A /70/PV.91

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventieth session

91st plenary meeting

Friday, 15 April 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Lykketoft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Denmark)

The meeting was called to order at 10:10 a.m.
Agenda item 113 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and
other elections
(b) Election of thirty members of the
United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law
The President: Members will recall that, at its
50th plenary meeting, on 9 November 2015, the General
Assembly elected the following 23 States as members
of the United Nations Commission on International
Trade Law for a six-year term of office beginning on
27 June 2016: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus,
Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Czech Republic, India,
the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Lebanon,
Mauritius, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Spain, Thailand, Turkey, the United States of America
and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. Therefore,
those 23 States are not eligible for election.
Members will also recall that there remain six seats
to be filled from among the Group of African States
and one seat from the Asia-Pacific States.
I should like to remind members that, as of
27 June 2016, the following States will continue to be
represented on the Commission: Armenia, Bulgaria,
Cameroon, Canada, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Denmark,
Ecuador, El Salvador, France, Germany, Greece,
Honduras, Hungary, Indonesia, Japan, Kuwait, Liberia,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Mexico, Namibia, Panama,

16-10629 (E)

the Republic of Korea, the Russian Federation, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Zambia.
Therefore, those 30 States are not eligible for election.
The General Assembly will now proceed to the
election of five members to replace those members
whose terms of office will expire on 26 June 2016.
In accordance with rule 92 of the rules of procedure,
the election shall be held by secret ballot and there shall
be no nominations. However, I should like to recall
paragraph 16 of decision 34/401, whereby the practice
of dispensing with the secret ballot for elections to
subsidiary organs when the number of candidates
corresponds to the number of seats to be filled should
become standard unless a delegation specifically
requests a vote on a given election.
In the absence of such a request, may I take it that
the Assembly decides to proceed to this election on the
basis of dispensing with the secret ballot?
It was so decided.
The President: With regard to candidatures, I
should like to inform members that, for the six seats
from among the Group of African States, the Group has
endorsed Kenya, Lesotho, Libya, Nigeria and Uganda.
Since the number of candidates for the group is
equal to or less than the number of seats to be filled
by the Group, may I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to declare Kenya, Lesotho, Libya, Nigeria and
Uganda elected for a six-year term of office beginning
on 27 June 2016?

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1610629*

A/70/PV.91

It was so decided.
The President: I congratulate Kenya, Lesotho,
Libya, Nigeria and Uganda, which have been elected
members of the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law.
With regard to the one remaining vacancy from
among the Group of African States and the one
remaining vacancy from the Group of Asia-Pacific
States, the General Assembly will hold elections upon
notification by interested Member States from those
two regions.
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 113.
Agenda item 13 (continued)
Improving global road safety
Note by the Secretary-General (A/70/386)
Draft resolution (A/70/L.44)
The President: I should now like to consult with
Member States with a view to giving the floor to
Mr. Jean Todt, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Road Safety. If there is no objection, may I take
it that the General Assembly wishes, without setting a
precedent, to invite Mr. Todt to make a statement at this
meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: In accordance with the decision
just taken, I now give the floor to Mr. Todt.
Mr. Todt (spoke in French): I acknowledge the
important honour conferred upon me to address the
General Assembly at its seventieth session in my
capacity as the Secretary-General’s Special Envoy for
Road Safety. It is therefore my duty and responsibility
to raise a certain number of alarming and disturbing
issues here in the Hall, because they force all of us to
question ourselves. Those questions relate to the cause
for which, alongside others, I have been waging a fierce
battle for many years now. I am speaking about the
fight against the dangers of the road or, diplomatically
speaking, the fight for road safety.
First, why and how can we speak about this silent
killer? It is such a terrible scourge that we generally
prefer to speak of it as seldom as possible. I might recall
the terrifying statistics — unfortunately, well-known
ones that are mentioned in draft resolution A/70/L.44,
2/13

15/04/2016

to be introduced shortly by the representative of the
Russian Federation, who should be commended.
However, as time is short, I shall limit myself, during
the five minutes allotted to me, that 12 people are killed
on roads every five minutes, 480 will suffer injuries
of varying severity, and two children will die. We
accordingly ask why is there silence. I do not really
have an answer.
There is of course no hierarchy or ranking of
catastrophes and their victims, and no one can or should
keep such a macabre tally. I will therefore not attempt
to do so. However, how can we avoid asking ourselves
why that double standard exists? Why is there such
resignation? Why is there such fatalism, for which we
are all responsible? Would our awareness be greater if,
instead of speaking in years, I were to speak in decades?
In so we would need to say that every 10 years there
are 13 million deaths on the roads, half a billion people
injured and approximately 2 million children killed.
Furthermore, those statistics do not take into account
the growth and increasing mobility of the population.
What better forum exists than the General Assembly
in which to speak out and to remember that road
safety is also a problem of solidarity and development
and one that urbanization and motorization — which
will be addressed at the United Nations Conference
on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development in
Quito — will only increase and worsen if we do not act.
The disparities among countries are also striking. The
less advanced and the middle-income countries, with
82 per cent of the global population and 54 per cent of
licenced vehicles, account for 90 per cent of fatalities
on the roads, while the others, the high-income
countries, with 18 per cent of the population and 46 per
cent of vehicles, account for 10 per cent of the fatalities.
I give yet one last statistic: the cost of road accidents
and their consequences is estimated at approximately
$500 billion per year. It does not take much imagination
to consider what such an enormous sum of money could
be used for.
How can we then accept that the sums allocated to
fighting this global scourge and veritable killer are so
miserly and so small as to be almost ridiculous? In fact,
I am talking about only a few tens of millions of dollars.
That is right; everyone heard correctly: only a few tens
of millions of dollars. And that is when campaigns
against other global scourges — and I am genuinely
happy for them — have several tens of billions of
dollars at their disposal to fight those scourges. One
16-10629

15/04/2016

again, one must wonder why there is such a difference
and why there is such a gap?
The draft resolution that will soon be introuced
will — I hope — enable concrete advances to be made,
because nothing decisive or effective can be undertaken
without substantial financial resources. Accordingly, I
would like to stress the importance of paragraph 20 of
the draft resolution and the progress that could result
from it. It will therefore be one of the priorities of my
efforts during the second year of my tenure as Special
Envoy to try to bring about the establishment and
financing of the United Nations global fund for road
safety called for by the draft resolution.
There is another question that I would like to ask.
While the United Nations and its specialized agencies
are mobilizing and 58 conventions have already been
drawn up within the framework of the United Nations,
why, in a certain number of countries, are vehicles that
do not observe basic safety standards still being built?
What is even more worrying is that those vehicles are
built in the same factories, often on a neighbouring
assembly line under the same roof, as those that strictly
adhere to safety standards, because those cars are being
built for export. What accounts for those deliberate
disparities? The list of reasons could go on. The same
issues apply to road construction — compliance with
the laws, security standards and the installation of road
signs and so on.
I would like to conclude by emphasizing the
importance of road safety education. In the third
millennium we need to have every child learn not only
to write, read and count, but also to move around as
a pedestrian, motorcyclist, motorbiker and future
driver. That is a major goal, but one so easy to achieve.
Imagine just one hour a week dedicated to education
on mobility. That would mark significant progress.
How many victims would be spared if we did so? In
the General Assembly we must recall that in 1948 the
Assembly adopted the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, article 3 of which stipulates that
“Everyone has the right to life, liberty and security
of person.”
The right to life is what is referred to above all, hence
this is what we are fighting for. Let us not forget, at
least for those millions of people who are casualties of
road accidents.

A/70/PV.91

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/70/L.44.
Mr. Kononuchenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Improving road safety is a priority for most
countries in the world. During the years of the Decade
of Action for Road Safety 2011-2020, significant
results have been made in reducing the number of
traffic accidents. The inclusion of this topic in the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1)
offers us a possibility to consider this issue not just in
terms of the loss of human life, but also as an element
of sustainable development in all its three dimensions,
namely, economic, social and environmental.
We are greatly honoured to introduce draft
resolution A/70/L.44, entitled “Improving global road
safety.” Based on the relevance of the provisions of the
resolutions of previous years, draft resolution A/70/L.44
reflects new elements of the long-term strategy in the
field of road safety, including the appointment of a
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Road Safety
and the adoption of the Brasilia Declaration on Road
Safety at the second Global High-Level Conference on
Road Safety, and also notes key milestones for further
efforts to mitigate the negative consequences of road
traffic accidents. I will mention just the most important
of those.
First, the draft resolution calls for developing
and strengthening partnerships with the participation
of States and international organizations, including
the agencies of the United Nations system, civil
society and the private sector, in order to improve
the situation on roads. As one of the mechanisms that
will facilitate the pooling and coordination of efforts,
draft resolution A/70/L.44 and takes note of such a
consultative mechanism as the United Nations Road
Safety Collaboration.
Secondly, the draft resolution aims at the creation
of a road safety trust fund that could be an additional
instrument of financial support and a catalyst for
attracting investments for the implementation of road
safety programmes.
Thirdly, the draft resolution invites the relevant
organizations, including the World Health Organization
and the regional economic commissions, first and
foremost the United Nations Economic Commission
for Europe, to provide further assistance to interested
States on improving the normative legal framework

16-106293/13

A/70/PV.91

and road safety technical standards, as well as on the
development of further targeted indicators of the major
risk factors in that sphere.
The inclusion in the draft resolution of the following
references is also significant: the upcoming third United
Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development, the World Health Organization Global
Conference on Health Promotion and events as part of
the fourth United Nations Global Road Safety Week.
Given that the entire 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development is dedicated to the theme of no one being
left behind, it was important to focus on the most
vulnerable groups in the field of ensuring road safety,
namely, children and persons with disabilities.
We note that the negotiations took place in a
constructive manner and with the participation of
all stakeholders. Allow us to express our gratitude
to delegations for their active participation in the
agreement. In particular, I would like to single out our
colleagues from the Permanent Mission of Brazil to
the United Nations for their valuable contribution. We
call on all Member States to support draft resolution
A/70/L.44 and invite them to become co-sponsors.
The President: I now call on the observer of the
European Union.
Mr. Parenti (European Union): I have the honour
to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The EU and its member States welcome draft
resolution A/70/L.44, entitled “Improving global
road safety.” In particular, we would like to thank the
Russian Federation for its leadership and efforts to
facilitate this outcome.
In 2015 in Europe 26,000 people died on the roads,
the equivalent of a middle-sized town. Worldwide,
road-traffic deaths accounted for more than 1.2 million
persons, which would compare to the population of the
ninth most-populated city of the United States. Fifty
million people a year are injured because of road traffic
crashes. Road traffic crashes are a leading cause of death
globally and are the main cause of death among people
aged between 15 and 29 years. That is unacceptable,
and shows that our road transport systems around the
world are inherently unsafe and that one single human
mistake can end up in a catastrophe for individuals,
families and societies.
4/13

15/04/2016

Europe has taken a clear stand on this major health
problem. According to our white paper on transport, by
2050 Europe is to move close to zero fatalities in road
transport — a clear vision that will not be achieved
overnight. A system of intermediate targets and safety
indicators is needed in order to guide our efforts along
the way. Based on that, we agreed on the Sustainable
Development Goals in September 2015 and its target
3.6, which is to halve the global number of deaths and
injuries from road traffic crashes by 2020. In that context,
the Brasilia Declaration on Road Safety, adopted at the
second Global High-level Conference on Road Safety,
held in November 2015, and draft resolution A/70/L.44,
entitled “Improving global road safety”, represent clear
and recent illustrations of the continuous international
efforts to achieve our difficult goals.
To prevent road traffic injuries and to develop a
safe road transport system, we need a comprehensive
and holistic approach with the involvement of all
stakeholders. The EU road safety policy framework 20112020, which is guiding our efforts towards contributing
to safer roads, is a good example. The framework
focuses on new key priorities, such as reducing
accidents on rural roads and on vulnerable road users,
such as pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists, children
and elderly people. In addition, we built on previous
commitments including, among others, strengthening
controls and penalties; supporting initiatives at the
national level to combat driving under the influence of
drugs and alcohol; investing in road infrastructure and
improving traffic conditions; and improving legislation
on driving licences and standards of fitness for driving.
Such measures resulted in reducing road fatalities by
17 per cent between 2011 and 2015.
But even if the regional road fatality rate in the EU
is the lowest worldwide, it remains unacceptable. We
need to continue to share best practices and exchange
information at the national, regional and global levels,
with the active participation of civil society and the
private sector. We also need to strengthen our efforts to
integrate safety into the broader agenda of sustainable
cities and transport. We know the main killers on
the roads: speeding, drunk-driving and the failure to
wear a seat belt. To make roads safer, work is needed
on safer road infrastructure, on safer vehicles and on
safer road users. That includes the implementation and
enforcement of adequate laws, but also soft measures
such as awareness-raising and educational efforts.
16-10629

15/04/2016

Although road traffic injuries are a major publichealth problem and the challenges sometimes feel
overwhelming, there is hope. Many countries around
the world have already shown that it is possible, through
a holistic and multisectoral approach, to prevent people
from getting killed or seriously injured in road traffic.
Let us build on those experiences. We cannot afford to
be complacent about road safety; millions of human
lives are at stake.
Mr. Ba Omar (Oman) (spoke in Arabic): I deliver
this statement on behalf of the Permanent Representative
of Oman, who unfortunately was unable to be with us.
On behalf of the Government of the Sultanate of
Oman, I would like to extend my thanks and appreciation
to the Secretary-General for his report (A/70/386) on
the efforts made to improve safety on roads worldwide.
The report provides information on the latest actions by
States to implement the recommendations of General
Assembly resolutions relating to improving road safety.
I would also like to commend the constructive efforts
by the international community in that area.
Oman was a pioneer in launching the campaign on
road safety at the international level. Oman proposed
inscribing the item on road safety on the Organization’s
agenda for the sake of future generations. After the
General Assembly first included the issue of road safety
on its agenda, on 23 May 2003 the Assembly adopted
resolution 57/309, which the Sultanate of Oman had
introduced based on our belief in the importance of
road safety worldwide. Having highlighted the tragedy
of unnecessary deaths and accidents due to inadequate
road safety precautions, the General Assembly
subsequently adopted several other resolutions on road
safety. A number of ministerial-level meetings were
held in order to draw attention to the deaths resulting
from traffic accidents, to encourage the building of
safer roads and to offer technical support for safety on
roads at the regional and international levels.
Since road safety is now one of the important items
on the United Nations agenda and on those of other
organizations, the international community has been
giving the utmost priority to working with the various
stakeholders to reduce the negative impact of the lack of
road safety. Approximately 1 million people are killed
annually, and nearly 50 million severely injured, due to
traffic accidents on the world’s roads — creating great
pressure on the international community.

A/70/PV.91

The Government of Oman has been making great
efforts to improve road safety. We have issued a decree
to establish the National Committee for Road Safety,
aimed at elaborating a comprehensive strategy to reduce
traffic accidents, deal with their negative impact and
take into account related problems. The strategy will
set the foundation to respect international standards in
building safe roads. As for awareness efforts, we have
worked to improve reporting statistics on a weekly
basis. We are also collaborating with the mass media and
issuing more than 100 awareness newsletters each year,
distributing them to distant regions in the Sultanate,
targeting university and other students and the
community at large. We are launching documentaries
to raise awareness about the importance of road safety.
Some of those films have received international awards.
In order to introduce new generations to road safety,
we have established a traffic school for children, which
is actually a comprehensive mini-city that introduces
pupils to road-safety standards and laws. We are also
training police officers and the various road users on
road safety. In addition, at the beginning of April,
the Oman Liquefied Natural Gas Company launched
a project entitled a Gift to the Nation, which aims to
reduce road accidents by setting up a traffic safety
institute in Sur province.
The efforts made by my Government and our private
sector and the improved awareness in our society have
made it possible for Oman to achieve positive results
in reducing accidents on our roads. Statistics indicate
that the number of deaths on our roads have decreased
by 50 per cent, and injuries by 30 per cent, since 2012,
in spite of a 25 per cent increase in the number of
registered vehicles on our roads.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate our
appreciation to you, Mr. President, and to the SecretaryGeneral. We assure the General Assembly that we are
committed to improving international efforts to achieve
greater safety on roads and to work together to achieve
our common goal.
Mr. De Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): I commend the
Russian Federation for introducing the draft resolution
on road safety and for facilitating the negotiations
over the past few weeks. I would also like to thank
the Sultanate of Oman and the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Todt, for their leadership.
And I welcome the report of the Secretary-General.

16-106295/13

A/70/PV.91

In November, Brazil had the honour to host the
second Global High-level Conference on Road Safety.
The Conference, co-sponsored by the World Health
Organization with the support of many other players,
including the Economic Commission for Europe
and other United Nations regional commissions,
welcomed to Brasilia 2,200 participants in a truly
multi-stakeholder fashion. The outcome document
of the Conference, the Brasilia Declaration on Road
Safety, was drafted through an inclusive negotiation
process and is expected to be endorsed by the General
Assembly today. In doing so, the United Nations will
align its guidelines and actions on road safety with
a transformative paradigm of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development (resolution 70/1).
Among other things, road safety is a question of
development, equality and sustainability and of how
we interact in the public sphere with our common and
shared space. It relates to Sustainable Development
Goal (SDG) 3 very directly — which is to ensure healthy
lives and to promote well-being for all at all ages — but
also with SDG 11, which reminds us to make cities
inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable. Sustainable
public-transport policies should be at the core of road
safety concerns. Most of the victims are in developing
countries; more than half of them are not automobile
users. They are pedestrians, cyclists, motorcyclists
and, more broadly, the still-uncertain number of people
who use unsafe transportation systems. Vulnerable
populations such as women, children and persons
with disabilities should receive special attention in
this regard.
I would like to highlight the importance of the
mandate to be given by the General Assembly to the
World Health Organization to work with Member
States on global voluntary targets for key risk factors
such as drinking and driving, speeding and failing to
use motorcycle helmets, seat belts and child restraints,
as well as for service-delivery mechanisms. This work
is instrumental to achieving the ambitious SDG targets
for road safety. International cooperation, including
capacity-building and technology transfer, is crucial to
our endeavour. Brazil will be following attentively the
discussions coordinated by the Secretary-General on
the establishment of a fund for road safety.
Draft resolution A/70/L.44 will send a strong
political message that we hope will be echoed at the
World Health Assembly next May in Geneva and at
the third United Nations Conference on Housing and
6/13

15/04/2016

Sustainable Urban Development, to be held in October in
Quito. Together, those processes provide the mandates
and sense of urgency needed to achieve the ambitious
targets of the Decade of Action for Road Safety and of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I would
also like to thank Ambassador Churkin for his
personal leadership on this issue and for the steady,
determined commitment of the Russian Federation to
shine a spotlight on this serious problem, and to urge
all nations to help solve it. The United States is proud
to co-sponsor the critically important draft resolution
A/70/L.44. We urge every Member State not only to
adopt it, but to translate its commitments into practice
through concrete public policy efforts.
Road crashes kill roughly 1.2 million people every
year. Pause and think about that — approximately
1,200,000 individuals killed every single year. That is
more people than are citizens of 40 States Members of
the United Nations — year after year — for reasons
both predictable and preventable.
Those losses are not equally distributed around the
globe. Low- and middle-income nations are particularly
hard-hit. Although home to just over half of the world’s
vehicles, those nations account for 90 per cent of all
traffic deaths. It is for good reason that the Sustainable
Development Goals include a specific target for global
road safety among the health goals.
Perhaps even more shocking is the people who
are disproportionately affected. Road deaths are by
far the leading cause of death for young people ages
15 to 29 around the world. The General Assembly
regularly debates serious threats to human life; this
issue clearly must be treated as one of them. And the
cost is not only felt in lives lost, but in the consequences
for development. The World Health Organization
(WHO) estimates that an estimated 3 per cent of global
gross domestic product is lost to road traffic deaths
and injuries.
As we pass the halfway point of the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2011-2020, we can point to some
progress. The number of annual deaths has remained
roughly consistent since 2007, even as the world’s
population continues to increase by around 1.1 per cent
every year, which currently amounts to an increase
of around 80 million people per year. Since 2010, 79
countries have seen a decrease in the number of road
deaths. But at the same time, 68 other nations have seen
16-10629

15/04/2016

a rise in road deaths. No one should feel satisfied with
the progress. We have to do better.
What more can we do? Many of the deaths can be
prevented by improvements in legislation, road design,
traffic management, safety equipment, emergency
response and human behaviour. Simply using a seat belt
reduces serious and fatal injuries by 40 to 65 per cent.
Drivers, in particular those who drive drunk, drugged,
drowsy or distracted, are a central part of this problem.
The threat of distraction is particularly urgent, because
in virtually every one of our countries there simply
is not sufficient recognition of the dangers of driving
while texting, calling or otherwise not paying full
attention on the road.
Consider this: the average time a driver takes his or
her eyes off the road while texting is five seconds. If the
driver is driving 55 miles an hour for five seconds — or
roughly 89 kilometres per hour — and is looking at his
or her phone, he or she will cover roughly the length of
an entire soccer field in that five seconds effectively
blind. If we think about how reckless it would be to
close one’s eyes for five seconds at a time while driving,
we start to get a sense for how dangerous it is to text at
the wheel.
A 2014 study found that at any given moment
during the day in the United States, more than 587,000
vehicles were being driven by someone who was
using a cell phone at the same time. The results are
predictably deadly. That same year, 3,179 people in this
country were killed, and 431,000 others were injured,
in collisions involving distracted drivers. At least one
in 10 fatal crashes in this country — and nearly one in
five injury crashes — involve a distracted driver.
As Governments and societies, we are beginning to
wake up to the gravity of the threat. According to WHO,
139 countries have approved laws that prohibit the use
of handheld phones while driving. Here in the United
States we have convened two national distracteddriving summits, banned texting and cell-phone use
for commercial drivers, encouraged States to adopt
tough laws and launched multiple campaigns to raise
public awareness about the dangers and human costs
of distracted driving. We have designated this month,
April, as national Distracted Driving Awareness Month,
and have launched a new public-awareness campaign
and law-enforcement crackdown. Still, given the
numbers and the tragedies, we can and must do more.

A/70/PV.91

Here is one lesson we have learned: the most
compelling advocates in convincing people of the
dangers of distracted driving are often the victims.
I would like to conclude by telling the Assembly the
quick story of one of those individuals.
In 2008, Jacy Good was driving home to Lancaster,
Pennsylvania with her parents from her college
graduation ceremony when their car was struck headon by a tractor trailer. Both of Jacy’s parents were
killed, and she suffered critical injuries. Doctors gave
her a 10 per cent chance of making it through the first
night. The accident was caused by a distracted driver
talking on his cell phone.
But Jacy somehow beat the odds and survived,
and while the event left her partially paralysed and
with minor lingering cognitive issues, it has also made
her into a powerful advocate for educating people
about the dangers of distracted driving and the need
to adopt reforms to address this deadly problem. Since
2011, when she and her husband, Steve, founded an
organization dedicated to this issue — an organization
called HangUpAndDrive.com — Jacy has spoken at
nearly 600 events in 32 States.
Texting while driving is a global killer, one that
disproportionately affects our young people. We must
do a better job of treating it that way. If we do, and if
we bring the energy, innovation and commitment that
we see in partners like Jacy Good, we can save millions
of lives.
Lord Robertson (United Kingdom): It is a great
honour for me once again to represent the United
Kingdom in the General Assembly at this meeting on
global road safety. I would like to thank the Government
of the United Kingdom for giving me, an opposition
politician, the opportunity to speak today on behalf of
the Government.
Last September, in this Hall, the Sustainable
Development Goals were adopted by the world’s
Governments. For the very first time, global goals
such as these included a road safety target, a clear and
unambiguous target to halve road-traffic fatalities by
2020. In Brazil, last November, many of us gathered
at the high-level conference on road safety to set the
agenda for delivering on this global target and to adopt
the Brasilia Declaration. More than 70 ministers and
2,000 representatives participated in the Conference.
Speaking at the closing ceremony, I described the
Declaration as a manifesto for change, and it is a

16-106297/13

A/70/PV.91

15/04/2016

great pleasure to see so much of the change that was
proposed in Brasilia included in the draft resolution we
will formally adopt here today.

Global Road Safety Facility, helping to catalyse a local
response in low-income countries with high levels of
road traffic carnage.

The draft resolution urges all Governments to
display leadership and cooperation and calls on donors
to support a new global fund. It issues a clear moral
challenge to all the world’s car makers to meet essential
and inarguable minimum United Nations safety
standards by 2020. It highlights the appalling toll of
child and adolescent casualties and calls on countries
to meet their obligations under the Convention on the
Rights of the Child, established to protect our young.
It recognizes the need to design and manage highways
and city streets to be safe for all, makes the vital link
between safe mobility and environmental protection
and demonstrates why road safety must be at the heart
of the new urban agenda to be agreed on later this year
at the third United Nations Conference on Housing and
Sustainable Urban Development.

I am very proud that the Fédération Internationale
de l’Automobile Foundation, the independent United
Kingdom charity that I chair, is at the forefront of
campaigning and collaborative funding to tackle
the global epidemic of road death and injury. Our
Foundation has helped to establish and finance two
other United Kingdom charities, the International
Road Assessment Programme and the Global New
Car Assessment Programme, which are now working
with dozens of countries across the world to improve
infrastructure and vehicle safety. We are providing
strong support to the United Nations Special Envoy for
Road Safety, Mr. Jean Todt, who spoke earlier, and to
his high-level efforts to secure unprecedented financing
for road safety. And we are excited about working with
UNICEF and other global and national partners on a
new child-health initiative with the aim of achieving
the vision that every child can enjoy a safe and healthy
journey to school.

This is a draft resolution that can help us to deliver
change. But we will succeed only if we resolve together
to turn the words on its pages into action on our streets.
And we must act now because, as Britain’s Prime
Minister David Cameron has said,
“Every six seconds, someone is killed or
seriously injured on the world’s roads. Addressing
this must be an urgent priority for the international
community.”
The United Kingdom is responding to the Sustainable
Development Goals. In December, the Government
published a new road-safety policy statement, adopting
a safe-system approach and setting out how it will
deliver an election manifesto commitment to reducing
road traffic deaths every year. The United Kingdom’s
policy statement references the United Nations Global
Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 20112020 as an organizing framework. It sets out a clear
plan for driving down casualties, through measures
that include the protection of vulnerable road users;
tough enforcement of speeding and drunken driving;
and encouraging a faster uptake of safer vehicles. In
order to improve infrastructure safety, the Highways
England organization is now aiming for zero, with the
goal of ensuring that by 2020, 90 per cent of travel on
its strategic network will be on roads with a safety
assessment of three or more stars. In solidarity with
the global effort, the United Kingdom Department for
International Development is funding the World Bank’s
8/13

We are doing this because if we are to achieve the
Sustainable Development Goals, we must be ambitious,
and we have to succeed. We must succeed for Lavna,
a 14-year-old girl killed by a lorry as she walked
to school in London on the same day that we met in
Brasilia. We must succeed for Sammy, struck down and
killed at the age of 13 while walking to school here in
New York City. And we must succeed for Maria, an
11-year-old girl from Brazil who wrote a prizewinning
essay for a school road-safety competition. In her essay,
Maria said,
“You should have love for life, your life and
others’ as well. I believe that if all drivers thought
this way then certainly many children would still
have their parents and many parents would still
have their children.”
Just 10 months after she wrote those words, Maria and
her father were killed when their motorbike was hit by
a car.
We can therefore resolve here today that the loss of
those young lives will mean something. We can resolve
here today that there will be no more excuses or delays
for delivering the solutions that we know can work and
prevent more unnecessary deaths. We now have the
new Sustainable Development Goals, which include the
very ambitious target of halving road casualties in the
16-10629

15/04/2016

next five years. So many lives are at stake. We cannot
afford to fail. So let us approve today’s draft resolution
and then work together to deliver the change that the
world so desperately needs.

A/70/PV.91

should never be associated with the risk of being killed
or seriously injured.

Mr. Belin (Sweden): Sweden aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier on behalf of the
European Union.

The progress Sweden has made in road safety
would not have been possible without help from the
international community. We therefore welcome the
upcoming adoption of draft resolution A/70/L.44 and
further international collaboration in this field.

Sweden welcomes the General Assembly’s
forthcoming adoption by consensus of draft resolution
A/70/L.44, entitled “Improving global road safety”, and
we would like to thank the Russian Federation for its
leadership and efforts to facilitate it.

Mr. Roet (Israel): I almost did not make it here
today. As I was driving to this meeting in the terrible
New York traffic, almost in a rage, I remembered what
I was coming here to do and how calm we have to be
on the road.

Road traffic injuries are a global public health
problem that needs the global attention of which today’s
draft resolution is an expression. Fifty years ago,
Sweden’s traffic casualties peaked at around 17 fatalities
per 100,000 inhabitants; since then, that number has
fallen to less than three per 100,000. That trend is one
of the reasons why a country like Sweden has adopted
Vision Zero and can seriously consider the possibility
of developing a safe system for all road users.

At the outset, let me thank the World Health
Organization for its leadership role on this life-saving
issue and the Russian Federation for leading the
negotiations on draft resolution A/70/L.44.

To get where we are now has been a long and winding
journey and our knowledge and competence have grown
along the way. One important thing we have learned
from experience is that systematic and effective roadsafety work must be holistic. We have to work on all the
aspects of the system, such as road infrastructure, the
urban environment, speed limits and vehicle design,
together with aspects of the system’s use, such as
speeding, drinking and driving, and wearing seat belts
and helmets. Another thing we have learned is that road
safety is complex and multisectoral. We need to involve
various stakeholders at the international, regional,
national and local levels, such as Governments, the
private sector, municipalities and non-governmental
organizations, because all of them influence different
aspects of the road transport system.
In order to develop every part of the road system
and to get all stakeholders to work for the same goals,
we need both a long-term vision of a safe system
and short-term targets and indicators for managing
progress. Based on its experience with this, Sweden
fully supports target 3.6 of the Sustainable Development
Goals, but we would also like to highlight target 11.2 and
its impact on road safety. Road traffic injuries are one
important aspect of sustainability. People need to walk,
ride bikes, drive and commute by public transport. That

Israel has long been committed to promoting road
safety. That is why we speak at this meeting every
year. This issue has been, and still is, one of our
national priorities.
The year 2015 was a landmark year for development.
Member States reached historic agreements, including
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
(resolution 70/1) and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda.
Today, in 2016, we will begin implementing the
commitments we made to future generations. When
it comes to road safety, the 2030 Agenda has set the
ambitious goals of halving the global number of deaths
and injuries from road traffic accidents by 2020 and
providing access to safe, affordable and sustainable
transport systems for all by 2030.
The challenges before us are daunting. Road
transportation is at the heart of our societies and is the
lifeblood of our economies. Yet every year 1.25 million
people die, 50 million are injured in road-related
incidents and many suffer long-term or permanent
disabilities. Those accidents are tragedies for the
victims and their families, but they also have serious
socioeconomic consequences. That is especially true
for low-income countries, where 90 per cent of the
world’s fatalities on the road occur, despite having only
50 per cent of the world’s vehicles.
Crashes deprive families of their primary
breadwinners or force them to contend with expensive
medical care. When that happens, families are plunged
into a crippling cycle of poverty. According to the
World Bank, road crashes cost the Governments of

16-106299/13

A/70/PV.91

developing countries an estimated 1 to 5 per cent of
their gross domestic products. Therefore, by saving
lives on the road we are also fighting poverty and
boosting prosperity.
The Global Plan for the Decade of Action for
Road Safety provides clarity and areas of focus for
national authorities seeking to improve domestic
road safety. That will help to stabilize, and ultimately
reduce, the forecasted level of global road fatalities.
Progress has already been made. In that regard, it is
worth mentioning the increasing activities of regional
organizations, such as the Economic Commission for
Latin America and the Caribbean, to improve road
safety among their members.
Mr. Cardi (Italy), Vice-President, took the Chair.
Israel has discovered that even seemingly simple
actions can make a difference. Our Government has
been working to change the driving culture in Israel
through marketing strategies and campaigns, including
by displaying billboards that read “Think Life!”. A
previous campaign reminded us that, on the road,
we do not always have to prove that we are right,
but instead we should choose to act wisely. Israel’s
National Road Safety Authority promotes regulations
and policies, prepares driver education programmes
and has a close working relationship with other
branches of Government, as well as non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) dedicated to road safety.
Those actions enable us to reach out to all sectors
of society, including those sectors that historically
have a higher rate of traffic incidents than the general
population. The National Road Safety Authority
also encourages the development of intelligent
transportation systems. Through the integration of
computers and information technologies into vehicles
and infrastructure, intelligent transportation systems
enable transportation authorities, transport providers
and private road users to make better informed, safer
and more intelligent decisions. The result is significantly
enhanced efficiency of the use of resources and time,
which contributes to protecting the environment.
One example of such lifesaving technologies has
been developed by the Israeli company Mobileye.
This innovative company has created a vision-based
advanced system that provides warnings for collision
prevention and mitigation. Those are a few of the steps
we in Israel have taken on the path towards road safety,
10/13

15/04/2016

but we will continue to pursue policies and encourage
innovation to keep making our roads safer.
Road traffic deaths and injuries are preventable.
The efforts of Governments, NGOs and the private
sector will help to ensure that we meet the goals set
forth in the Decade of Action and the road safetyrelated targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Together, we can make roads safer and
our people more secure. The Jewish tradition teaches
us that whenever someone saves one life, it is as if he
saved the entire world. Let us unite to save the world
one life at a time.
Mr. Lamek (France) (spoke in French): On behalf
of France, I would like to thank the President for having
convened this meeting, as well as to commend the
Russian delegation for having prepared and facilitated
the negotiations on draft resolution A/70/L.44, to be
adopted by the General Assembly today. I also wish
to commend the work of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean Todt, and to thank him for
his commitment to road safety.
We align ourselves with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union and its member States.
With more than two deaths and 100 injuries
per second worldwide due to road accidents, many
involving children and young people, it is urgent to
act and implement the 10 basic steps recommended by
the World Health Organization in order to halve the
number of deaths and injuries on the roads by 2020, as
we collectively committed ourselves to doing here in
the Hall in September 2015 (see A/70/PV.4).
Since the launch of the Decade of Action for
Road Safety, the relatively stable statistics on global
population growth and on the number of vehicles is a
source of hope. Lives have been saved, in particular
with the adoption by 17 additional countries of laws
mitigating the risk factors for road accidents, including
bans on drunk driving and laws requiring the wearing
of helmets. We must continue along that path.
For France, leaving no one behind is an important
initiative to save 2,000 additional lives on the roads.
The past indicates that such a result is within our reach.
Over the course of the decade from 2001 to 2010,
France went from more than 8,000 killed in 2001 to
fewer than 4,000 in 2010, and in 2014 the number was
3,384. We could not have achieved that result if political
will at the highest level had not been put forth in 2002.
16-10629

15/04/2016

That commitment has paid off and has not wavered in
recent years.
A close monitoring of statistics should enable us to
adapt our actions. In response to the uptick in fatalities
from 2014 to 2015, the French Government implemented
an emergency plan of 26 measures, including combating
the dangers of using telephones while driving; drinking
and driving for young drivers; and speeding, through
the use of a new type of independent radars that
provides better results.
Leaving no one behind also means tackling this
scourge in areas where road accidents represent a
disproportionate burden. Developing countries suffer
approximately 90 per cent of deaths in the world,
while road traffic deaths in Africa are three times
greater than in Europe. Hence, since 2009, France has
been firmly committed to the implementation of the
Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety,
as illustrated by the commemoration, each year since
2010, of a Francophone day for road safety. France is
also strengthening its bilateral ties with countries such
as Algeria, Senegal and Lebanon via agreements that
promote the exchange of good practices.
The Secretary-General’s third report (A/70/386)
since the beginning of the Decade of Action for Road
Safety illustrates the multitude of actions undertaken.
I therefore welcome the commitment of all actors
engaged in this fight, the World Health Organization,
the Economic Commission for Europe and the entire
United Nations system — all of which, in collaboration
with Governments, non-governmental organizations
and civil society in its entire, do considerable work.
Just as in Brasilia, France will continue to play
its part in this mobilization in the service of all, in
particular the most vulnerable, ensuring that no one is
left behind. I am sure that these synergies will result in
significant progress, thereby saving millions of lives on
our planet.
Ms. Girón Tomás (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome draft resolution A/70/L.44, on improving
global road safety (A/70/L.44), which is an example
of outstanding international cooperation in joining the
efforts of all Governments and public and private actors
to reduce the road traffic accident rate.
In line with international standards and as part
of its national public and private initiatives, Spain
has appreciably improved road safety. We have noted

A/70/PV.91

a cumulative decrease in road traffic deaths between
1989 and 2014 of 82 per cent. In our experience,
improving road safety is entirely possible through a
defined road safety policy strategy focused on the five
road safety risk factors that have been identified at the
international level. Of course, a number of technological
advantages have been of use, but above all international
cooperation among all countries through international
organizations at the regional and global levels has been
important. Spain has good experience in that area, a
good example being our collaborative work with our
Latin American colleagues, to whom we will always be
grateful for placing their trust in our joint work.
Finally, we would also like to thank the Special
Envoy for Road Safety for his excellent leadership and
all the support he has given to the road safety initiatives
recently developed at the global level. But above all,
looking to the future, we should improve road safety
globally through cooperation with all actors, both in
the public and private actors. Ultimately, we are all
citizens.
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 49/2, of 19 October 1994, I now call on the
Observer for the International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies.
Mr. Watson (International Federation of Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies): I would like to thank
the President for the opportunity to provide a brief
statement on behalf of the International Federation of
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC).
The IFRC first recognized road safety as a
humanitarian crisis in its World Disasters Report 1998.
Since that time, it has worked alongside its Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies to undertake a variety of
actions to enhance global road safety. For example, our
national societies are widely recognized for the first-aid
services and training they provide. In addition, many
are actively involved in working with their authorities
to develop evidence-based road safety laws and
policies, as well as delivering on-the-ground road safety
initiatives. Those efforts are supported by our hosted
programme, the Global Road Safety Partnership, which
works to establish partnerships with Government, the
private sector and civil society organizations in order
to enhance road safety — in particular in lower- and
middle-income countries, where the need is greatest.
We are now at the midpoint of the Decade of Action
for Road Safety, and considerable progress has been

16-1062911/13

A/70/PV.91

15/04/2016

made to address this man-made crisis. In that regard, the
IFRC would like to commend all those who contributed
to the establishment of the Decade of Action and have
worked tirelessly to achieve its goals. More recently,
the inclusion of truly ambitious road safety targets in
the Sustainable Development Goals, the SecretaryGeneral’s appointment of a Special Envoy for Road
Safety and the organization of the second Global
High-level Conference on Road Safety, in Brazil, have
provided much-needed political impetus for further
global action. However, so much more still needs to be
done, and policies must now be put into effect.

For its part, the IFRC will continue to work with all
our member States and relevant organizations to realize
the goals of the draft resolution. Achieving ambitious
road safety targets will not only benefit society as a
whole, but will in particular assist the poorest and most
vulnerable among us, ensuring that no one is left behind.

While the latest data from the World Health
Organization suggests that road fatalities have
stabilized at 1.25 million per year, the human and
economic costs of road crashes remain staggering.
From a humanitarian perspective, the risk of death
or injury on the road remains ever-present in many
communities around the world. For example, there
are cities and towns where vehicles travel at up to 100
kilometres per hour through school zones because the
road police have no authority or resources to prevent
it. There are also cities and towns where injured road
users are provided with no assistance due to a lack of
legal protection for good samaritans in their country,
and where adults and children falling from motorbikes
suffer life-altering head injuries because they are either
not required to wear a helmet or have access only to
substandard helmets that offer little protection. Events
like that happen every day — and are happening right
now all over the world. The reality is that, if you are
poor or if you live in a rapidly motorizing country, you
are likely to experience road trauma at first hand.

I give the
the Secretariat.

Changes need to occur at the local, national and
global levels if we are going to achieve our ambitious
road safety goals. Of particular importance is the need
to build strong multisectoral and multi-stakeholder
partnerships. In that regard, we welcome draft
resolution A/70/L.44, which lays out clear actions for
Member States, United Nations agencies and other
relevant stakeholders. In particular, we support the
call for Governments to pass and implement strong
road safety policies that are locally relevant and
evidence-based. To maximize their effectiveness, such
policies should be consistently and uniformly enforced
and adequately resourced. More broadly, there is a need
for more attention, political will and resources to be
devoted to road safety.
12/13

The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in this debate on this item.
The General Assembly will now take a decision on
draft resolution A/70/L.44, entitled “Improving global
road safety”.
floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/70/L.44: Andorra, Belgium, Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada,
Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Greece, Guyana, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Japan, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Morocco, the Netherlands, Nicaragua, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, San Marino, Serbia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
Turkmenistan, the United Arab Emirates, the United
States of America and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt draft resolution A/70/L.44?
Draft resolution A/70/L.44 was adopted (resolution
70/260).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 13?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 23 (continued)
Groups of countries in special situations
(a) Follow-up to the Fourth United Nations
Conference on the Least Developed Countries
Draft resolution (A/70/L.45)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on draft resolution A/70/L.45, entitled
16-10629

15/04/2016

“Modalities for the Comprehensive High-level
Midterm Review of the Implementation of the Istanbul
Programme of Action for the Least Developed Countries
for the Decade 2011-2020”.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt
draft resolution A/70/L.45?
Draft resolution A/70/L.45 was adopted (resolution
70/261).
The Acting President: I call on the representative
of Thailand, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position on the resolution just adopted. I recall that
explanations of position are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Ms. Chartsuwan (Thailand): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of the Group of 77 and
China. At the outset, please allow me to express the
appreciation of the Group of 77 and China to the core
facilitators for their constructive guidance, relentless
efforts and unwavering patience during the course of
negotiations on the very important resolution 70/261.
The Group would like also to thank our delegations
for their constructive engagement and the flexibility
shown during the negotiation of the resolution. With
47 of 48 countries officially listed as least developed
countries being members of the Group of 77, we cannot
overemphasize the importance of the Comprehensive

A/70/PV.91

High-level Midterm Review of the Implementation
of the Istanbul Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011-2020 for the
Group. It is crucial that the upcoming Midterm Review
be inclusive in nature, not only in the sense of full-scale
State participation, but also with regard to the active and
constructive participation of the relevant stakeholders.
In that way we may determine the future path of genuine
partnership that will enable least developed countries
to graduate from least developed country status. In
our view, the adoption of these modalities is only the
beginning of the process of ensuring that the Midterm
Review encapsulates the commitments we made during
the course of 2015 to provide a meaningful outcome that
will yield enablers key to the successful implementation
of those commitments by least developed countries.
The Group of 77 and China looks forward to
actively, constructively and substantively engaging
with the co-facilitators and all members and observer
States in the deliberations on, and the negotiation of,
the draft outcome document for the Midterm Review
in the lead up to the conference to be held at the end
of May.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (a) of agenda item 23.
The meeting rose at 11.25 a.m.

16-1062913/13
