UNITED

NATIONS

t11

MEETING:

4AUGUST

1982

NEW YORK

CONTENTS

,. , ,,, ,., , .., ,. ,. ,., ,,,. ... . .... . .. ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . , . , , . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . , , . . . , . . , . , . . , , , . , , . . . , . .

1

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2389)

The situation in the Middle East:
(10 Letter dated 4 June 19X2 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council

(S/lS162):
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent Representatives of Egypt
and France to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15316) . . ,. . . . . ., . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . ,. . . . . ,.

SIPV.2389

I

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol SI. . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpplet~mf~s of the Qfficirrl Recwh qf tltc Sssurity Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcwlrttiotzs cd
D~&ions of the Security Corwil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2389th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 4 August 1982, at 7.15 p.m.

PIYJSL~/~~:
The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of Amet*ica, Zaire.

3. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members of the Council that I have received letters from
the representatives of Cuba and India in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council.
to invite those representatives
to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2389)
1,

Adoption

of the agenda

2.

The situation in the Middle East:
(II) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative
of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/IS 162):
(h) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the
United Nations addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/ 15316)

4. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council have
before them a revised text,
contained in document
submitted
Sf 15343/Rev. I t of the drmft resolution
earlier today by Jordan and Spain.

I. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to apologize to
and thank those who have waited patiently for some
time for our meeting to begin.

de PINIl?S
(Spain) (i/2trrprctlrtir)r1
,fiwm
This morning, as members of the Council
are well ;lware. the representative of Jordan, on behalf
of his country and mine, submitted a draft resolution
under the symbol S/ 15343, which has been revised and
distributed
under the symbol S/ IS343/Rev. 1, Before
this meeting proceeds, I should like to propose a few
minor revisions to that text in order to improve it, if
possible. Since the original draft resolution is in
English. I shall venture to read out in that Iang~lage
un additional paragraph we propose to add to the draft
resolution.
This additional
paragraph will be paragraph 5. The present operative paragraph 5 will then
became operative paragraph 6: the present paragraph 6
will become paragraph 7: and the present paragraph 7
will become paragraph 8.
&5 .

Mr.

Spclnish):

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(([I) Letter dated 4 June 1982 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15162);
(6) Letter dated 28 July 1982 from the Permanent
Representatives of Egypt and France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/15316)

The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
nt previous meetings on this item [2.?74th,
2375rJt, 2377th und 2h%fth mv~~tings1, I invite the
I-eprcsentatives
of Lebanon and Israel to take places nt
the Council table: I invite the representative of the
Palestine
Liberation
Orgunization
(PLO) to take a
place at the Council table; I invite the representatives
of Egypt and Pakistan to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
2.

taken

6. The operative
follows:

paragraph

,. 5
- .

to be added

rends as

TrrJss t?(JfP of the decision of the Palestine
Libenltion
Organization
to move the Palestinian
armed forces from Beirut:“.“:
si Quoted

I

in English

by the spe;Iker,

7. Members will understand that because of the
fate hour at which we are meeting. we shall have to
make II change in the last part of former operative
paragraph 6, now paragraph 7. and, bearing in mind
the fact that it is now 4. IS a.m. in Beirut and that here
in New York it is already IO. I.5 p.m., request the
Secretary-General
to report to the Security Council
on the implementation
of the pt-esent resolution as
soon a possible and not later than 1000 hours. eastern
daylight time, on 5 August 1982.

13. The new operative pnragruph 7 would now read:
“Rc~~rrt~sf.sthe Secretary-Gcnelal
to report to the
Security Council on the implementation
of the
present resolution as soon as possible and not latel
than 1000 hours. eastern daylight time, on 5 August 1982:“.
14. The new operative pariigIXph

8 would now read:

the Secretar-y-General
to report
to the Security Council on the implementation
of
the present resolution as soon as possible and not
later than 1000 hours, eastern daylight time. on
5 August 1982:“.:‘:

“Dcc,irlrs to meet at that time, if necessary. in
order to consider the report of the Secretary-GeneraI and. in case of failure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict. to consider adopting effective ways and means in accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations.”

8. In accordance with thslt change, the new operative paragraph 8 should be revised to read: “Decides
to meet at that time, if necessary,‘” instead of: “Decides to meet three hours from now.”

15. I think that I have correctly reflected the rcvisions proposed olally by the representative of Spain
as one of the two sponsors of the draft resolution.

“8. Dcc,id(Js to meet at that time,!if necessary. in
order to consider the report of the Secretary-General and, in case of failure to comply by any of the
parties to the conflict , , .“::

16. Is the Council ready to proceed to the vote on
draft resolution S/l5343/Rev.l,
as revised by the pr’oposals just put forward orally by the representative of
Spain? If I hear no objections, I shall now put the
draft resolution, as orally revised. to the vote.

9. Those at-e the revisions I nm proposing. In view
of the lateness of the lwur.
I hope that these minor
revisions will not cause any delay and that we will
be able to proceed with the vote. If any r-epresentatives would like me to repeat the suggested revisions, I shall of course be happy to do so.

I/I ,fir\~,r*: China, France, Guyana, Ireland, Japan,
Jordan, Panama, Poland, Spain, Togo, Uganda, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of
Gr-eat Britain and Northern Ireland, Zaire

“7.

Rc~~rwsr,s

IO. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of Spain
has orally suggested certain revisions to the draft
resolution before members of the Council in document S/ lS343/Rev. I. At the risk of repetition, but in
order to be quite clear that we are all agreed on whtlt
we are talking about, I shall take the liberty of repeating
his proposed revisions.

/lh.stcti/zin,~l: United States of America

17. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make stntements
following the vote,

I I. The representative of Spain has proposed the
addition of a new operative parilgl’>lph S, which would
rend:

18. Mr. NISIBORI
(Japan): Since this is the first
time that I have spoken formally in the Council this
month, I wish to congratulate you, Sir, on the assumption of the presidency. Although we are just a few days
into the month, you have atready amply demonstrated
a keen insight into the difficult problems we are now
confronting.
I am confident that under your wise
leadership the Council will successfully discharge its
important responsibilities.

“5. Ttrkrs /lorr of the decision of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
to move the Palestinian
armed forces from Beirut:“.
That would be inserted between the present paragraphs 4 and 5 as B new operative paragraph 5. Consequently. the present paragraph 5, 6 and 7 would be
renumbered as paragraphs 6, 7 and 8.

19, I L\rn also pleased to have this opportunity to
express my delegation’s appreciation to Mr. Sinclair,
of Guyana. who, as President for the month of July,
guided the work of the Council with exemplary patience
:md understanding.

12. Furthermore,
the representative
of Spain, as
one of the sponsors of the draft resolution, bus proposed revisions in operative paragraphs 6 and 7, now
operative paragraphs 7 and 8, in order to extend somewhat the deadline for the Seci.etal.y-Genel.~tl’s
report.

20. Now I should like to take this opportunity to State
very briefly my Government’s position on the recent

~’ Quoted in English hy the speaker.

2

thrust into west Beirut by Israeli forces. It is the view
that Isr-ael’s latest action is clearly
in contempt of the various relevant United Nations
rewlutions demanding an immediate cease-fire and the
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon. Furthermore. it demonstrates Israel’s total disregard of my
Guvcrnment’s profound concern for the grave developments in Lebanon. This concern has been expressed
in statements by the Minister for Foreign Affairs on
6 and 30 June, as well as in an urgent appeal by my
Government
to Israel to comply with the relevant
United Nations resolutions,

was not implemented
because of the thrust
of Israeli forces beyond the lines reached at 1325 hours
on Sunday. I August. and because the Israeli Government opposed the deployment of observers who had
already been assembled by the Secretary-General.
resolution

of my Government

29. That is why, as a warning and to appeal here to
the Government of Israel for reason and respect for
law. my delegation voted in favour of the draft resolution suhmitted to us and welcomes its adoption by
the Council.
30. Mr. GERSHMAN
(United States of America):
MI.. President, I should like to join those who have
cong~a~Lll:lted you on your assumption of your office
and particularly
to emphasize our confidence in YOUI
capabilities, which you are demonstrating during these
trying days. We should also like to commend the permanent representative of Guyana. who carried out his
responsibilities
as President of the Council last month
so effectively.

21. My Government is also deeply worried that this
Isr-aeli action will undermine efforts being made by
Mr. Habib for the peaceful solution of the Lebanese
question.
22.

ThLIs. the Israeli thrust into west Beirut cona serious challenge to r.he international comwhich has been striving to achieve peace in
Lebanon. It should therefore never be condoned and
must be strongly condemned.
stitutes
munity,

31. The United States Government is gravely concerned at the tragic violence that afflicts the people of
Beirut. We have repeatedly supported resolutions
calling for a cease-fire. The United States Ciovernment has worked ceaselessly. especially through the
President’s
special emissary. Mr, Philip Habib, to
bring peace to the region by restoring the sovereignty
and independence of the Government
of Lebanon.
Towards that end, we have sought the removal of all
foreign forces from Lebanese territory.

23. The Government of Japan once again urges Israel
to stop such action immediately
and unconditionally
and to withdraw ft-om west Beirut us soon iIs possible.
24. Based on this position, my delegation voted in
favour of draft resolution S/l5343/Rev. I. as orally
revised. sponsored by Jordan and Spain.
2.5. Mr.
LOU ET (France) (it?trrprrJt(ttiot?
.fiotn
FIY*/~(*/~): I am particularly happy to be able to extend
to YOU, Mr. President, on behalf of my delegation.
extremely warm congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council. During this month, the
Council will have need of your patience. your imagination and your sense of reality. In carrying out YOUI
delicate responsibilities,
you can be fully assured of
my delegation’s
cu-operation.

32. Just last Sunday, we voted in favour of resolution 516 (1982). which called for the introduction
of
United Nations observers in Beirut. We continue to
support this important step and we regret that there
has not yet been full co-operation with the SecretaryGeneral in the implementation
of that resolution.
33. In our view, the resolution now before us has
one fatal flaw: it does not explicitly and unequivocally
call for the withdrawal of the PLO from Lebanon.

26. May I ask you, Mr. President, to extend to
Mr. Sinclair, the representative of Guyana, my delegation’s gratitude for the authority and competence
with which he carried out his functions as President
hst month.

34. Our position
made this morning

is best stated in the declaration
by President Reagan. He said:

“Through
Governments
which have direct contact with the PLO I have expressed my strong
conviction
that the PLO must not delay furthe!
its withdrawal from Lebanon. At the same time,
I have expressed to the Government
of Israel the
absolute necessity of I-e-establishing and maintaining
11strict cease-fire in place so that this matter can be
promptly resolved.”

27.

The French Government
has vigorously protested against the new military actions of Israeli troops
in Beirut,
actions which are designed to hinder any
solution
other than that which results from the use of
force. These un-justifiable actions violate the rules of
international
law and the rights of civilian populations in wartime. In such conditions, we believe that
the authority of the Council can no longer be flouted
and that Israel now should be censured,

35. Because the draft resolution contained in document S/l5343/Rev. I, introduced by Jordan and Spain,
is inconsistent with the balanced policy set forth in
President Reagan’s statement, we abstained in the
vote.

28. The Council unanimously adopted on I August
resolution
5 i 6 ( 1982). Despite preparatory measures
:aken by the Secretary-General,
to whom the French
delegation
would like to pay a public tribute, that
3

36. MI-. WHYTE
(United
Kingdom):
Mr. President. allow me to add the congratulations
of my delegation to those :dready addressed to you and to say
how much we admire your skill, your patience and
your determination.
We suspect that you may in fact
have chalked up a record for the number of hours
put in actually on the job at the end of day four of your
presidency. We hope for all our sakes that you will
not have to keep LIP the same striking rate for the rest
of the month.

at I. 15 in the morning of I August. However. I wish
to associate myself with the remarks that have been
addressed to you in the Council by the members and
to say that if it were left to us we could willingly right
now promise to make this ;I very pacific month for
you. for the members here and for all those who seek
peace in our part of the world.
43. I wish to address my thanks to the representative of the Soviet Union for having asked for this
meeting. ulso at an early hour. and for his support foi
my country.

37. May I also extend our congratulations
and
express our admiration to Mr. Noel Sinclair and his
colleagues in the delegation of Guyana, who conducted
the presidency last month with such skill and efficiency and energy and determination.

44. I also wish to address particular thanks to my
brother the representative of Jordan and to my friend
the representative of Spain for having sponsored this
resolution.

38. My Government has made its view of Israel’s invasion of Lebanon known to the Council on two recent
occasions. The strong views which we expressed
then have not changed, and thel-e is no need for me to
repeat them. But what meanwhile has been repeated
is the collapse of yet another cease-fire and the resumption of the bombardment
by land, sea and air of
the city of Beirut. Last night, even as you, Mr. Prcsident. were delivering a statement on behalf of the
members of the Council [S//5342] reaffirming the vital
need for a cessation of military activities, word wits
coming in of the latest Israeli attacks on west Beirut.

45. It is now 4.30 tomorrow morning in Beirut. The
latest we have heard is that we have an undeclared
cease-fire, Yet people are still dying. In such apocnlyptic moments, one’s mind is not set on debates and
I shall not engage in one.
46. Even statistics assume names. They become real
persons. They become brothers, sisters, friends,
colleugues, students, children you knew and saw
growing. Even institutions assume a certain persanality. When you see images of destruction, you cannot
look at such a situation impersonally, as it were,

39. My Government
is appalled by these further
attacks. We can in no way become inured or indifferent to the continuing terrible loss of life and the
human suffering inflicted on the civilian population
of Beirut. What we ;lre witnessing is the piecemeal
destruction of a large part of one of the great cities of
the Middle l&t.

47. In the Council we have been discussing the fate
of west Beirut. Both sides of Beirut have suffered
tremendously today. and it is our hope that we shall
soon be able to propose some new elements, even B
draft resolution, that will be another contribution to
the return of peace to my country.

40. The bloodshed must, in OLII’ view, be brought
to a stop. Council resolution 5 16 ( 1982) must be respected and implemented.
We believe that the deployment of United Nations observers would be a modest
but important step in helping to maintain a cease-fire.
We fully support the Secretary-General
and the efforts
that he has already made towards the implementation
of resolution 516 (1982). For those reasons, we have
now voted for resolution 5 I7 ( 1982). We regret that,
despite all your endeavours, Mr. President. and those
of other members of the Council, it did not prove
possible to reach consensus. But we hope that the
absence of consensus will not impair the impact of the
resolution and that it will contribute towards ;I peaceful settlement of this bloody conflict such as all of ~1s
must profoundly wish for.
41. The PRESIDENT:
tative of Lebanon.

48, We have another resolution, It has been a long
time since resolutions were solutions in the Council.
Yet we still attach great importance to resolutions
here, particularly we small countries that do not have
much more to go by. We think that the Council has
over the past two months built, stone by stone, :I
framework for peace in Lebanon, and we should like
to stress that we approach the present resolution and
look at it precisely from this perspective. Hence,
I should like to make the following remarks.
49. First, because we are dealing with a specific
case, namely, the latest invasion of Beirut yesterday
nnd today, we have accepted and are grateful forcertain words in this resolution, but we wish to em@\size that they must not be understood as a set-back
to what has already been established in previous resolutions. To be very explicit. the withdrawal of Israel
to lines where its troops were yesterday when the
Council was meeting should in no way mean that we
are relinquishing
what was established in resoIutions SO8 ( 1982) and SO9 ( 1982) concerning the total
and unconditional
withdrawal of Israel from all of
Lebanon’s territories. Secondly, when we take note

I now call on the represen-

42. Mr. TUENI (Lebanon): I believe I have already
congratulated
you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency, having had the privilege of being the first
pcrsvn to speak to you after YOLI became President,
4

of the decision of the PLO to move its forces from
Beirut, we are not underwriting a policy that limits
our desire to see Lebanon again for the Lebanese and
the Lebanese alone. We do not underwrite a policy
that will limit OLIN attitude to this vet-y limited move.
I am sorry for speaking in such a manner, but I want
to make myself clear.

so.

My Government
has already made its position
very explicit to the Council, to public opinion and to
the world. We have taken a very clear, unequivocal
attitude. I have written to the Council about it in a
letter that has been distributed as an official document.
and I have since had occasion to repcat it in the Council in an earlier debate.
51. The objectives of my Government are Israel’s
withdrawal from all of Lebanon, the withdrawal of
all non-Lebanese forces and the deployment of the
Lebanese army and security forces-and their deployment alone -on all of Lebanon’s territory. We know
that that is a very ambitious scheme. We may seek
help from international or multinational forces. We are
content today to have observers to assist LIS in this
enterprise.
But we are deter-mined to see peace in
Lebanon
t-e-established within ;I scheme to restore
Lebanon’s
sovereignty exclusively,
not only over
west Beirut. not only over our capital, but over all of
Lebanon.
1 conclude by saying that all the members of the
Council-with
one exception-voted
in favour of this
rcsoiution.
I associate myself with the hope expressed
by the representative of the United Kingdom that the
fact that the United States abstained in the vote will
not be read as impairing the impact of this resolution. Israel must in no way read-and 1 do not think
it will read-the
United States abstention as licence
given it to pursue its present acts. We want to empha-

size that point because we have been indeed. and
remain. very supportive of the efforts deployed by
Presidential envoy Philip Habib. who, we hope, will
in the next few days succeed-with
the assistance of
the United Nations and within the framework now
being established by the Council-in
reaching a solution to the problem that will ensure the withdrawal of
Israel. of the PLO and of every other foreign force
on our territory.
53. The PRESIDENT:
Israel.

I call on the representative

of

Mr. BLUM (Israel): I should like to associate
myself with the statement we have just heard from the
representative
of Lebanon. namely. that all foreign
forces should remove themselves or be removed from
Lcbancsc territory. Lebanon legitimately
belongs to
its own people and to its own people alone. Lebanon
belongs to the Lebanese and all foreign forces should
be withdrawn from Lebanese soil. This has born the
okjective of the Government of Is~xel all along and we
continue to adhere to this objective.

54.

ss. As far as west Beirut is concerned. it is imperative that the terrorists leave Beirut without any furthe!
delay. It is also imperative. for the restoration of Lebanese sovcrcignty throughout the territory of Lebanon.
that the Syrian army of occupation withdraw from
Lcbancse soil.

52.

56.
On behalf of Israel. I can assure the Council once
again that my country hiis no intention whatsoever of
staying in Lebanon and that, once the objectives of
operation “Peace for Galilee” are attained the lsrilci
Defence Forces will withdraw to the internntional
boundary between our two countries.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United
world.

Nations
Consult

COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

Les publications
des Nations
Units
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres
des ventes, New York ou Get&e,

COMO

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained
I’rom bookstores
and distributors
your bookstore
or write IO: United Nations,
Sales Section,
New

CONSEGUIR

NATIONS

sent en vente dans Its librairies
de votrc libraire
ou adressez-vous

PUBLICACIONES

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
todas partes del mundo.
Consulte
Nueva York o Ginebra.

DES

DE LAS

NACIONES

Unidas estdn en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase
a: Naciones

throughout
the
York or Geneva.

UNIES

et Its agcnces
a : Nations

d+ositnircs
du
Unies, Section

UNIDAS
y casas distribuidoras
en
Unidas,
Section
de Ventas,
