2
tation from rench into EnRlish and vice versa,
and when a speech is mad~ in Russian, simultaneous interpretation will be given into both
French and English. The same applies to a
speech made in Spanish. What wc cannot do,
to my regret, is to give interpretation into Russian and into Spanish.

service que VOICt: l'interpretation simultanee
sera {aite (Jc fran<;ais en anglais et uice versa et,
lorsqu'on parlera en russe, I'interpretation simultance sera faite a la fois en franr;ais et en anglais.
It en sera de mcrne lorsqu'on parlcra en cspagnol.
Ce qu'on ne pourra faire, ,1 mon regret, c'est
['interpretation en russe et en espagnol.

:Mr. l\-fALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): As the
system of simultaneous translation is being used,
it would be more satisfactory if translations were
also made into Russian, Spanish and Chinese.
This would be more convenient and it is the
usual procedure in simultaneous translation. I
very much regret that it is not practicable.

M. MALIK (Union des Rcpubliqucs socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Puisque
nous faisons uS<lge dc l'interprctation simultanee,
il aurait elc plus logique de donner en mcme
temps l'intcrpn'tation en russe, en espagnol et en
chinois. eela aurait (Stc plus commode, et tcl est
I'mage gcneralcmcnt suivi lorsqu'on emploi l'interprctation simultanCe. Je regrette gu'il ne soit
pas possible de le faire.

Mr. PELT (AssistaJ1t Secretary-General in
charge of the Department of Conference and
General Services): I should like to join with
the representative of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics in expressing regret that we cannot
give any interpretation from or into Chinese,
but I hope the Council will understand that the
original arrangement was that we should give
only consecutive interpretation into English and
French. We succeeded at the very last moment
in unpacking part of our equipment, but we
could not recall the staff which is now dispersed, which would have been necessary to
give full service. That is why I asked the President to explain yesterday [391 st meeting] that
we could provide only a reduced emergency
service.

M. PELT (Secretaire gencral adjoint charge
cJu Dcpartemcnt des conferences ct services gcncraux) (traduit de l'allglais): Je desire me
joindre au reprcsentant de l'Union des Republiques socialistcs sovictiques pour exprimer mes
regrets de ne pouvoir faire faire l'interpretation
du chinois ou en chinois, mais j'cspcre que le
Conseil comprendra que, d'aprcs Ics dispositions
primitives, l'interpretation consecutive ne devait
ctre faite qu'en anglais et en fran<;ais. Nous
avons rcussi, au tout demicr moment, a cJeballer
une partie de notre equipcment, mais nOlls
n'avons pu rassembler le personnel qui est actueJlement disperse, ce qui aurait ete necessaire pour
foumir un servic complet. C'cst pourquoi j'ai
demande hier [39Jeme seance] au President
d'expliqucr que nous ne pouvions fournir qU'UB
service de fortune red uit.

3.

Adoption of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.

3. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

4. Continuation of the discussion on the
Indonesian question

4. Suite de la discussion sur la question
indonesienne

A t the invitation of the President, Colonel

Sur l'in7!itation du President. le colonel flod,£'.son, representant de I'Australic; M. Dewi. representant de l'Inde; M. van Roijen, repn=sentant des Pa)'s-Bas, et ;\1. Palar, rrpresentant de
la Republique d'lndonesie, !Jrennent pIa/.. I a la
table du Conseil.

H odgson, representative of Australia, Mr. Desai,
representative of India, A1r. van Roijen, representative of the Netherlands, and Mr. Palar,
representative of the Republic of Indonesia, took
their seats at the Secun'ty Council table.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): I ask permission to speak in order to propose the resolution, which I promised yesterday [391 st meeting] I would submit a little later.

M. MALIK (Union des Rcpubliqucs ~ocia­
listes sovictiques) (traduit du russe): Je demande la parole pour presenter le projet de resolution que j'avais mentionne au cours de mon
intervention d'hier [391eme seance] et que j'avais
prom is de soumettre plus tard.

The PRESIDENT (translated from French): If
the United Kingdom representative does not
object, I shall first call upon the representative
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, so
that he may submit his draft resolution.

Le PRF.SIDENT: Si le representant du RoyaumeUni y consent, je donnerai d'abord la parole au
representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques pour qu'il presente son projet
de resolution.
.

Mr. MALIK (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): In my
speech yesterday I outlined the position of the
USSR delegation on the Indonesian question

M. MALlK (Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiqucs) (traduit du russe): Au cours de
mon intervention d'hier, j'ai expose l'attitude
adoptee par ]a delegation de l'URSS
l'egard

a

and
war

anc

spe
an(

offi

Co

lar
ta:

m
ID

t<l

se
l'
P
r
t
)

1
