S/2001/707

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 July 2001
Original: English

Letter dated 17 July 2001 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999, I have
the honour to convey the attached report on the international security presence in
Kosovo covering the period from 1 to 31 May 2001 (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the report to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-46185 (E) 180701

*0146185*

S/2001/707

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 May 2001) there were approximately 46,500
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre, with no major changes in
deployment since the last report.
2.
KFOR’s main activities during the month of May related to the return of the
forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the last remaining sector of the
Ground Safety Zone (GSZ), reinforcement of its presence along the border with the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,1 anti-smuggling and prevention of
criminal and illegal border activities and dealing with residual protests against the
excise and sales tax collection policy of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK).
3.
The number of refugees making their way into Kosovo in May was 19,282, of
which 10,987 came from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and 8,295
from the Presevo Valley. One thousand three hundred refugees had returned to the
Presevo Valley by the end of May.
Security
4.
During the reporting period, the level of inter-ethnic violence continued across
the province but at a reduced level. In Vitina, on 1 May, a Kosovar Serb and a
Kosovar Albanian were shot from a passing car; the Kosovar Serb later died. On 8
May a Kosovar Serb was shot and seriously wounded in a suspected inter-ethnic
murder attempt. In the last year, the Kosovar Serb population of Vitina has fallen by
60 per cent due to ethnic harassment. On 11 May, in Vitez, schoolchildren
demonstrated peacefully against violence committed recently against the Kosovar
Serb community.
5.
KFOR continued to support UNMIK in the restoration of law and order. On 18
May, KFOR and UNMIK police carried out a joint search operation against a
security firm2 (called Jaguar) in Pec, which resulted in the arrest of 26 people and
the confiscation of large amounts of weapons, documents and computer hardware
and software. An investigation to determine any involvement of members of the
Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) in this company is continuing.
6.
In Mitrovica and the surrounding area, Kosovar Serbs continued to show their
dissatisfaction with the implementation of UNMIK’s excise and sales tax collection
policy by blocking roads and through small-scale demonstrations. Although freedom
of movement had been achieved for KFOR at the end of April, restrictions on access
by UNMIK police continued until the third week in May. An agreement reached
between UNMIK tax experts and the Deputy Prime Minister of the Federal Republic
of Yugoslavia, Mr. Labus, on 23 May, is expected to finally resolve difficulties
surrounding the establishment of this excise and sales tax.
__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.
2 UNMIK police, who are responsible for issuing operating licences to companies providing

security services, began closing down unauthorized security service providers on 18 May.

2

S/2001/707

7.
KFOR also dealt with small-scale incidents in the town, including the rescue of
a Kosovo Police Service (KPS) officer, who was assaulted and wounded by several
Kosovar Serbs, and the eviction of a Kosovar Albanian from “Little Bosnia”, who
was suspected of involvement in a shooting incident. In addition, KFOR and
UNMIK continued to work together on confidence-building measures by extending
the “Confidence Zone” and on several multi-ethnic projects relating to establishing
sports and cultural centres and a multi-ethnic market.
8.
The weapons destruction programme, as previously reported, is scheduled to
begin again on 11 June once the necessary repairs to the furnace are completed. The
total number of weapons destroyed had reached 5,300 by 31 May. Only four
weapons were destroyed during the reporting period, with the backlog currently
standing at 971. Weapons surrendered by Ethnic Albanian Armed Groups to KFOR
prior to the entry of the forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia into Sector B
of the GSZ will also be destroyed under this programme.
Return of the forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the Ground
Safety Zone
9.
Exchanges of fire continued in the Ground Safety Zone (GSZ) in the lead-up to
the due date for the return of forces to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia to the
remaining sector, and included heavy and prolonged fighting on 11 and 12 May in
the area of Oraovica in the Presevo Valley. Although KFOR forces came under fire
more than once at the beginning of the reporting period, there were no casualties.
The conditional and controlled return of FRY forces into Sector B began on 24 May
and continued according to plan. The main difficulties encountered were mines and
improvised explosive devices. The mined areas were marked and forces of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia are expected to clear them by 20 June. KFOR’s twophase policy of detaining, screening and releasing members of the Liberation Army
of Presevo, Medvedja and Bujanovac (UCPMB) before and after the 24 May
deadline resulted in a total 523 turning themselves in by the end of the reporting
period, of which 480 were released, 10 remained to be screened and 33 were in
detention. UCPMB members also delivered significant amounts of weapons and
ammunition to KFOR. A prominent UCPMB commander (Lleshi) of the Veliki
Trnovac/Breznica faction was shot dead, apparently accidentally, by Serb forces
and, despite fears of retaliation, his funeral took place on 25 May without incident.
Illegal border activity
10. KFOR forces continue to provide appropriate control of Kosovo’s internal
boundaries, external borders and recognized crossing points. On several occasions,
KFOR successfully intercepted smugglers and others illegally crossing from Albania
into Kosovo.
11. KFOR significantly increased its presence along the border with the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to interdict the movement of personnel and
weapons into the northern part of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia,
where fighting between government forces and the “National Liberation Army”
(NLA) continued. On 30 May near Vitina, 10 NLA fighters were detained.

3

S/2001/707

United Nations Security Council resolution 1160 (1998)
12. Although KFOR operations continue to result in weapons seizures there have
been no reported violations of Security Council resolution 1160 (1998).
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
13. The Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC) establishment, as at 31 May, stood at
4,663 members, of which 132 belonged to minority groups. Over the reporting
period, the number of cases of non-compliance reported decreased in comparison to
April from 13 to 5, all for minor offences. Cases of KPC members suspected of
involvement in the activities of Ethnic Albanian Armed Groups in the Presevo
Valley and in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia were also reported. On 9
May, the Commander of KFOR (COMKFOR) promulgated a directive, “KFOR and
KPC — Partners for the Future”,3 setting out guidelines for the future relationship
between KPC and KFOR, with the focus on KPC attitudes and perceptions. KPC
continued to carry out a variety of humanitarian projects throughout the province,
including house repairs, road construction, street cleaning and refuse collection.
14. Security forces of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.
Cooperation with international organizations
15. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations (NGOs) throughout Kosovo, on request, and to
provide security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
Outlook
16. Although the security situation in Kosovo continues to be affected by the
violence in the northern part of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, which
has increased the risk to KFOR personnel, the situation throughout Kosovo is
generally calm following the return of the forces of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to the GSZ and the voluntary laying down of weapons by a significant
number of UCPMB members.

__________________
3 COMKFOR directive 035.

4
