S/2007/522

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
4 September 2007
English
Original: French

Letter dated 27 August 2007 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 1772 (2007), which
requested me to intensify my efforts to strengthen the National Reconciliation
Congress and the wider political process by working together with the African
Union, the League of Arab States, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development,
the European Union and the International Contact Group on Somalia. In the same
resolution, the Security Council requested me to provide it with an assessment of
further measures that may be required to strengthen the ability of the United Nations
Political Office for Somalia (UNPOS) to fulfil its enhanced role in Somalia.
In order to enhance the ability of UNPOS to fulfil its enhanced mandate, I
intend to upgrade the post of Head of that Office to the level of Under-SecretaryGeneral. I also intend to appoint Mr. Ahmedou Ould Abdallah, who is currently my
Special Representative for West Africa, as Special Representative for Somalia.
Pursuant to paragraph 17 of resolution 1772 (2007), I will propose in my next report
to the Security Council further measures for strengthening the capacity of UNPOS.
Furthermore, Assistant Secretary-General François Lonseny Fall, my current
Special Representative for Somalia, will be reassigned as Head of the United
Nations Peacebuilding Support Office in the Central African Republic (BONUCA).
General Lamine Cissé, Special Representative of the Secretary-General, whose
contract expires on 31 December 2007, will be temporarily reassigned as Officer-inCharge of the Office of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for West
Africa at his current level.
I should like to take this opportunity to express my appreciation to
Mr. Abdallah, Mr. Fall and Mr. Cissé for their remarkable contributions to the
United Nations’ peace efforts in West Africa, Somalia and the Central African
Republic, respectively.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

07-49556 (E) 060907 060907

*0749556*
