A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/251
15 September 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 39 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.80 and Add.1)]
52/251. Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations
and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 51/34 of 9 December 1996 in which, inter alia, it invited the SecretaryGeneral to take steps to conclude a relationship agreement with the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea,
Noting the decision of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea taken at its fifth session on
12 March 1998 to approve the Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations
and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea signed on 18 December 1997 by the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations and the President of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
Noting also that the eighth Meeting of States Parties to the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, held in New York from 18 to 22 May 1998, took note with appreciation of the report of the
International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, including paragraphs 67 and 68, relating to the conclusion
of the Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations and the International
Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,1

1

SPLOS/31, paras. 13 and 14, and SPLOS/27.

98-77407

/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 2

Having considered the Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations and
the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,2
Approves the Agreement, which is annexed to the present resolution.
92nd plenary meeting
8 September 1998
ANNEX
Agreement on Cooperation and Relationship between the United Nations
and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea
The United Nations and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea,
Bearing in mind that, in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, the United Nations is the
principal organization dealing with matters relating to the maintenance of international peace and security
and that one of the main purposes of the Organization is to bring about by peaceful means the settlement
of international disputes or situations that might lead to a breach of the peace,
Acknowledging the key role played by the United Nations under the Charter in the peaceful settlement
of international disputes,
Bearing in mind that the General Assembly of the United Nations in its resolution 3067 (XXVIII)
of 16 November 1973 decided to convene the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea
for the adoption of a convention dealing with all matters relating to the law of the sea and that the
Conference adopted the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea3 (hereinafter referred to as "the
Convention"),
Bearing in mind also that the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (hereinafter referred to
as "the International Tribunal") has been established in accordance with article 287, paragraph 1 (a), and
annex VI to the Convention as an autonomous international judicial body,
Noting the role of the International Tribunal in the peaceful settlement of disputes in relation to the
uses of the seas and the oceans and their resources,
Noting also that the functions of the International Tribunal are consistent with Article 2, paragraph 3,
of the Charter of the United Nations, which provides that international disputes shall be settled by peaceful
means,

2

A/52/968, annex.

3

Official Records of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, vol. XVII (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.3), document A/CONF.62/122.
/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 3

Noting further the responsibilities entrusted to the Secretary-General of the United Nations under
article 319 and other provisions of the Convention,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 51/204 of 17 December 1996 inviting the International
Tribunal to participate in the sessions and the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer,
Taking note of General Assembly resolution 51/34 of 9 December 1996 and the decision of the first
session of the International Tribunal calling for the conclusion of a relationship agreement between the
United Nations and the International Tribunal,
Have agreed as follows:
Article 1
General
1. The United Nations recognizes the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea as an autonomous
international judicial body with jurisdiction as provided for in the relevant provisions of the Convention
and the statute of the International Tribunal annexed thereto.
2. The International Tribunal recognizes the responsibilities of the United Nations under the Charter,
in particular in the fields of international peace and security, economic, social, cultural and humanitarian
development and the peaceful settlement of international disputes.
3. The United Nations and the International Tribunal each undertake to respect the status and mandate
of the other and to establish cooperative working relations pursuant to the provisions of the present
Agreement.
Article 2
Cooperation and coordination
The United Nations and the International Tribunal, with a view to facilitating the effective attainment
of their objectives and the coordination of their activities, shall:
(a) Consult and cooperate, whenever appropriate, on matters of mutual concern; and
(b) Pursue, whenever appropriate, initiatives to coordinate their activities.
Article 3
Reciprocal representation
1. Without prejudice to the decision of the General Assembly in its resolution 51/204 granting observer
status to the International Tribunal, and subject to such decisions as may be taken concerning the
attendance of meetings by observers, the United Nations shall, subject to the rules and practices of the
/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 4

bodies concerned, invite the International Tribunal to attend meetings and conferences convened under the
auspices of the United Nations, where observers are allowed, and whenever matters of interest to the
International Tribunal are under discussion.
2. Subject to the applicable provisions of the rules of the International Tribunal, the Secretary-General
of the United Nations or representatives of the Secretary-General may attend public meetings of the
International Tribunal or its Seabed Disputes Chamber, including oral hearings.
3. Subject to the rules of the International Tribunal, written statements submitted by the United Nations
to the International Tribunal for distribution shall be distributed by the Registry to the members of the
International Tribunal. Written statements presented by the International Tribunal to the United Nations
for distribution shall be distributed by the Secretariat of the United Nations to all members of the
appropriate organs of the United Nations in accordance with the relevant rules of procedure. Such written
statements shall be circulated in the quantities and languages in which they were made available to the
Registry or the Secretariat.
Article 4
Exchange of information and documents
1. The United Nations and the International Tribunal shall, to the fullest extent possible and practicable,
and subject to paragraphs 2 and 3 of the present article, arrange for the regular exchange of information
and documents of mutual interest. In particular:
(a) The Secretary-General of the United Nations shall:
(i)

Periodically transmit to the International Tribunal information on developments relating to the
Convention that are relevant to the work of the International Tribunal, including copies of
communications received by the Secretary-General in the capacity of depositary of the
Convention or depositary of any other agreement which confers jurisdiction on the International
Tribunal;

(ii)

Transmit to the International Tribunal copies of any documents notified to the Secretary-General
or otherwise communicated to the United Nations by the International Court of Justice pursuant
to its Statute and Rules of Court;

(iii)

Subject to the applicable rules and regulations and the obligations of the United Nations under
the relevant agreements, furnish to the International Tribunal information requested by it as
relevant to a case before it.

(b) The Registrar of the International Tribunal shall:
(i)

Periodically transmit to the United Nations information concerning developments under the
Convention that are related to the activities of the International Tribunal;

(ii)

Transmit to the United Nations information and documentation relating to the work of the
International Tribunal, including documentation relating to pleadings, oral proceedings, orders,
judgements and other communications and documentation, including those relating to
/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 5

applications submitted to the International Tribunal in accordance with articles 290 and 292 of
the Convention;
(iii)

Furnish to the United Nations, with the concurrence of the International Tribunal and subject to
its statute and rules, any information relating to the work of the International Tribunal requested
by the International Court of Justice.

2. Nothing in the present Agreement shall be construed to require either the United Nations or the
International Tribunal to furnish any information, the provision of which would, in its judgement,
constitute a violation of the confidentiality of such information or of rights in proprietary materials.
3. The United Nations and the International Tribunal shall make every effort to achieve maximum
cooperation with a view to avoiding undesirable duplication in the collection, analysis, publication and
dissemination of information related to matters of mutual interest. They shall strive to combine their
efforts, where appropriate, to secure the greatest possible usefulness and utilization of such information
and to minimize the burdens placed upon national Governments and other organizations from which such
information may be collected.
Article 5
Reports to the United Nations
The International Tribunal shall keep the United Nations informed of its activities that may require
the attention of the United Nations. For this purpose, the International Tribunal may, when it deems it
appropriate:
(a) Submit reports to the United Nations through the Secretary-General of the United Nations; and
(b) Notify the Secretary-General of the United Nations whenever, in its opinion, a question within
the competence of the Security Council, in particular relating to the application of article 298,
paragraph 1 (c), of the Convention, arises in connection with the work of the International Tribunal.
Article 6
Personnel arrangements
1. The United Nations and the International Tribunal agree to apply, as far as practicable, common
personnel standards, methods and arrangements designed to avoid serious discrepancies in terms and
conditions of employment, to avoid competition in recruitment of personnel and to facilitate any mutually
desirable interchange of personnel in order to obtain the maximum benefit from their services.
2. The United Nations and the International Tribunal agree to cooperate to the fullest extent possible
in achieving these ends and in particular they agree to:
(a) Consult periodically on matters of mutual interest relating to the employment of their officers
and staff, including conditions of service, duration of appointments, classification, salary scale and
allowances, retirement and pension rights and staff regulations and rules, with a view to securing as much
uniformity in these matters as shall be found feasible;
/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 6

(b) Cooperate in the interchange of personnel, when desirable, on a temporary or permanent basis,
making due provision for the retention of seniority and pension rights;
(c) Strive for maximum cooperation in order to achieve the most efficient use of specialized
personnel, systems and services;
(d) Cooperate in seeking an arrangement that will allow the extension of the competence of the
United Nations Administrative Tribunal to the staff of the Registry of the International Tribunal.
Article 7
Conference services
1. Upon the request of the International Tribunal, the United Nations may, subject to availability,
provide to the International Tribunal, on a reimbursable basis, such facilities and services as may be
required for the sessions of the International Tribunal, including translation and interpretation services,
documentation and conference services.
2. The terms and conditions under which any facilities or services of the United Nations in connection
with the matters referred to in the present article may be extended to the International Tribunal shall,
where necessary, be the subject of supplementary arrangements concluded for this purpose.
Article 8
Administrative cooperation
The United Nations and the International Tribunal recognize the desirability of cooperation in
administrative matters of mutual interest. They shall consult from time to time concerning the most
efficient use of facilities, staff and services with a view to avoiding the establishment and operation of
overlapping facilities and services. They shall also consult to explore the possibility of continuing or
establishing common facilities or services in specific areas.
Article 9
Laissez-passer
Members of the International Tribunal, the Registrar and other officials of the Registry shall be
entitled, in accordance with such special arrangements as may be concluded between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the International Tribunal, to use the laissez-passer of the United Nations as
a valid travel document where such use is recognized by States parties to the Agreement on the Privileges
and Immunities of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea or other agreements defining the
privileges and immunities of the International Tribunal, its members and officials. The above is without
prejudice to the right of the International Tribunal to issue its own travel documents.

/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 7

Article 10
Budgetary and financial matters
1. The International Tribunal recognizes the desirability of establishing close budgetary and financial
relationships with the United Nations so that the maximum measure of coordination and uniformity with
respect to administrative operations may be secured.
2. The United Nations and the International Tribunal agree to cooperate to the fullest extent possible
in achieving these ends.
3. The International Tribunal agrees to conform, as far as may be practicable and appropriate, to
standard practices and forms recommended by the United Nations.
4. The Registrar of the International Tribunal may consult with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations with a view to achieving consistency in the presentation of the budget of the International
Tribunal with that of the United Nations.
5. The United Nations may, upon request of the International Tribunal, provide advice on financial and
fiscal questions of interest to the International Tribunal with a view to achieving coordination and securing
uniformity in such matters.
Article 11
Financing of services
The costs and expenses resulting from the cooperation or the provision of services pursuant to the
present Agreement shall be subject to separate arrangements between the United Nations and the
International Tribunal. To that end, the United Nations and the International Tribunal shall consult each
other with a view to determining the most equitable manner in which such costs and expenses shall be
borne.
Article 12
Implementation of the Agreement
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Registrar of the International Tribunal may enter
into such supplementary arrangements for the implementation of the present Agreement as may be found
desirable in the light of the operating experience of the United Nations and the International Tribunal.
Article 13
Amendments
The present Agreement may be amended by agreement between the United Nations and the
International Tribunal. Any such amendment agreed upon shall enter into force on its approval by the
General Assembly of the United Nations and by the International Tribunal.

/...

A/RES/52/251
Page 8

Article 14
Entry into force
1. The present Agreement shall come into force on its approval by the General Assembly of the United
Nations and by the International Tribunal.
2. Pending such approval the present Agreement shall be applied provisionally from the date of its
signature by the Secretary-General of the United Nations and the President of the International Tribunal.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the undersigned have signed the present Agreement.
SIGNED this 18th day of December 1997 at United Nations Headquarters in New York in two
originals in the English language.
For the United Nations:

For the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea:

(Signed) Kofi A. ANNAN
Secretary-General

(Signed) Thomas A. MENSAH
President
