General Assembly-Forty-second Session

64

nuclear-weapon-frec zonc in the region of the Middle
East".
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/29.

Establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in
South Asia

The General Assembly,
Reca/ling its resolutions 3265 B (XXIX) of 9 December
1974, 3476 B (XXX) of 11 December 1975, 31/73 of 10
December 1976, 32/83 of 12 December 1977, 33/65 of
14 December 1978, 34/78 of 11 December 1979, 35/148
of 12 December 1980, 36/88 of 9 December 1981, 37/76
of 9 December 1982, 38/65 of 15 December 1983, 39/55
of 12 December 1984, 40/83 of 12 December 1985 and
41/49 of 3 December 1986 concerning the establishment
of a nulcear-weapon-free zone in South Asia,
Reiterating its conviction that the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the world is
one of the meas u res which can con tribute effectively to the
objectives of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and
general and complete disarmament,
Believing that the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in South Asia, as in other regions, will assist in
the strengthening of the security of the Sta tes of the region
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Noting with appreciation the declarations issued at the
highest leve! by Governments of South Asian States that
are developing their peaceful nuclear programmes reaffirming their undertaking not to acquire or manufacture
nuclear weapons and to devote their nuclear programmes
exclusively to the economic and social advancement of
their peoples,
Welcoming the recent proposal for the conclusion of a
bilateral or regional nuclear-test-ban agreement in South
Asia,
Taking note of the proposal to convene, under the auspices ofthe United Nations, a conference on nuclear nonproliferation in South Asia, as soon as possible, with the
participation of the regional and other concerned States,
Bearing in mind the provisions of paragraphs 60 to 63 of
the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of the
General Assembly, 11 regarding the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones, including in the region of South
Asia,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General 13 and
the views of the States of South Asia contained therein,
l. Reaffirms its endorsement, in principie, of the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
2. Urges once again the States of South Asia to continue to make ali possible efforts to establish a nuclearweapon-free zone in South Asia and to refrain, in the
mean time, from any action contrary to this objective;
3. Calls upan those nuclear-weapon States that have
not done so to respond positively to this proposal and to
extend the necessary co-operation in the efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to communicate
with the States ofthe region and other concerned States in
order to ascertain their views on the issue and to promote
consultations among them with a view to exploring the

13 A/42/456 and

Add. 1

best possibilities of furthering the efforts for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia;
5. A/so requests the Secretary-General to report on the
subject to the General Assembly at its forty-third session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia".
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/30.

Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on
the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons
Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessively Injurious or to Have Indiscriminate Effects

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 32/152 of 19 December 1977,
35/153 of 12 December 1980, 36/93 of9 December 1981,
37/79 of9 December 1982, 38/66 of 15 December 1983,
39/56 of 12 December 1984, 40/84 of 12 December 1985
and 41/50 of 3 December 1986,
Recalling with satisfaction the adoption, on 10 October
1980, of the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions
on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May
Be Deemed to Be Excessively lnjurious orto Have lndiscriminate Effects, together with the Protocol on NonDetectable Fragments (Protocol 1), the Protocol on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Mines, Booby Traps
and Other Devices (Protocol 11) and the Protocol on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Incendiary
Weapons (Protocol 111), 14
•
Reaffirming its conviction that general agreement on the
prohibition or restriction of use of specific conventional
weapons would significantJy reduce the suffering of civilian populations and of combatants,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the Secretary-General, 15
1. Notes with satisfaction that an increasing number of
States have either signed, ratified, accepted or acceded to
the Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use
of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be
Deemed to Be Excessively lnjurious or to Have lndiscriminate Effects, which was opened for signature in New
York on 10 April 1981;
2. Further notes with satisfaction that, consequent
upon the fulfilment of the conditions set out in article 5 of
the Convention, the Convention and the three Protocols
annexed thereto entered into force on 2 December 1983;
3. Urges ali States that have not yet done so to exert
their best endeavours to become parties to the Convention
and the Protocols annexed thereto as early as possible, so
as ultimately to obtain universality of adherence;
4. Notes that, under article 8 of the Convention, conferences may be convened to consider amendments to the
Convention or any of the annexed Protocols, to consider
additional protocols relating to other categories of conventional weapons not covered by the existing annexed
Protocols, or to review the scope and operation of the
Convention and the Protocols annexed thereto and to consider any proposal for amendments to the Convention or
to the existing Protocols and any proposals for additional

14 See The United Nations Disarmament Yearbook, vol. 5: 1980
(llnited Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.IX.4), appendix VII.
15 A/42/580

111.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the First Committee

protocols relating to other categories of conventional
weapons not covered by the existing Protocols;
5. Requests the Secretary-General as depositary of the
Convention and its three annexed Protocols to inform the
General Assembly from time to time of the state of adherence to the Convention and its Protocols;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the ítem entitled "Convention on
Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional W eapons Which May Be Deemed to Be Excessi vely lnjurious or to Have lndiscriminate Effects".
84th plenary meeting
30 November 1987

42/31.

Conclusion of effective international arrangements on the strengthening of the security of
non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons

The General Assembly,
Convinced of the need to take effective measures for the
strengthening of the security of States, and prompted by
the desire shared by ali nations to eliminate war and prevent nuclear conflagration,
Considering that, until nuclear disarmament is achieved
on a universal basis, it is imperative for the international
community to develop effective measures to ensure the
security of non-nuclear-weapon States against the use or
threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recognizing that effective measures to assure nonnuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use of
nuclear weapons can constitute a positive contribution to
the prevention of the spread of such weapons,
Noting with satisfaction the determination of nonnuclear-weapon States in various parts ofthe world to prevent nuclear weapons from being introduced into their territories and to ensure the complete absence of such
weapons from their respective regions, including through
the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of
the regions concerned, and being anxious to encourage
and contribute to the attainment of this objective,
Desirous of promoting the implementation of paragraph
59 of the Final Document of the Tenth Special Session of
the General Assembly, 11 the first special session devoted
to disarmament, in which it urged the nuclear-weapon
States to pursue efforts to conclude, as appropriate, effective arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Recalling its numerous resolutions on this subject, as
well as the relevant part of the special report of the Committee on Disarmament 16 submitted to the General Assembly at its twelfth special session, 17 the second special
session devoted to disarmament,
Noting that the Conference on Disarmament considered
in 1987 the item entitled "Effective international arrangements to assure non-nuclear-weapon States against the use
or threat of use of nuclear weapons", as reflected in its report, 18 where it is stated that discussions on the conclu-

16 The Committee on Disarmament was redesignated the Conference

on Disarmament as from 7 February 1984.
17 Official Records of the General Assembly. Twelfth Special Session.
Supplement No. 2 (A/S-12/2), sect. III.C.
18 [bid.. Forty-second Session. Supplemenl No. 27 (A/42/27).
sect. 111.F.

65

sions that could be drawn from the work of the Ad Hvc
Committee on this item, induding consideration of the
possibilities for interim measures and alternatives, once
again proved inconclusive,
Notingfurther that during that consideration the importance of making progress on this issue was underlined in
the light of the forthcoming third special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament,
Recalling the proposals submitted on the subject to t he
General Assembly and in the Conference on Disarmament, induding the drafts of an international convention,
and the widespread international support for the condusion of such a convention,
Aware that additional proposals on the substance of the
issue of security assurances with respect to non-nuclearweapon States were submitted in the Conference on Disarmament in 1987, as reflected in its report, 18
Aware a/so that the work on the substance of the elfective arrangements and discussion on various aspects and
elements of an interim solution revealed that specific difficulties relating to differing perceptions of security interests persisted and that the complex nature of the issues
involved continued to prevent agreement on a "common
formula",
Recognizing the need for fresh approaches to the solution of urgent security issues in the nuclear age, many of
which relate to the security of 11011-nuclear-weapon States
as well,
Aware of the wide support in the Conference on Disarmament for continuing the search for a "common formula", which could be included in an international legally
binding instrument to assure 11011-nuclear-weapon States
against the use or threat of use of nuclear weapons,
Welcvming once agai11 the solemn declarations made by
sorne nuclear-weapon States concerning 11011-first use of
nuclear weapons, and convinced that if ali nuclearweapon States were to assume obligations not to be the
first to use nuclear weapons, that would be tantamount in
practice to banning the use of nuclear weapons against ali
States, including ali non-nuclear-weapon States,
Considering that the 11011-nuclear-weapon States having
no nuclear weapons on their territories have every right to
receive reliable, uniform and unconditional international
legal assurances against the use or threat of use of nuclear
weapons,
1. Reaffirms once again the urgent need to reach agreement on effective international arrangements to assure
11011-nuclear-weapon States against the use or threat of use
of nuclear weapons and to find a common approach acceptable to ali;
2. Considers that the Conference on Disarmament
should continue to explore ways and means of overcoming
the difficulties encountered in carrying out negotiations on
this question;
3. Appeals to ali States, especially the nuclear-weapon
States, to demonstrate political will and to exercise the
flexibility necessary to reach agreement on a "common
formula", which could be included in an international instrument of a legally binding nature;
4. Requests the Conference on Disarmament to continue active negotiations on this subject and to establish
for this purpose the relevant ad hoc committee at the beginning of its 1988 session;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session the item entitled "Conclusion of effec--
