A /73/PV.52

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-third session

52nd plenary meeting

Thursday, 13 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Espinosa Garcés

In the absence of the President, Mr. Beleffi (San
Marino), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 10
Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin
Report by the Secretary-General (A/73/390)
Draft resolution (A/73/L.54)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Greece to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.54.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): It is my honour to speak
today on behalf of the sponsors of the draft resolution
entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property to the
countries of origin”, contained in document A/73/L.54.
At the outset, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the Director-General of UNESCO for
the relevant comprehensive report (A/73/390), which
outlines the most significant developments that have
taken place in the aforementioned field during the past
three years.
In 2015, the General Assembly adopted resolution
70/76, entitled “Return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin”, by consensus. Three years
later, significant developments have occurred, which
this draft resolution aims to reflect in a thorough and
balanced way.

(Ecuador)
Over the past few decades, the rise in the
international cross-border movement of cultural
objects, the increase in international organized crime
involving cultural objects and the tendency to launder
money through the antiquities market, including the
selling of stolen cultural objects at auction, including
in online auctions, have resulted in an increase of
illicit trafficking in cultural property. Moreover, of
late cultural property has been targeted more than
ever before due to the recent armed conflicts in the
Middle East and elsewhere. It is noteworthy that one
of the consequences of those conflicts is the looting of
antiquities, as well as their trafficking and trade through
the illegal market, notably by terrorist groups, with the
aim of financing terrorism. As a result, a large number
of artefacts supposedly ended up in antiquities markets,
while the Internet has led to an immense increase in
the possibilities for that illegal trade through online
sales of trafficked cultural property. The fight against
illicit trafficking in cultural property is therefore a
key element in the strategy for drying up the sources
of any illicit profit-making, including the financing
of terrorism.
The draft resolution under consideration today
expresses deep concern about the loss, destruction,
theft, pillage, illicit removal or misappropriation of
cultural property from archaeological and other sites,
in particular in areas of armed conflict, including
occupied territories. At the same time, it recalls the
relevant Security Council resolutions, which highlight,
among other things, the direct linkage between illicit

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43660 (E)

*1843660*

A/73/PV.52

trafficking in cultural property and the financing
of terrorism.
Furthermore, the draft resolution recognizes the
leading role of UNESCO in the fight against illicit
trafficking in cultural property, including its specific
mandate within the context of Security Council
resolution 2199 (2015). That is very important because
the aim of that resolution is to cover not only the fight
against illicit trafficking in cultural property but
also, most importantly, its return or restitution to the
countries of origin.
Capacity-building is critical to the success of
the efforts undertaken with regard to the return or
restitution of cultural property to the countries of origin.
Criminal prosecution, customs and border controls are
indispensable, but so are preventive measures to block
the laundering of looted objects through art markets,
including a proper framework for restitution. In that
context, the draft resolution underlines the critical role
of UNESCO, the United Nations Office on Drugs and
Crime and INTERPOL, while at the same time focusing
on the added value of stolen works of art databases,
provided by the respective international organizations,
as a tool in the fight against illicit trafficking in cultural
property, of which all Member States should make use.
The international community shares a common
responsibility to protect cultural property, in times of
both peace and war. Cultural property is not simply the
testimony of a nation’s path. Cultural heritage, as the
mirror of a country’s history, is thus at the very core of
its existence, since it represents not only specific values
and traditions but also the unique way in which a people
perceives the world. That is why cultural property must
be protected against any illicit act and must be restored
to its historic environment, where it can best inspire the
collective conscience of humanity. That is precisely the
reason for which the objectives of this draft resolution
should leave no State indifferent.
Mr. Said (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): My country’s
delegation took note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the return or restitution of cultural property
to the countries of origin (A/73/390), submitted in
cooperation with the Director-General of UNESCO.
We would like to stress that the issue of the return
or restitution of cultural property to the countries of
origin as a result of illicit appropriation includes many
thorny and complex matters. However, those difficulties
should not deter concerted efforts by the United Nations
2/29

13/12/2018

and other international governmental organizations to
continue their coordination with UNESCO within their
mandates and in cooperation with Member States to
resolve that important issue. The objective is to return
cultural property to the countries of origin because it
represents the historical heritage of the countries from
which it was looted.
Cultural property is of great significance among
peoples and nations because it constitutes part of their
history and is indicative of their deep-rooted origin and
cultures. Our discussion of this item is therefore seen as
a new campaign against States and individuals to return
what they took or plundered, such as manuscripts,
sculptures and monuments. We note at this session that
the report under consideration indicates that UNESCO
attaches increasing importance to the issue of cultural
property and its protection. In that regard, my country’s
delegation commends UNESCO and its DirectorGeneral for their efforts to launch awareness-raising
campaigns and training courses at the international level
and for their keen interest in increasing international
awareness towards cultural property and in helping to
return it to its countries of origin.
I would also like to note the international efforts to
support Libyan professionals and cultural institutions
through UNESCO and in cooperation with the General
Authority for Monuments in Libya and the International
Centre for the Study of the Preservation and Restoration
of Cultural Property. International experts have held
meetings with a view to protecting Libya’s cultural
heritage, as well as preventing its illicit trafficking,
while providing the necessary means to secure
collections at risk in the west and east of the country.
Like other States, over the past five centuries Libya
has been subject to great plundering of its cultural
heritage. The circumstances that the Libyan people
experienced under the colonists paved the way for
the organized plundering of Libyan cultural heritage
from antiquity. We see our statues, antiques, valuable
manuscripts and handicrafts in famous museums,
documentation centres and palaces in Asia, Europe and
the Americas. They demonstrate the innovation and
imagination of the Libyan people, who left a marvellous
cultural heritage. The colonists dispersed and destroyed
them, while keeping some in their archaeological
collections. Suffice it to say that in the last quarter
of the nineteenth century, 165 original carvings were
plundered from the archaeological site of Shahat town
in eastern Libya. Hundreds of pieces of pottery, as well
18-43660

13/12/2018

as thousands of rare gold and bronze coins of different
sizes, were also looted.
Historical records show that in 1860 alone scores of
huge pillars and other marvellous artefacts were stolen
from the city of Leptis Magna in western Libya and
moved to a European country, where they were used
in the gardens of a certain king. The same sources
indicate that a European removed 350 alabaster pillars
and thousands of other small pieces of artefacts from
the same town, while another European removed 600
prehistoric objects from the city of Benghazi alone.
They are currently located in a European museum.
Through UNESCO, the United Nations has tried
to ensure the return or restitution of works of art,
antiquities and manuscripts to their country of origin.
However, it is clear from the report of the SecretaryGeneral that progress in that area has been limited
and that threats to cultural heritage are increasing,
regrettably taking new forms and being used to finance
organized crime and terrorist groups, as indicated in
Security Council resolution 2199 (2015).
It is of great concern that most countries in
possession of such treasures have not yet taken any
practical measures to implement the General Assembly
resolutions pertaining to that item. Libya was among
those that supported its inclusion on the agenda of the
General Assembly in view of the great importance
that my country attaches to the restitution of cultural
property to its country of origin. Given its vast cultural
heritage and as a victim of such organized plundering
of its cultural treasures, Libya is determined to restore
those items to their places of origin.
In conclusion, it is my pleasure to announce in this
forum that on 23 February, we signed a memorandum
of understanding with the United States of America
that imposes restrictions on the import and trade of
Libyan archaeological objects. On 18 July, we received
some pottery objects that date back to the Germanic
civilization in Libya, representing a part of Libya’s rich
history and the history of humankind.
Mr. Korneliou (Cyprus): At the outset, I wish to
commend Greece, the main sponsor of draft resolution
A/73/L.54, entitled “Return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin”. We welcome the
updates to the draft resolution, which reflect important
initiatives and significant developments in that area.
Cyprus supports and co-sponsors this draft resolution
and appreciates today’s discussion.

A/73/PV.52

Although there are numerous international
conventions and decisions on the protection of cultural
heritage, there is still a great deal that the international
community can do in that regard. That said, the draft
resolution is particularly significant in the framework
of the collective efforts for the protection of cultural
heritage and the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin.
The protection of cultural property is one of the
priorities of the foreign policy of Cyprus. That is hardly
surprising if one considers Cyprus’s rich cultural
heritage dating back thousands of years and the bitter
experience of witnessing its destruction and looting
since 1974 as a result of the foreign military occupation.
To that end, Cyprus actively promotes the adoption
of measures against the destruction and illicit trafficking
of cultural heritage and the return or restitution of
cultural property to the countries of origin, such as
the digitization of cultural property, both movable and
immovable, and enhancing the public role in combating
looting and illicit trafficking of cultural property.
At the international level, recent initiatives include
the establishment by Cyprus, together with Italy, of
the Group of Friends for the Protection of Cultural
Heritage, within the framework of the United Nations
in New York; Cyprus’s initiative in Geneva on the
Human Rights Council resolution on cultural rights
and the protection of cultural heritage, unanimously
adopted in March 2018; and, finally, the adoption in
2017 of the Council of Europe’s Convention on Offences
relating to Cultural Property, also known as the Nicosia
Convention, an initiative of Cyprus’s Chairmanship of
the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe.
The Convention is the first legal text to incorporate a
criminal code for perpetrators who destroy, steal or
trade cultural property, including a provision that the
burden of proof lies with the buyer or the possessor
of the artefact, and the need for the harmonization of
national legislation in order to promote and facilitate
inter-State cooperation in combating the illegal
trafficking of cultural heritage.
Moreover, the Convention promotes international
cooperation in this field. It is open for signature
and accession by members and non-members of the
Council of Europe. Once again, I call upon all members
to become a party to the Nicosia Convention, an
important and unique legal tool for the protection of

18-436603/29

A/73/PV.52

cultural heritage and the return or restitution of cultural
property to the countries of origin.
In conclusion, we are convinced that the unanimous
adoption and implementation of the draft resolution
under discussion will further enhance our cooperation
and collective efforts for the protection of our common
global cultural heritage.
Mr. Brown (United States of America): The United
States welcomes the resolutions of the General Assembly
and other international forums that draw attention to
the important issue of trafficking in cultural property.
The United States strongly believes that the protection
of cultural heritage in countries of origin promotes
regional stability and good governance. To that end,
we have supported and continue to support numerous
resolutions on this issue in various international
forums, including the Security Council, the United
Nations Office on Drugs and Crime and UNESCO.
Furthermore, we have joined with other members of the
United Nations Group of Friends for the Protection of
Cultural Heritage in implementing national legislation
to prevent the illicit trafficking of cultural property.
In 2016, the United States Congress passed its most
recent legislation concerning this issue, the Protect and
Preserve International Cultural Property Act, which
seeks to coordinate policy and programmes on this
matter across the United States Government as well as
with our international partners. We have already seen
positive results from those efforts and look forward to
continuing to work with our international partners on
multilateral and bilateral bases.
However, while the United States joins the
consensus on draft resolution A/73/L.54, on the
return or restitution of cultural property, we take this
opportunity to clarify important points related to the
fifth preambular paragraph and operative paragraph
11, concerning the United Nations Convention on
Jurisdictional Immunities of States and Their Property.
The draft resolution concerns the illicit trafficking
of cultural property, which we believe is a separate
issue from whether such property is immune in a
judicial proceeding. In future draft resolutions on
this issue, we encourage a re-examination of the
relevance of the Convention to the issue of trafficking
in cultural property.
The United States also takes this opportunity
to highlight the important issue of trafficking in the
cultural property of indigenous peoples. Consistent
4/29

13/12/2018

with the spirit of this draft resolution and the United
Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous
Peoples, the United States has enacted national
domestic legislation that seeks to enable the repatriation
of such property. Nevertheless, native American tribes
frequently have difficulty recovering their cultural
property internationally.
In conclusion, the United States reiterates its view
that the trafficking of cultural property is unacceptable,
and we look forward to continuing to raise the issue
of the cultural property of indigenous peoples at
international forums in future.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/73/L.54.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution, and
in addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors of draft
resolution A/73/L.54: Algeria, Angola, Australia,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belize, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, El Salvador, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Georgia,
Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Indonesia, Ireland, Latvia,
Libya, Lichtenstein, Mauritius, Morocco, Myanmar,
Nepal, the Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Papua
New Guinea, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of
Moldova, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Slovenia, Somalia, Sri Lanka,
the Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, Tunisia, Ukraine and
the United Arab Emirates.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.54?
Draft resolution A/73/L.54 was adopted (resolution
73/130).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 10?
It was so decided.
18-43660

13/12/2018

Agenda item 129 (continued)
Global health and foreign policy
Notes by the Secretary-General (A/73/393,
A/73/393/Corr.1 and A/73/414)
Draft resolutions (A/73/L.37 and A/73/L.62)
Draft amendment (A/73/L.67)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Brazil to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.62.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): Today I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.62, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: a healthier world through
better nutrition”, under agenda item 129, on behalf of the
seven core members of the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative, which are Brazil, France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand.
The Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative
was formed in September 2006. Every year since
2008, we have introduced in the General Assembly
draft resolutions on health-related matters in order
to advocate greater recognition of the intrinsic link
between global health and foreign policy. For 10 years,
we have touched on different topics that are seen as
key health challenges and that require greater attention
from the international community.
This year, at the seventy-third session of the General
Assembly, under Brazil’s chairmanship, the Foreign
Policy and Global Health Initiative has the honour to
introduce a draft resolution on global health and foreign
policy with a focus on nutrition. The right of everyone
to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of
physical and mental health is inseparable from the right
to adequate nutrition.
In April 2016, the General Assembly proclaimed
2016-2025 the United Nations Decade of Action on
Nutrition (resolution 70/259). The following year, a
programme of work was adopted. Those documents
provide a unique opportunity for stakeholders to
strengthen their efforts to eradicate hunger and prevent
all forms of malnutrition worldwide. Notwithstanding
those efforts and frameworks, we see a risk of lagging
behind in the implementation of the Decade. That is a
common concern of all countries of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative and a decisive factor for us
in choosing nutrition as this year’s theme.

A/73/PV.52

Improved nutrition, as well as healthy diets and
lifestyles, are essential to the achievement of all
Sustainable Development Goals and targets and are also
key elements in preventing, controlling and responding
to non-communicable diseases. The draft resolution
recognizes the fundamental right of everyone to be
free from hunger and all forms of malnutrition, and
encourages international cooperation and assistance
to support Member States in achieving health goals,
implementing universal access to health services,
addressing health challenges and increasing food
production and access to healthy and nutritious food.
To strengthen those efforts, the draft resolution
also invites Member States to work with the World
Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations to convene, on a
voluntary basis, new action networks on nutrition and to
develop, strengthen and implement policies to address
the multiple challenges of malnutrition, including
through the adoption of commitments that are specific,
measurable, achievable, relevant and time-bound,
within the framework of the United Nations Decade of
Action on Nutrition.
Tackling the root causes of, and factors leading
to, malnutrition in all its forms is a complex and
multidimensional task that demands strong and
sustained political leadership, policy coherence across
Governments and concerted, sustained and intersectoral
efforts. In that context, I take this opportunity to express
my gratitude to the World Health Organization and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations for their fundamental support throughout the
entire negotiation process.
Through this draft resolution, we reaffirm our
intention and willingness to continue working together
to achieve concrete results through the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative for the advancement of
global health issues in the broader United Nations
framework and beyond.
In conclusion, I call on all Member States to support
this important initiative and to join us in adopting the
draft resolution.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Hungary to introduce draft
amendment A/73/L.67.
Mrs. Bogyay (Hungary): Hungary is fully
committed to the goals enshrined in draft resolution

18-436605/29

A/73/PV.52

A/73/L.62, on global health and foreign policy. The
Hungarian Government has devoted strong support to
achieving universal health coverage globally by 2030.
We are one of the core members of the Group of Friends
of Universal Health Coverage.
Today, I would like to thank Brazil and the group
of friends of the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative for their commitment. However, we cannot
and are not in a position to endorse the twenty-second
preambular paragraph of the draft resolution given its
reference to the global compact for safe, orderly and
regular migration. Our opposition to such a reference
was consistently expressed throughout the negotiations
on the text. As is well known, after a long process of
negotiations, the Government of Hungary decided
to disassociate itself from the adoption and the
implementation process of the global compact for safe,
orderly and regular migration. For that reason, Hungary
requests the amendment of the draft resolution by
deleting the twenty-second preambular paragraph.
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Brazil on a point of order.
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of France, Indonesia, Norway,
Senegal, South Africa, Thailand and my own country,
Brazil.
We regret that the only paragraph related to
migration in draft resolution A/73/L.62 is being
challenged. Aware of the current sensitivity of the issue,
the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative tried
to remain as factual as possible and not to reopen the
discussion held during the negotiations on the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration. The
group made a great effort to accommodate all concerns
around that issue and managed to strike a delicate
balance in the twenty-second preambular paragraph
and the entire draft resolution. We therefore call on all
delegations to vote against the amendment contained in
document A/73/L.67.
Mr. Srivihok (Thailand): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the 10 States
members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations
(ASEAN), namely, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia,
Indonesia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Malaysia, Myanmar, the Philippines, Singapore, Viet
Nam and my country, Thailand.
6/29

13/12/2018

The issue of health has gained impressive
prominence and political attention in New York over
the years for very obvious reasons. In the context of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, where
people are placed at the very heart of our efforts, it is
undeniable that good health is central to the achievement
of sustainable development. Health is a fundamental
right, an indispensable factor for the advancement and
development of human capital and the empowerment of
peoples, and an evident form of social justice.
The interdependence of and intrinsic link between
global health and foreign policy become ever stronger
with time. In that respect, ASEAN would like to
commend the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative, of which two of our fellow ASEAN nations,
namely, Indonesia and Thailand, are members, for
spearheading the efforts to address persistent and
emerging issues of global health at the United Nations.
The theme of this year’s annual resolution on
nutrition (A/73/L.62) is of particular importance
to our region because a large proportion of our
populations die prematurely every day due to dietrelated non-communicable diseases such as diabetes
and obesity. It is important because some of our
children continue to suffer from malnutrition and
undernourishment, which hinders their growth and
development, especially in families in rural areas.
In alignment with and reinforced by the Sustainable
Development Goals, ASEAN member States have been
continuously working together under the ASEAN Post2015 Health Development Agenda across 20 priority
areas for health and their related goals, especially in the
context of the promotion of good nutrition and a healthy
diet, as guided by the ASEAN Community Vision 2025
and the ASEAN Socio-Cultural Community Blueprint
2025. Among those priorities, we are working to ensure
food safety and security, as well as to promote healthy
diets and lifestyles of people, in our respective countries
and in the region as a whole in order to achieve Healthy
ASEAN 2020. ASEAN reiterates its strong commitment
to addressing the various determinants, be they social,
economic or environmental, and the main risk factors
for poor health, as well as to ensuring greater access to
health services, in the face of rising co-morbidities and
drug resistance everywhere.
In that regard, ASEAN wishes to welcome the
successful conclusions of the high-level meeting on
the fight against tuberculosis and the third high18-43660

13/12/2018

level meeting on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, and the adoption of their
respective outcome documents (resolutions 73/3 and
73/2), which mark another important milestone with
respect to global health. We also welcome the convening
of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage
next year. We believe that these processes will galvanize
the political will needed to make a real and impactful
change on the ground. It is clear that, in so doing, the
health sector alone cannot be left with this task. It calls
for the highest and strongest level of political support
and requires adequate and sustained investment for
effective implementation. Most importantly, it requires
engagement from all relevant actors and sectors,
including the people themselves.
To that end, ASEAN would like to reaffirm its
commitment to continue working with the international
community to realize our shared goal of healthy
lives and well-being for all and truly to leave no one
behind. Thailand will continue the excellent work
done by Singapore this year as we take up the ASEAN
chairmanship next year with the aim of advancing
partnership for sustainability, which is much needed to
address the complex challenges we face today.
Before I conclude, I would like to say a few words
in my national capacity. First of all, Thailand aligns
itself with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Brazil. For us, it has been an honour
to be an active member of the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative since its formation over a
decade ago. I would also like to commend Brazil, as
the Group’s current Chair, for leading us through this
year’s negotiation process. It was not an easy one, but
we are happy to see the very balanced yet strong text
of the draft resolution. Special thanks go to Ms. Laura
Delamonica of the Brazilian Mission for having
diligently facilitated the negotiating process on this
very important draft resolution.
We deeply regret that this year, for the first time,
the only draft resolution on health proposed annually
by the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative in
the General Assembly may be put to a vote even though
its aim is to address health-related challenges that
affect all countries, large and small. We also note with
concern that today, the cross-cutting nature of health
is drawing us further away from finding consensus.
Nonetheless, the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative, as a unique, like-minded, cross-regional
group, will continue to advocate for global health in

A/73/PV.52

the international arena, regardless of the countless
difficulties and obstacles we may encounter because,
after all, health is a key enabler for the achievement of
the Sustainable Development Goals.
Looking ahead and having just celebrated International
Universal Health Coverage Day yesterday, my country
is eagerly looking forward to the high-level meeting
on universal health coverage to be held next year. For
us, universal health coverage is an overarching factor
of Sustainable Development Goal 3. The high-level
meeting will therefore mark another historic milestone,
which will help countries to promote greater access to
essential and quality health services and medicines,
bearing in mind that poverty should not block access to
these services, and similarly, that these services should
not force service users and their families into poverty
or financial hardship.
Lastly, it is an honour for me to have been entrusted by
the President of the General Assembly the responsibility
of co-facilitating, with the Permanent Representative of
Hungary, the negotiations on the political declaration
of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage.
Once I have been officially appointed as co-facilitator,
please rest assured of my full support and that of my
country towards a transparent and inclusive process, as
well as an action-oriented outcome.
Ms. Bhengu (South Africa): I have the honour to
deliver this statement on behalf of South Africa. South
Africa aligns itself with the statement delivered by the
representative of Brazil on behalf of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative.
The year 2018 marks an important milestone for the
international community as we commemorate 70 years
since the adoption of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. That marked a critical turning point
as world leaders decided that discrimination on any
grounds could no longer be tolerated by boldly declaring
that all human beings are born equal in rights and in
dignity. That historic document establishes the basic
concepts of dignity, liberty, equality and brotherhood
in how we conduct ourselves within and among nations.
This anniversary offers us an opportunity to assess
how the commitments enshrined in the Declaration
have guided and continue to guide us as we address
emerging issues. As early as 1948, we understood that
we cannot choose which and whose human rights we
want to promote and protect as they are indivisible,
interconnected and interrelated. Our pronouncements

18-436607/29

A/73/PV.52

on human rights — in this case, the right to health — are
invalid if we cannot rise above our indifference towards
those who are different from us, such as migrants
and refugees.
As President Ramaphosa has said, the centrality of
human rights in South African law and the importance
of having a Bill of Rights included in our Constitution
are in no small part thanks to the enduring impact of
the Declaration, which has proved to be as relevant as
it is timeless. Seventy years after it was adopted, South
Africa reaffirms its commitment to upholding this pact
between the peoples of the world.
Access to health care, including reproductive
health care, is a constitutionally recognized right, under
section 27 of the South African Constitution. The South
African Constitutional Court has linked the realization
of socioeconomic rights to the right to life and adequate
standards of living. It enjoins the State to take reasonable
legislative and other measures within its available
resources to achieve the progressive realization of each
of these rights on a non-discriminatory basis.
Similarly, 2018 marks exactly 10 years since our
network presented its first draft resolution to the
General Assembly, which would make global health a
pressing foreign policy issue of our time. We have been
privileged to walk this journey with countries who share
our vision, not only to promote health as a right but also
to ensure that all people, without discrimination, enjoy
access to health care.
While our network remains at the forefront of
tackling some of the most difficult yet pertinent healthrelated questions through its annual themes, we have
enjoyed the support of other Member States that believe
that, regardless of our differences, the health of our
people should always take priority. This is based on
the recognition that health is a precondition for, and
an outcome and indicator of, all three dimensions of
sustainable development.
Under the leadership of our Chair, Brazil, we have
once again presented a draft resolution seeking to
promote a healthier world through better nutrition. The
draft resolution brings together the commitments made
in the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition,
the Second International Conference on Nutrition,
political declarations on non-communicable diseases
and the 2030 Agenda on Sustainable Development,
among others.
8/29

13/12/2018

In line with the commitments made by our Heads
of State and Government at the high-level meeting on
non-communicable diseases last September, as well as
those made by ministers of health at the World Health
Assembly in 2017, we urge Member States to promote
healthy diets and adopt fiscal and regulatory public
policies, such as taxing unhealthy foods and beverages,
effective front-of-pack labelling, restrictions on the
marketing and commercialization of unhealthy foods
to children and adolescents, and the reformulation of
industrialized foods to improve their nutritional value.
What we did not anticipate was that such an
earnest effort aimed at the protection of the health of
our population in line with the commitments made in
Sustainable Development Goal 3 would erode the very
essence of diplomacy, constructive engagement and
mutual respect. Instead of heeding the call to adopt
and review policies to ensure that children who suffer
from child obesity resulting from unhealthy foods
and beverages were protected by Governments, we
witnessed a concerted effort to shut down any attempts
aimed at highlighting this pertinent issue, all because
it threatens industry. Nonetheless, South Africa and
its partners remain resolved in their commitment to
protect public health against the advocates of industry,
who will stop at nothing to block progress that brings
us closer to the attainment of Sustainable Development
Goal 3.
Accordingly, South Africa condemns attempts
to limit dialogue at the United Nations on important
issues simply because they are deemed controversial.
We are called “distinguished delegates” because we are
committed to finding solutions, even on some of the
most difficult issues, through dialogue.
We thank the delegations that worked with
us to produce a well-balanced draft resolution on
such an important topic. The role of nutrition in the
lives of all populations, in particular those battling
communicable and non-communicable diseases,
cannot be overemphasized. Through policies and
concrete actions, we should ensure that consumers
make informed choices about the food they eat, while
promoting physical activity and healthy lifestyles. It
is our duty to protect our populations, in particular
children, from all forms of malnutrition.
South Africa remains firm in its belief that access
to medicines, in particular essential medicines that are
affordable, safe, efficacious and of quality, is one of
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

the fundamental elements in progressively achieving
the full realization of the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical
and mental health.

the commitments made just a few months ago during
the high-level meeting on the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases, and we call on our partners
and the international community to do the same.

In that regard, South Africa wishes to reiterate its
commitment to the Declaration adopted by the World
Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 2001
in Doha on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights (TRIPS), as well as the TRIPS
Agreement, as instructive documents on the balance
between intellectual property rights and the rights of
Member States to protect public health.

The health of our children continues to be
of particular concern. With extremely worrying
prevalence rates of childhood obesity in our region,
Saint Kitts and Nevis continues to promote the
importance of breastfeeding, nutrition education and
physical education as components of our national
interventions aimed at improving the health of our
children. In addition, we continue to strengthen
initiatives to improve the nutritional health of our
population throughout the life course and to prevent
micronutrient deficiencies.

It is unfortunate that despite all our efforts to
find consensus, a vote has been called for on the
draft resolution. We ask that all Member States who
are committed to global health vote in support of the
draft resolution.
Ms. DeSuza (Saint Kitts and Nevis): Saint Kitts
and Nevis welcomes the adoption of draft resolution
A/73/L.62, on global health and foreign policy, as a
manifestation of our continued commitment to building
a healthier world through better nutrition. At the outset,
we thank the facilitator of Brazil for the excellent
manner in which the negotiations were conducted and
express our appreciation to the other members of the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative.
Saint Kitts and Nevis believes that a healthy
population is a wealthy population. We are convinced
that health is a precondition for, and an outcome of,
sustainable development. In particular, we note the
multidimensional nature of health as defined throughout
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the
important interplay between food security and improved
nutrition as well as healthy diets and lifestyles. Our
Government has committed to improving the health
and well-being of all our citizens and people through
the crafting of our national food and nutrition security
policy and plan of action.
Saint Kitts and Nevis is undergoing a period
of nutritional and epidemiological transitions. The
nutrition transition is reflected in a shift in diets, which
is seen in a reduced prevalence of undernutrition and
infectious diseases and an increased prevalence of
overweight and obesity — one of the main risk factors
for non-communicable diseases. Those diseases are
the main public health concerns in Saint Kitts and
Nevis. We therefore maintain that our country and our
Caribbean Community region will continue to pursue

My Government firmly believes that social
protection programmes are a fundamental component
of providing a healthier environment for our people. In
my Government’s most recently launched programme,
we have encouraged the beneficiaries of cash transfers
to invest in healthy diets and lifestyles.
We maintain that we cannot secure a healthier world
through better nutrition without the advancement of
food and agricultural systems. Small island developing
States, such as Saint Kitts and Nevis, will continue to
face the dual threats of climate change and unhealthy
populations. Climate change, with its implications for
agriculture and fisheries, undermines food security
and in fact denies our population access to affordable,
healthy food.
As articulated in The State of Food Security and
Nutrition in the World 2018, published by the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, we
note that all dimensions of food security and nutrition,
including food availability, access and utilization, are
affected by climate variability and climate extremes,
even in the short term. An important component of
national food and nutrition policy in Saint Kitts and
Nevis is the creation of effective disaster preparedness
and adaptation and mitigation strategies as a means of
protecting our population from the threats of natural
disasters and climate change.
In the context of our discussion on global health and
foreign policy, Saint Kitts and Nevis continues to chart
its course towards achieving universal health coverage
for all its people, and we look forward to the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage to be held during
the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.

18-436609/29

A/73/PV.52

Finally, Saint Kitts and Nevis renews its commitment
to building a healthier nation, a healthier region and,
ultimately, a healthier world through better nutrition.
Mr. Gimenez (Norway): Let me first thank the
delegation of Brazil for its steady leadership of the
negotiations on this year’s draft resolution A/73/L.62.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered
by the representative of Brazil on behalf of the members
of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative. The
negotiations have been particularly challenging this
year, and I commend all Brazil’s efforts and success in
achieving our collective outcome.
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the
submission and adoption of the resolution, as agreed in
2007 in the Oslo Ministerial Declaration, spearheaded
by the Foreign Ministers of Brazil, France, Indonesia,
Norway, Senegal, South Africa and Thailand.
Our shared concern then, as now, is that health
is one of the most important yet broadly neglected
foreign -policy issues of our time and that it needs
our continued and strategic focus here at the United
Nations. It is therefore encouraging that awareness
has been raised on the centrality of health to attain our
common development objectives.
The topic of this year’s draft resolution — nutrition — is
essential in our endeavours to achieve a healthy population.
Improving nutrition involves complex interrelationships
between diet and disease, while the effects of malnutrition,
including underweight, stunting, overweight and obesity,
all heighten risks for both infectious and non-communicable
diseases. Several of those concerns are underlined and
addressed in this year’s draft resolution.
However, we regret that the language regarding
non-communicable diseases and nutrition in paragraph
10 does not sufficiently address some of the concrete
policies and actions needed. We consider the language
in that paragraph to be weaker than the language we
collectively agreed on at the high-level meeting on
non-communicable diseases as late as September.
In my country’s view, the key to attaining
the nutrition-related target 3.4 of the Sustainable
Development Goals, on reducing disease and premature
death, is through ensuring increased consumption
of healthy and nutritious foods. That means that we
must make a concerted effort to avoid consumption of
unhealthy foods that are high in sugars, salt, saturated
fats and trans-fats.
10/29

13/12/2018

The normative work of the World Health
Organization (WHO) has shown that there are costeffective ways to achieve that, including the use of
fiscal measures, such as taxation, front-pack labelling
and restrictions on marketing of unhealthy foods
and beverages, especially those aimed at children.
The evidence base for applying those recommended
measures is clear. We therefore urge Member States
seeking to improve health through better nutrition
to implement the WHO cost-effective actions
and recommendations.
It is encouraging that we acknowledge the link
between nutrition and sexual and reproductive health.
Improving nutrition for mothers and children helps
ensure that children get the best start in life and the
opportunity to reach their full potential. We must step
up our work in that area.
Health is an integrated element of a number of
SDGs. Improving health and access to health services
for all has a direct impact on poverty reduction, ending
hunger, gender equality, education and peaceful
societies, among many other issues. Progress on
health means progress towards achieving the entire
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. Health
and improved nutrition are among the most important
building blocks of any well-functioning society. It
is a long-term investment, but it is one that we must
make now. We have no time to lose. We regret that,
despite our efforts to reach a consensus, a vote has
been requested on the draft resolution. We join others
in asking Member States to vote in favour of it.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I commend the Foreign Policy and Global
Health Initiative group, in particular the delegation of
Brazil and its expert, for the effective management of
this important issue. I also express my appreciation
to the Secretariat, the World Health Organization and
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations for their support.
Everyone is aware of the high priority of issues
relating to global health, reflecting its international
importance and the central role of international
cooperation in implementing the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development and the relevant Sustainable
Development Goals. In that regard, we at the United
Nations have increasingly begun to address these
issues, which were formerly considered specialized
issues that did not require discussion at Headquarters.
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

Despite the related challenges, in particular with regard
to delegations of developing countries with limited
resources, this positive development reflects our
realization of the need to achieve coherence in policies
concerning a number of sectors, such as health, trade
and industry, among others.

on the adoption of this important draft resolution in few
moments. We hope that all States, the Secretariat and the
relevant programmes and specialized agencies, whose
role we value, will implement the draft resolution upon
its adoption and enhance international cooperation so
that no State and no person will be left behind.

With respect to the relevant draft resolutions,
the chosen topic of nutrition this year attests to the
interrelated nature of such issues. The topic of nutrition
calls for increased focus on the part of the international
community, given that we have all noted in the
reports of the Secretary-General the disconcerting
and unprecedented increase over the past three years
in the number of those suffering from hunger, at rates
not seen in the past 10 years. It is simply unacceptable
for us — the international community — to stand idly
by as we watch more than 150 million children suffer
from stunted growth. Through scientific research, it
is also within our reach to consider studies and data
on sound nutrition and healthy lifestyles. Given their
limited financial and economic resources, however,
human societies for the most part are unable to adhere
to such guidelines.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): We thank the
Secretary-General for transmitting the important
report of the Director-General of the World Health
Organization (WHO) (see A/73/414) on improving
coordination and cooperation to address the health
needs of the most vulnerable for the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We share the
views of the Director General of WHO that health is not
just an end in and of itself but a foundation for human
capital. Therefore, Sustainable Development Goal 3,
aimed at ensuring healthy lives and promoting wellbeing for all at all ages, is fundamental for reaching
other SDG targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. Yesterday, for the first time at the
United Nations, and globally, we celebrated Universal
Health Coverage Day, which is a demonstration of our
collective commitment to provide access to health care
to everyone, everywhere. To move forward, we should
frame emerging priorities, identify challenges and offer
collective recommendations for accelerating progress
towards universal health coverage. In that regard, we
welcome draft resolution A/73/L.62, and our delegation
remains grateful to the delegation of Brazil for
successfully facilitating it in the most inclusive manner.

With regard to scientific research, my delegation
would like to point out that, as we are deliberating on
the annual resolution under the agenda item “Global
health and foreign policy”, many scientific discoveries
have allowed us to achieve progress in the treatment
and prevention of many diseases. It is important to
note, however, that human societies have never been
as stringent in placing restrictions on the transfer and
recognition of knowledge as we are at the present time.
That represents a very grave challenge for humankind.
It is crucial that we step up our means to address that
imbalance. It is also unacceptable that individuals and
societies should suffer from any disease for which
a cure is available, and for States and individuals to
endure unbearable financial burdens in order to treat
diseases that afflict them.
Given the important provisions of draft resolution
A/73/L.62 on nutrition and health in order to achieve
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in
all its dimensions and objectives, while calling for
the elimination of poverty in all its dimensions and
forms, my delegation has given the draft resolution
serious consideration and interacted constructively
and positively with the other delegations since its
submission. We were happy to be among its sponsors. I
hope that all of us will be able to congratulate ourselves

As we endeavour to address the health needs
of the most vulnerable populations and improve
equity, we need to work for collective action and its
greater coherence at all levels and among all sectors
and stakeholders. Global health is multidimensional
in scope, often crosses physical boundaries and
requires sustained high-level commitment and closer
international cooperation, including partnerships
among the relevant stakeholders. We recognize that,
despite the progress made, challenges in global health
still remain, with special regard to inequities and
vulnerabilities within and among countries, regions
and populations.
Bangladesh
has
seen
remarkable
health
improvements since gaining independence in 1971 and
has evolved into a role model of good health at low
cost. Public health scholars have identified Bangladesh
as a positive deviant, performing far better, given
its widespread challenges, than anyone could have

18-4366011/29

A/73/PV.52

expected. The Lancet, the renowned British medical
journal, called that success one of the great mysteries
of global health. In terms of health expenditure, per
capita purchasing power parity expenditure from public
funds in Bangladesh increased to $88 in 2014, while the
country spent less than 3 per cent of its gross domestic
product (GDP) on health in the same year. However,
Bangladesh’s health achievements in reducing
maternal, infant and under-5 mortality rates, increased
vaccination coverage and higher life expectancy at birth,
have been achieved despite such low per capita GDP
spending on health care. Bangladesh has outperformed
its many South Asian neighbours, convincingly
defying the expert view that economic strength and
abundant health resources are the key drivers of better
population health. Progress in the area of infant, child
and maternal mortality has been particularly striking,
with maternal mortality reduced from 594 deaths per
100,000 live births in 1990 to 176 deaths in 2015. The
infant mortality and under-5 mortality rates, as of 2016,
are 29 and 36 per 1,000 live births, respectively.
Such achievements are attributed to a variety of
health and non-health systems-related factors, including
the sustained political commitment of the Government,
maternal and child health-based strategies, an
expanded programme of immunization, innovative
low-cost technology, the extensive networking of field
workers, the establishment of community-based clinics
by the present Government under Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina, the active collaboration between the
Government and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs), the proactive role of mass media, intersectoral
cooperation and the use of information and
communication technology, among others.
I must mention here our strategy for the
empowerment of women. Support for women in
relation to national development has been one of the
most important contributing factors. Bangladesh has
undertaken the implementation of a pluralistic health
system, in which resources were drawn from public
funds and spaces were created for NGOs to work within
the health sector.
This year, the theme of the global health and foreign
policy draft resolution is a healthier world through
better nutrition. Nutritional imbalances can lead to
the two extreme health burdens of undernutrition and
obesity and, like many other developing countries,
Bangladesh has been experiencing both those burdens.
Child malnutrition is a particular issue — according
12/29

13/12/2018

to 2011 data, 30 to 40 per cent of children under
5 years of age are underweight or stunted. Yet,
although undernutrition remains a significant issue in
Bangladesh, overweight and obesity are also becoming
concerns, especially for women of reproductive age.
Despite these challenges, Bangladesh has made strides
in reducing the prevalence of the stunting and wasting
forms of undernutrition, which decreased from 41 per
cent in 2011 to 36 per cent in 2014.
As agreed by Heads of State and Government at
the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on non-communicable diseases, Bangladesh has
committed to minimizing the impact of the main
risk factors for non-communicable diseases and to
addressing malnutrition in all its forms by intensifying
its efforts and scaling up its activities under the work
programme of the United Nations Decade of Action on
Nutrition (2016-2025).
Bangladesh recognizes the right of all people to
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health. Those fundamental human rights cannot be
realized without universal health coverage, which
ensures that all people have access to the health services
that they need without enduring financial hardship.
In that regard, we welcome the high-level meeting on
universal health coverage to be convened during the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly.
We underscore that effective, results-oriented
international coordination and cooperation are vital
to the achievement of Goal 3 and other health-related
Sustainable Development Goals. High-level political
support from, and engagement with, Member States and
non-State actors is therefore fundamental. Accordingly,
we join the global community in committing to achieve
universal health care by 2030 under the Sustainable
Development Goals. We are fully committed in our
support for draft resolution A/73/L.62.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this agenda item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolutions
A/73/L.37 and A/73/L.62 and draft amendment
A/73/L.67.
Before giving the floor to speakers in explanation
of vote before the voting, may I remind delegations
that explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
18-43660

13/12/2018

Ms. Nemroff (United States of America): The
United States regrets that it finds it necessary to vote
against draft resolution A/73/L.62 today. No nation
makes greater contributions in terms of resources and
actions to promote global health than my country, and
we appreciate the intent of the originators of the global
health and foreign policy resolution to address this topic
through an annual process, as a way of showing our
long-term commitment to the issue. We also appreciate
the importance of the general theme of this year’s
resolution, with its focus on nutrition.
Therefore, we find it unfortunate that this wellintentioned idea seems to have degenerated into an
exercise in negotiating a draft resolution for the sake
of negotiating a draft resolution. While the topic
of nutrition is indeed an important one, this draft
resolution seems little more than a collection of general
platitudes, along with many paragraphs on extraneous
topics that are composed of previously agreed text with
the addition of the words “and nutrition” to make them
appear on topic. This year’s draft resolution has become
a metaphor for the problem of the overconsumption of
foods that have little nutritional value but are high in
empty calories.
As representatives here know, when resolutions
really matter, the sponsors go to great lengths to defend
the texts from extraneous or controversial language
in order to defend the parts that are important. In this
instance, the opposite has happened. It has become a
freight train in which the goal seems to be to load it
with as much extraneous text and unfinished business
as possible, while no delegation dares to oppose the
text because we all believe that health is so important.
This year, our delegation has therefore decided to
vote against this resolution, not out of disrespect for
this body but, in fact, because we respect the need to
focus on resolutions and other agreed outcomes that are
actionable and have real-world implications.
In future, when these types of resolutions are
brought up annually, we would urge the sponsors to
take a different approach — keep the draft resolutions
as concise as possible, minimize or eliminate entirely
preambular text and resolve to keep operative text to
a minimum, with an emphasis on text that is truly
new. Sponsors should seek to defend those resolutions
against regurgitations of previously agreed text that
we have adopted countless times. The draft resolution
before us today does not respect the results of the highlevel meetings of the General Assembly held by our

A/73/PV.52

leaders just two months ago. On the contrary, the draft
resolution diminishes and distorts the declarations of
our leaders by attempting to relitigate those carefully
negotiated balances.
With regard to the seventh preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution, the United States believes that
women should have equal access to reproductive health
care. We remain committed to the principles laid out in
the Beijing Declaration and the Programme of Action
of the International Conference on Population and
Development. As has been made clear over many years,
there was international consensus that those documents
do not create new international rights, including any
right to abortion. The United States fully supports the
principle of voluntary choice regarding maternal and
child health and family planning. We do not recognize
abortion as a method of family planning, nor do we
support abortion in our reproductive health assistance.
We also note that the United States is the largest
bilateral donor of reproductive health and family
planning assistance.
Moreover, with respect to the eighth preambular
paragraph of the draft resolution, the United States
strongly supports the dignity and value of all human
life and rejects any attempt by others to construe the
term “health services” or “health-care services” to
include abortion.
In our view, the United Nations must respect
the independent mandates of other processes and
institutions, including trade negotiations, and must not
involve itself in decisions and actions in other forums,
including at the World Trade Organization (WTO). The
United States recognizes the importance of access to
affordable, safe and effective medicines and the critical
role that intellectual property plays in incentivizing the
development of new and improved medicines.
We regret, however, the inclusion of the unacceptable
language of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS) and
the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and
Public Health in the thirty-third preambular paragraph
of the draft resolution. It is unacceptable to the United
States that the United Nations and other Member
States have used non-WTO multilateral forums to
attempt to characterize WTO rules and agreements.
This could lead to misinterpretation of international
trade obligations in a manner that may negatively
affect the ability of countries to incentivize new

18-4366013/29

A/73/PV.52

drug development and expand access to medicines.
Furthermore, that paragraph distorts the agreement
reached less than three months ago in the declaration
adopted at the high-level meeting of the General
Assembly on non-communicable diseases.
Furthermore, the United States reaffirms, in this
context, that the strong protection and enforcement of
intellectual property rights incentivizes the creation
and distribution of lifesaving medicines and other
useful consumer products around the world that address
the health, environmental and development challenges
of today and tomorrow through a carefully negotiated,
balanced set of TRIPS member rights and obligations.
We continue to oppose language that we believe
attempts to characterize trade commitments. We do
not believe that United Nations resolutions are the
appropriate vehicle for such pronouncements, and we
are concerned that the inclusion of that language may
be an attempt to prejudice negotiations under way or
anticipated in other, more appropriate forums. Nor does
this draft resolution prefigure or in any way influence
the preparations for or the outcome of the fall 2019
high-level event on universal health coverage.
Finally, regarding the reference to the global
compact for safe, orderly and regular migration, we
believe that the Compact and the process that led to
its adoption, including the New York Declaration for
Refugees and Migrants, represent an effort by the
United Nations to advance global governance at the
expense of the sovereign right of States to manage their
immigration systems in accordance with their national
laws, policies and interests. While the United States
honours the contributions of the many immigrants who
helped build our nation, we cannot support a compact
or process that imposes, or has the potential to impose,
international guidelines, standards, expectations or
commitments that might constrain our ability to make
decisions in the best interests of our nation and citizens.
In that regard, we thank the delegation of Hungary for
having proposed the amendment (A/73/L.67) to the text.
Lastly, with regard to references to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development, we addressed
our concerns in our statement on 3 December under
agenda item 12 (see A/73/PV.44).
Mr. Vieira (Brazil): In connection with draft
resolution A/73/L.62, I have the honour to deliver the
following statement on behalf of France, Indonesia,
14/29

13/12/2018

Norway, Senegal, South Africa, Thailand and my own
country, Brazil.
Every year since 2008, the Foreign Policy and
Global Health Initiative has submitted a draft resolution
on global health issues for consideration by the plenary
of the General Assembly, and every year it has been
adopted by consensus. It is regrettable that this year,
as we celebrate its tenth anniversary, an entire draft
resolution on health, with a focus on nutrition, is
being put to the vote, especially given that the highlevel meeting on universal health coverage will be
held in 2019. The work done by the Missions of the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative countries
in Geneva; the dedication, energy and hard work of all
delegations here in New York; and the tireless support
of the World Health Organization and the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations all
must be acknowledged and recognized.
We have tried to conduct an open and transparent
process and to accommodate the various concerns
expressed by delegations. In that regard, Brazil is
confident that we have achieved the best possible results,
given the time constraints and all the challenges with
which we had to deal. The draft resolution reaffirms
the right of every human being to the enjoyment of
the highest attainable standard of physical and mental
health. It notes the importance of health across all the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and targets
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and
the essential role of food security, improved nutrition,
healthy diets and lifestyles in achieving the SDGs. The
document recognizes that health challenges call for a
national, regional and international approach, while also
recognizing the need to eradicate hunger and prevent
all forms of malnutrition, including undernourishment,
stunting, wasting, underweight, overweight and obesity
in all age groups.
We would recall that the Rome Declaration on
Nutrition and its Framework for Action reiterated the
importance of the United Nations Decade of Action
on Nutrition (2016-2025) and welcomed the political
declarations of the high-level meetings on the fight
against tuberculosis and non-communicable diseases.
We have before us a draft resolution that sets the tone on
health issues, and the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative will continue to do so for years to come. In
that regard, we invite all delegations to vote in favour
of the text. Their vote in favour is an indication of the
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

importance and the priority given to health issues in the
United Nations agenda.

to prepare a summary of the hearing prior to the highlevel meeting.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.37, entitled
“Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting on universal health coverage”.

Pursuant to the decisions contained in paragraphs
1, 4 and 6 of the draft resolution, it is envisaged that
the following meetings will be held in New York:
a one-day high-level meeting on universal health
coverage on 23 September 2019 consisting of an
opening segment, a plenary segment, a brief closing
segment with interpretation in all six languages,
two multi-stakeholder panels to be held in parallel
on 23 September 2019 with interpretation in all six
languages, and an interactive multi-stakeholder hearing
before the end of July 2019. While interpretation
services for the two segments of the high-level meeting
and the interactive multi-stakeholder hearing would be
provided using the meeting entitlements of the General
Assembly, the remaining meetings would constitute an
addition to the meetings workload for the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management in
2019. However, the additional requirements for meeting
services in the amount of $23,800 would be met from
within existing resources.

I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement is
being made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs 1, 4, 5 and 6 of draft
resolution A/73/L.37, the General Assembly would
decide the following. The one-day high-level meeting
on universal health coverage would be convened by the
President of the General Assembly and held in New
York a day before the start of the general debate of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, from 9
a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. It would consist
of an opening segment, a plenary segment for general
discussion, two multi-stakeholder panels and a brief
closing segment. The organizational arrangements
for the two multi-stakeholder panels would be as
follows: two multi-stakeholder panels would be held
in parallel to the plenary segment, one from 11 a.m.
to 1 p.m. and the other from 3 p.m. to 5 p.m. The
high-level meeting would also approve a concise and
action-oriented political declaration, agreed in advance
by consensus through intergovernmental negotiations,
to be submitted by the President of the General
Assembly for adoption by the Assembly, and request
the President of the General Assembly, with the support
of the World Health Organization and other relevant
partners, to organize and preside over an interactive
multi-stakeholder hearing, before the end of July 2019,
with the active participation of appropriate senior-level
representatives of Member States, observers of the
General Assembly, parliamentarians, representatives of
local Government, the relevant United Nations entities,
non-governmental organizations in consultative status
with the Economic and Social Council, invited civilsociety organizations, philanthropic foundations,
academia, medical associations, the private sector
and broader communities, ensuring the participation
and voices of women, children, youth and indigenous
leadership, as part of the preparatory process for the
high-level meeting. It would also request the President

Furthermore, the decision contained in paragraph
5 of the draft resolution would entail an addition to the
documentation workload of the Department for General
Assembly and Conference Management in 2019 of
one post-session document of 10,700 words in all six
languages. However, the additional requirements for
documentation services in the amount of $32,500 would
be met from within existing resources. Accordingly,
should the General Assembly adopt draft resolution
A/73/L.37, no additional requirements would arise under
the programme budget for the biennium 2018-2019.
The statement that I have just read out has been
made available on the PaperSmart portal.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.37?
Draft resolution
(resolution 73/131).

A/73/L.37

was

adopted

The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.62, entitled
“Global health and foreign policy: a healthier world
through better nutrition”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.

18-4366015/29

A/73/PV.52

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that since the submission of the draft resolution and in
addition to those delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
A/73/L.62: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Cameroon, Canada, Ecuador, Egypt, the Gambia,
Guinea, India, Japan, Lesotho, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Madagascar, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, the
Philippines, Portugal, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Sao Tome
and Principe, Sweden, Togo, Turkey, Uruguay and
Viet Nam.
The Acting President: Before we proceed, in
accordance with rule 90 of the rules of procedure,
the Assembly shall first take a decision on the draft
amendment circulated in document A/73/L.67. A
recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Hungary, Israel, Libya, United States of America
Against:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada,
Colombia, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gambia, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Jamaica,
Japan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Korea, Russian Federation, Saint Kitts and Nevis,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe,
Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
16/29

13/12/2018

of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Abstaining:
Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bulgaria, Chile, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Equatorial Guinea, Georgia,
Germany, Italy, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lithuania, Norway, Oman, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Sweden,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
Draft amendment A/73/L.67 was rejected by 4 votes
to 117, with 27 abstentions.
The Acting President: I now put to the vote
draft resolution A/73/L.62. A recorded vote has been
requested.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger,
Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and
the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
18-43660

13/12/2018

Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Libya, United States of America
Abstaining:
Hungary
Draft resolution A/73/L.62 was adopted by 157
votes to 2, with 1 abstention (resolution 73/132).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
for explanations of vote after the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Ms. Goebel (Germany): I have the honour to deliver
this explanation of vote on behalf of Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom and my
own country, Germany.
We have voted today in favour of resolution 73/132
on the understanding that the text in its entirety reflects
a compromise package. With regard to the twentysecond preambular paragraph, we would like to specify
that we understand that paragraph as not promoting
an expansion of the rights of migrants in an irregular
situation within our countries, beyond what has been
agreed previously in relevant international documents
and what is in line with national legislation.
Mrs. Stern (Australia): Australia was pleased to
vote in support of resolution 73/132, and we thank the
Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative for bringing
it forward. Australia takes seriously its obligations
under international law, including those contained in
the core human rights instruments. We acknowledge
that all States have an overarching obligation to respect,
protect and promote the human rights of migrants and
refugees. Australia does not support conflating this
resolution with the global compact on migration, which

A/73/PV.52

is expected to be considered by the General Assembly
next week. For that reason, we abstained in the voting on
the twenty-second preambular paragraph, as contained
in document A/73/L.67.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): Austria voted in favour
of resolution 73/132 today despite our reservations
regarding the twenty-second preambular paragraph, as
we see the draft resolution in its entirety as a package
on the important topic of global health, with this year’s
focus on nutrition. In that regard, however, we reiterate
that Austria does not support the global compact on
migration and that it decides on migration issues in a
fully sovereign manner, based solely on national laws
and international treaties, duly ratified by the Austrian
Parliament. Therefore, our vote today cannot be
understood as accepting of an expansion of the rights
of migrants.
Mrs. Schneeberger (Switzerland): Switzerland
thanks the core group for its efforts to bring the
negotiations on resolution 73/132, entitled “Global
health and foreign policy: a healthier world through
better nutrition”, to an end. We regret that the resolution
was put to the vote today. We would like to take this
opportunity to clarify our position on certain aspects
of the resolution.
The global health and foreign policy resolution is
historically rooted in the Oslo Ministerial Declaration
and focuses on one of its specific topics every year.
This year’s resolution addresses the issue of nutrition.
Switzerland regrets that the resolution is not more
focused on the topic. The text before us includes a
variety of subjects not directly related to nutrition.
We believe that those subjects should be discussed
in the appropriate forums. One example is the issue
of access to medicines mentioned in the fifteenth
preambular paragraph.
With regard to this particular topic, Switzerland
takes a holistic approach including all relevant factors
that contribute to access to medical products. There
are many reports in that regard, and we do not see a
reason to single out one specific reference. Switzerland
welcomes the fact that this year’s resolution has taken
up nutrition. Switzerland is convinced that nutrition
plays a critical role for health and development. In
addition, this year’s resolution is fully in the spirit of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and its
multisectoral nature.

18-4366017/29

A/73/PV.52

13/12/2018

Mrs. Bernal Prado (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Chile has reservations concerning
the twenty-second preambular paragraph of resolution
73/132.
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 129.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
Draft decision A/73/L.38
The Acting President: As announced in the letter
from the President of the General Assembly, dated
27 November 2018, draft decision A/73/L.38 is orally
revised by adding to the end of paragraph (f) the
following text:
“..., subject to the provisions in the resolution entitled
‘Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting on universal health coverage’”.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
decision A/73.L.38, entitled “High-level meetings
of the General Assembly in September 2019”, as
orally revised.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): This oral statement
is made in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraphs (a), (b), (c), (d),
(e) and (f) of draft decision A/73/L.38, the General
Assembly would decide that the general debate of the
seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly will
be held from Tuesday, 24 September 2019 to Saturday,
28 September 2019 and on Monday, 30 September
2019; to hold the high-level meeting on universal
health coverage on Monday, 23 September from 9 a.m.
to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., in accordance
with resolution 72/139; to hold the high-level political
forum under the auspices of the General Assembly on
Tuesday, 24 September, from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m. and on
Wednesday, 25 September, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.; to hold the High-level Dialogue
on Financing for Development of the General Assembly
on Thursday, 26 September, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and
18/29

from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and to hold on the same day the
high-level meeting to commemorate and promote the
International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear
Weapons, from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to
6 p.m., in accordance with resolution 72/251.
Furthermore, as indicated in the letter from the
President of the General Assembly dated 27 November,
following action on draft resolution A/73/L.37, entitled
“Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting on universal health coverage”, draft
decision A/73/L.38 is to be orally revised before action
on it by adding to the end of paragraph (f) in the text:
“..., subject to the provisions in the resolution entitled
‘Scope, modalities, format and organization of the
high-level meeting on universal health coverage’”.
Pursuant to the decision contained in paragraph (b)
of the draft decision, it is envisaged that the following
meetings will be held in New York: a one-day high-level
meeting on universal health coverage, on 23 September,
consisting of an opening segment, a plenary segment
and a brief closing segment, with interpretation in all
six languages; and two multi-stakeholder panels to be
held in parallel on 23 September, with interpretation in
all six languages and an interactive multi-stakeholder
hearing before the end of July. While interpretation
services for the two segments of the high-level meeting
and the interactive multi-stakeholder hearing would be
provided using the meeting entitlements of the General
Assembly, the remaining meetings would constitute an
addition to the meetings workload for the Department
for General Assembly and Conference Management in
2019. However, the additional requirements for meeting
services in the amount of $23,800 would be met from
within existing resources.
Furthermore, the decision contained in paragraph
(b) of the draft resolution would entail an addition to
the documentation workload of the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management in
2019 of one post-session document of 10,700 words, in
all six languages. However, the additional requirements
for documentation services in the amount of $32,500
would be met from within existing resources.
The meetings and documentation requirements in
the aforementioned fourth and fifth paragraphs of this
oral statement were also indicated in the oral statement
read out and distributed upon the adoption of draft
resolution A/73/L.37.
18-43660

13/12/2018

Pursuant to the decision contained in paragraphs
(c) and (d) of the draft decision, it is envisaged that
the high-level political forum under the auspices of
the General Assembly, the High-level Dialogue on
Financing for Development and the high-level meeting
to commemorate and promote the International Day
for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons will be
utilizing existing entitlements.
Pursuant to the decision contained in paragraph
(e) of the draft decision, it is envisaged that the highlevel meeting to review progress made in addressing
the priorities of small island developing States
(SIDS) through the implementation of the SIDS
Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
on 27 September, in New York, will consist of two
meetings with interpretation in six languages. The
meetings would constitute an addition to the meetings
workload for the Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management in 2019. However, the
requirements for meeting services in the amount of
$11,900 would be met from within existing resources.
Pursuant to the decisions contained in paragraphs
(b), (c), (d) and (e) of the draft decision, it is also
envisaged that the high-level meetings would constitute
an addition to the meetings and media coverage, media
accreditation and liaison and audiovisual services for
the Department of Public Information in 2019. However,
the requirements in the amount of $51,600 would be
met from within existing resources.
Accordingly, should the General Assembly adopt
draft decision A/73/L.38, no additional requirements
would arise under the programme budget for the
biennium 2018-2019.
The statement I have just read out has been made
available on the PaperSmart portal.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to adopt draft decision
A/73/L.38, as orally revised?
Draft decision A/73/L.38, as orally revised, was
adopted (decision 73/524).
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 7.

A/73/PV.52

Agenda item 9 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council
Draft resolution (A/73/L.40/Rev.1)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.40/Rev.1.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt): On behalf of the Group of 77
and China, I have the honour to introduce the draft
resolution entitled “Graduation of countries from
the least developed country category”, contained in
document A/73/L.40/Rev.1.
The draft resolution pertains to the graduation
of the Kingdom of Bhutan, Solomon Islands and the
Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe from
the least developed country (LDC) category.
Since the creation of the least developed country
category in 1971, only five countries have graduated
from it. Two more are to be graduated in 2020 and
2021. Therefore, the graduation of an additional three
countries, which is at the core of the decision that the
General Assembly is about to take today, is a very
positive development and should be welcomed and
celebrated by the entire international community.
More importantly, graduation from the LDC category
represents a clear and strong signal that those three
countries are on the right development trajectory
towards achieving sustainable development and should
be commended for their development achievements.
The Group would like to stress that the graduating
countries, with the full support of the international
community, should be put on a path of sustainable
development to minimize the risk of backsliding
after graduation. As the three graduating countries
begin preparations for their smooth national transition
strategies, we call on development partners, including
the United Nations, to recognize that existing
vulnerabilities to economic and environmental shocks
will not be overcome simply by graduating out of the
LDC category. Therefore, we call on all development and
trading partners to assist the three graduating countries
and provide them with country-specific support over
the preparatory period and beyond to ensure smooth
sailing in their transition out of the LDC category.
On behalf of the Group of 77 and China, I would
like to thank all partners involved in the negotiations

18-4366019/29

A/73/PV.52

13/12/2018

on the draft resolution. We hope that the General
Assembly will adopt it by consensus.

those involved. It is in our interest to ensure a successful
transition process.

Finally, the Group would also like to thank the
delegations of Nepal and Canada for their efforts
in co-facilitating the draft resolution, as well as the
delegation of Bhutan for coordinating it on behalf of
the Group of 77 and China.

The Pacific is a unique region, with unique
vulnerabilities and operating challenges. We share
many of those vulnerabilities and challenges with our
other brothers and sisters in small island developing
States (SIDS) around the world. Many SIDS are highly
vulnerable to economic shocks and natural disasters.
Despite being middle-income countries, SIDS also
struggle to attract certain forms of financing and
investment. Susceptibility to fragility and conflict can
also affect access to financing. Some of our Pacific
countries have graduated from the least developed
country category or are on their way. Others face
obstacles that make graduation seem beyond our reach.

The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.40/Rev.1, entitled
“Graduation of countries from the least developed
country category”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.40/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/73/L.40/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 73/133).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolution just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Tealei (Tuvalu): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Pacific Islands Forum members
represented at the United Nations: Australia, the
Federated States of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, the
Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Papua
New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Vanuatu
and my own country, Tuvalu.
First, we would like to thank the Group of 77 and
China for introducing resolution 73/133 and Nepal and
Canada for their able facilitation of the resolution.
Graduation from the least developed country
(LDC) category is an important milestone on a
country’s road to sustainable development and should
be something that countries strive to achieve. However,
if countries are not fully ready, graduation instead
brings fear and regret. Therefore, graduation must be
undertaken cautiously and mutually so as to ensure that
it is sustainable.
The word “graduation” itself implies a gradual
process rather than a cliff. To protect the development
trajectory that led to graduation in the first place, it
is crucial that the process avoid uncertainty and the
potentially rapid loss of economic and development
gains beyond graduation. We know that a slower, more
deliberate transition process is more likely to create
successful conditions for sustainable graduation for all
20/29

Even after graduation, we remain highly vulnerable
due to the impact of climate change and the risk of natural
disasters. Gross national income (GNI) per capita does
not reflect vulnerabilities, nor does rising GNI make
them go away. The Pacific Islands Forum considers that
the mid-term review of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway next year will be an ideal
opportunity to reflect on the synergies between the
development needs of SIDS and LDCs and to ensure
that support measures for both are consistent and fit
for purpose. It will also be an opportunity to ensure
that the graduation process helps graduating countries
build the resilience they will need, not just to protect
but to extend their development achievement. We look
forward to working with all those present towards that
end in 2019.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 9.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related field
Draft resolution (A/73/L.50)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mongolia to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.50.
Mr. Sukhee (Mongolia): I have the honour to
introduce draft resolution A/73/L.50, entitled “Education
for democracy”, on behalf of the sponsors representing
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

various regions and my own country, Mongolia. The
text, which has been agreed by all delegations attending
the informal consultations, includes meaningful
advancements to promote education for democracy.
We reaffirm the fundamental link among democratic
governance, peace, development and the promotion
and protection of all human rights and fundamental
freedoms, which are interdependent and mutually
reinforcing, and we also recognize that education
contributes to the strengthening of democracy, good
governance and the rule of law at all levels.
In the draft resolution, we recall that the Sustainable
Development Goals and targets are integrated and
indivisible and that they balance the three dimensions
of sustainable development. We acknowledge the
importance of taking measures to ensure inclusive and
equitable quality education and of promoting lifelong
learning opportunities for all, including expanded
opportunities for all children, particularly girls’ access
to quality education.
We also recognize that education for democracy
nurtures responsible and active learners, capable of
contributing effectively to peace and prosperity in their
societies and beyond. Furthermore, Member States
and national, regional and local education authorities
are encouraged, as appropriate, to make further efforts
to strengthen, through education, the connections
among democratic governance, peace, sustainable
development and the promotion of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. Moreover, we acknowledge the
important contributions of civil society, academia, the
private sector and other stakeholders, including United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in support of
democracy and education for democracy.
I wish to take this opportunity to extend our
gratitude to all the delegations that participated actively
in our discussions on the draft text, as well as to all
sponsors for their support.
In conclusion, on behalf of all the sponsors, I would
like to express our hope that the draft resolution will
receive the unanimous support of Member States and
wide co-sponsorship, as it has in previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.50, entitled
“Education for Democracy”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution,
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/73/L.50, the following countries have also become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Andorra, Argentina,
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Canada, the
Central African Republic, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Greece,
Guinea, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Latvia, Luxembourg, Monaco, Morocco, Nigeria,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of Korea,
Romania, San Marino, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tunisia, Turkey and Uruguay.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/73/L.50?
Draft resolution A/73/L.50 was adopted (resolution
73/134).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of position on the resolution
just adopted, I remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Ordeman (United States of America): The
United States believes that education is transformational
for individuals and societies and that it creates pathways
to better health, economic growth, a sustainable
environment and peaceful democratic societies.
On 15 November, the United States Agency for
International Development announced a new education
policy aimed at focusing resources on programmes that
produce measurable learning outcomes for students.
The new policy also recognizes the important role of
non-State actors, including civil-society organizations,
faith-based and charitable entities and the private
sector, in providing educational opportunities that help
students gain access to the education and skills that
they need to be productive members of society.
While the United States joined the consensus on
resolution 73/134, on education for democracy, we do so
with the express understanding that when the resolution
acknowledges the importance of taking measures to
ensure various aspects of education, it does so in terms
that are mindful of and consistent with the governance
framework for education in the United States and our
respective federal, state and local authorities.

18-4366021/29

A/73/PV.52

We see significant variation in the capacity
and effectiveness of many nations’ Governments in
providing high-quality education. In many instances,
non-State schools and providers, which often include
faith-based and charitable organizations, are stepping
in to fill gaps that would otherwise prevent access to
education for many children and youth. Currently, in
low-income countries, non-State schools enrol nearly
14 per cent of primary school-age students, and in
lower middle-income countries the enrolment rate for
primary school-age students rises to 24 per cent.
The United States believes that there is both a need
and an opportunity to engage with non-State schools,
including those of faith-based and charitable entities, to
help ensure access to quality education for children and
youth in developing countries. We further understand
the reference in the resolution to internationally agreed
development goals to refer to the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development. The United States position is
articulated in the following explanation of position on
that document.
With regard to the references to the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development in the resolution, we
addressed our concerns regarding such references in a
general explanation of position delivered on 8 November
in the Second Committee and in an explanation of
position delivered in the General Assembly regarding
resolution 73/24, entitled “Sport as an enabler of
sustainable development”, which was adopted under
agenda item 12 on 3 December (see A/73/PV.44).
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of position after the voting.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 14.
Agenda item 128 (continued)
Cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and other organizations
(b) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
Draft resolution (A/73/L.45)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of Bangladesh to introduce draft
resolution A/73/L.45.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): In my capacity
as Chair of the group of States members of the
22/29

13/12/2018

Organization of Islamic Cooperation in New York,
I have the pleasure to introduce draft resolution
A/73/L.45, entitled “Cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
The draft resolution is consistent with the spirit, mission
and purposes of resolution 3369 (XXX),. of 10 October
1975, in which the Assembly decided to invite the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation to participate in
the decisions and work of the General Assembly and its
subsidiary organs in the capacity of observer.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
reaffirms the common purpose and shared objectives
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation and the
United Nations in conflict prevention and resolution,
confidence-building, peacekeeping, peacebuilding,
post-conflict rehabilitation, mediation and preventive
diplomacy, and the promotion of a culture of peace
through dialogue and cooperation, especially in
connection with conflict situations involving Muslim
communities around the world.
It welcomes, inter alia, the initiatives on interfaith
dialogue pursued by the two organizations.
Furthermore, the draft resolution highlights the desire
of the two organizations to work more closely in the
political, economic, social, humanitarian, cultural
and scientific fields and in their common search for
solutions to global issues of concern, such as questions
relating to international peace and security, respect for
territorial integrity, disarmament, self-determination,
decolonization, the promotion and protection of human
rights, economic and social development and combating
international terrorism.
Among other issues, the draft resolution recognizes
the existing cooperation between the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation and the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs. In its operative paragraphs,
the draft resolution reaffirms the shared goals of the
two organizations in promoting and facilitating the
Middle East peace process. It further acknowledges
the cooperation of the two organizations in combating
intolerance, the stigmatization of persons based on their
religion or beliefs and preventing violent extremism as
and when conducive to terrorism.
Today we are witnessing the increasing importance
and utility of dynamic cooperation between the United
Nations and the Organization of Islamic Cooperation.
Indeed, in the face of protracted as well as emerging
18-43660

13/12/2018

conflicts around the world, such cooperation between
the two organizations is an important strategic value.
In conclusion, we take this opportunity to
express our thanks and appreciation to delegations
for their interest in, and engagement with, the draft
resolution. I now request that all States members of
the General Assembly adopt draft resolution A/73/L.45
by consensus.
The Acting President: We shall now take a decision
on draft resolution A/73.L.45, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation”.
Before giving the floor to those representatives who
wish to speak in explanation of vote before the voting,
I would like to remind delegations that explanations are
limited to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations
from their seats.
Mr. Charwath (Austria): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU) and its
member States.
The candidate countries the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia and
Albania align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and its member States support
draft resolution A/73/L.45, on cooperation between
the United Nations and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC) and encourage further cooperation
between the two organizations. With reference to
the language contained in the draft resolution, which
notes the 2025 Programme of Action of the OIC,
the EU stresses that such language does not imply
any endorsement of the declarations, decisions and
resolutions adopted by the OIC forums, which should
be fully consistent with General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions and in full respect of international
law and the Charter of the United Nations, including,
notably, the principle contained in Article 2.7.
In that regard, we wish to put on record that the
provisions of the OIC 2025 Programme of Action
related to Cyprus are not consistent with existing
Security Council and General Assembly resolutions.
We therefore urge the OIC to refrain from adopting
positions that would undermine international law and
the Charter of the United Nations. The EU trusts that
its position will be taken into account in future so that
it can continue to support the resolution.

A/73/PV.52

Mr. Al-Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its position
on agenda item 128 (b) and draft resolution A/73/L.45,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
The Syrian Arab Republic is one of the founding
States of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
and will remain so despite the artificial performance
staged by the Government of the OIC host country in
August 2012, when it exerted, as usual, political and
financial pressure on certain OIC States to suspend
Syria’s membership through an illegitimate resolution
in violation of the Organization’s rules of procedure.
My country has excellent, friendly and steadfast
relations with most members of the OIC. We appreciate
that many Governments and peoples of OIC member
States remained at Syria’s side as we fought a terrorist
war that was imposed on us. However, the position
that we express today is put forward in response to
the irregular practices of the Government of the OIC
host country, which contravene the rules of procedure
that govern the Organization and the principles of
democracy, governance and equality of rights and
responsibilities among Member States.
These irregular practices of the Government of the
OIC host country require a new, comprehensive review
and evaluation of the performance of the OIC. It is no
secret that many OIC member States are dissatisfied
with these undemocratic practices, which depart from
the principle of collective action and have been imposed
on them by the Government of the OIC host country.
That Government imposes its vision, will, agenda and
national interests on the OIC.
In that regard, my country has reservations on
paragraph 81 of the report of the Secretary-General
(A/73/328), on cooperation between the United Nations
and regional and other organizations, pertaining to
the situation in the Syrian Arab Republic. My country
will continue to reject any role envisaged by the OIC
that is dictated by the policies and practices of the host
country’s Government, which are based on supporting
armed terrorist and extremist groups in Syria while
obstructing any political solution and interfering
destructively and dangerously in the internal affairs
of Syria.
My country has suffered from global terrorism to
a degree unprecedented in the history of humankind.
The Syrian people have paid a heavy price in blood

18-4366023/29

A/73/PV.52

and in the loss of economic, industrial and agricultural
gains that were realized after decades of hard work.
The Syrian people will never forget or pardon any
Government that has supported and financed terrorism
directly or by failing to shoulder its responsibility, or
that has promoted terrorism politically and by means of
the media and extremist religious platforms.
My country will never forget that tens of thousands
of foreign terrorist fighters who embrace the Wahhabi
extremist ideology have flooded areas of conflict and
fighting in Syria from more than 100 States members of
the United Nations. Regrettably, most of those terrorists
came from OIC member States. It is evident that the
recruitment and funding of tens of thousands of foreign
terrorist fighters and their ease of passage to Syria
were not coincidental or random events. Rather, they
were an organized and systematic process carried out
by certain Governments based on political and military
investment in terrorism and extremist ideology with a
view to achieving the political objectives of bringing
down the legitimate Government in Syria, spreading
chaos in the country and undermining its cultural
identity, which has existed for centuries and is based
on peaceful coexistence, tolerance and religious and
cultural diversity.
The millions of dollars spent by the OIC host
Government to get political cover from influential
countries and silence the voice of conscience will not
change the fact that it is responsible for the extremist
terrorist Wahhabi ideology embraced by terrorist groups
since the creation of Al-Qaida, Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham and all affiliated
armed terrorist groups. That ideology has threatened
international peace and security, undermined the image
of Islam and Muslims and sabotaged the commitment
of the OIC to promoting peace, tolerance and dialogue
among civilizations.
The OIC host country is responsible for the worst
humanitarian disaster and famine in the history of
mankind in Yemen, which has led to the killing,
displacement and starvation of 20 million Yemenis, the
destruction of the infrastructure of the country and the
spread of epidemics, such as cholera, on a scale not seen
in the world in the last 50 years. The OIC host country is
responsible for fuelling sectarian divisions, leading to
wars between Muslim communities, in order to realize
selfish and destructive political objectives, which will
eventually lead to more conflicts and wars in the Middle
East, merely because the Government of the OIC host
24/29

13/12/2018

country decided to create a situation of unjustified
hostility towards certain OIC Member States.
Above all, the Palestinian question is no longer
a priority for the OIC, even though it was created in
1969 to defend the Palestinian question and Jerusalem
after an arson attack by an extremist terrorist against
Al-Masjid Al-Aqsa. However, everyone should know
that the rights of the Palestinian people and the rights
of the people of the occupied Syrian Golan will never
be the subject of a deal or the negotiating tool of any
Government or party that does not have the right
or mandate to determine the fate of the occupied
Arab territories.
Nonetheless, my country will continue to believe
in the pioneering role of international and regional
organizations. Hence, it expects the OIC and its
member States to be able one day to collectively
conduct a true review of the methodology and work of
the organization and to rid itself of the financial and
political polarization that has, regrettably, been brought
about by the host Government.
With regard to the situation in Syria, what is
required of the OIC is to restore its free decision-making
ability and to exercise the true will of the overwhelming
majority of its members. The OIC should coordinate
and cooperate directly with the Syrian Government in
the combat against terrorism and religious extremism,
from which, regrettably, false stereotypical links have
been made between Islam and terrorism. The OIC
should support Syrian efforts regarding building and
reconstruction; facilitating the return of refugees and
displaced persons; putting an end to all forms of foreign
occupation; and achieving a political settlement that is
determined by Syrians without foreign intervention.
In conclusion, the position of my country is not
and will not be directed against the OIC, which we
established to be a forum that reflects the true identity
of Islam as a religion of peace, coexistence and
amity. We express this position in order to sound the
alarm, so that the OIC will return to its true path. Our
position flows from our commitment to the principles
of democracy, transparency and equality in rights and
duties among OIC member States. That prompts us to
ask for a recorded vote on draft resolution A/73/L.45.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote before the voting.
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

I give the floor to the representative of Bangladesh
on a point of order.

Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uganda, the United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan and Yemen.

Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): Bangladesh, on
behalf of the States members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation, is disappointed to see that the
delegation of the Syrian Arab Republic has broken
consensus on the text of draft resolution A/73/L.45
by asking for a vote on the draft. The text of the draft
resolution consists of agreed language from previous
resolutions and is consistent with the mandate of the
Organization for Islamic Cooperation and the relevant
instruments and resolutions of the United Nations.
We therefore request all States to vote in favour of the
draft resolution.

The Acting President: A recorded vote has been
requested on draft resolution A/73/L.45, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.

The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic on a point
of order.
Mr. Al-Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I understood that my colleague the Permanent
Representative of Bangladesh had asked for the floor
on a point of order. However, he spoke about the
draft resolution. In any case, it is not true that there
is consensual language in the draft resolution under
consideration because it was voted on last year. Hence,
he cannot consider it to be agreed language.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/73/L.45, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of the draft
resolution, and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/73/L.45, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Albania, Algeria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Benin, Brunei
Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Comoros,
Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti, Egypt, Gabon, the Gambia,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Indonesia, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Mauritania, Morocco, Mozambique, the Niger, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Somalia, the Sudan, Suriname, Tajikistan, Togo,

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia
(Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, China,
Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Latvia, Lebanon, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa,
Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
States of America, Vanuatu, Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Armenia, El Salvador, Honduras, India, Israel,
Syrian Arab Republic

18-4366025/29

A/73/PV.52

Draft resolution A/73/L.45 was adopted by 139 votes
to none, with 6 abstentions (resolution 73/135).
[Subsequently, the delegation of Afghanistan
informed the Secretariat that it had intended to vote
in favour.]
The Acting President: Before giving the floor
to representatives who wish to speak in explanation
of vote on the resolution just adopted, I would like to
remind delegations that explanations of vote are limited
to 10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): I would like to present
the position of Armenia on resolution 73/135, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation”.
Like most of the members of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC), my country’s shared history
stretches back many centuries. Armenia enjoys and
will spare no effort to further deepen cordial relations
with those States. With respect to the resolution just
adopted, the delegation of Armenia would like to
reiterate the importance of fostering the resolution
of disputes and supporting efforts for the peaceful
resolution of conflicts within internationally mandated
negotiation formats.
Furthermore, Armenia notes with regret the
reference to the OIC 2025 Programme of Action in
the preambular part of the resolution. The document
contains formulations that blatantly contravene the
basic principles of the settlement of the Nagorno
Karabakh conflict. We call upon the States members
of the OIC, when making references to Nagorno
Karabakh conflict resolution, to adhere to the language
and formulations contained in the proposals of the
Minsk Group of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe co-chairmanship — the only
internationally agreed and mandated format — and to
reject any attempts by one member State to misuse the
OIC platform to misrepresent and distort the process of
conflict resolution.
Ms. Galarneau (Canada): Canada strongly supports
resolution 73/135 and its objective of strengthening
cooperation between the United Nations and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). However,
we wish to dissociate ourselves from the fourth
preambular paragraph, as Canada opposes initiatives
at the United Nations and in other multilateral forums
26/29

13/12/2018

that unfairly single out Israel for criticism. Canada
rejects one-sided resolutions and any politicization of
the issues.
Mr. Ordeman (United States of America): While
the United States voted in favour of resolution 73/135,
we would like to make it clear that we once again
dissociate ourselves from the preambular paragraph
that makes mention of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation 2025 Programme of Action. The United
States views the 2025 Programme of Action’s treatment
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in particular, as
one-sided, politicized and biased in a way that does not
contribute positively to efforts to resolve the conflict.
Ms. Fisher-Tsin (Israel): Resolution 73/135,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)”, refers
to the OIC Programme of Action that was adopted in
2016. Not only does the Programme of Action contain
biased information against Israel, but it employs
language that is simply untrue.
It is regrettable to see the hijacking of yet another
organization to promote the anti-Israel agenda, which
does nothing to encourage dialogue and does nothing
for peace. Because of our strong bilateral relations with
some OIC members, Israel did not vote against this
resolution. However, I request the official record to show
that Israel dissociates itself from the fourth preambular
paragraph of the resolution, which begins “Noting the
adoption by the Islamic Summit Conference”.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote.
Several delegations have asked to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. May I remind members
that statements in the exercise of the right of reply are
limited to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to
five minutes for the second intervention, and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Denktaş (Turkey): I wish to state the following
in the exercise of our right of reply to the statement made
today by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Turkey supports the settlement of the Cyprus issue,
as was clearly demonstrated at the last round of talks that
ended in failure in Crans-Montana in July 2017 and at the
previous attempt in 2004. Only a negotiated settlement
based on dialogue and diplomacy can be sustainable.
We will continue to engage with all relevant parties
on that understanding. In the meantime, we call upon
18-43660

13/12/2018

A/73/PV.52

all parties to contribute to these efforts without bias or
prejudice. We regret, however, that the explanation of
vote read on behalf of the EU today and the approach
that it reflects are examples to the contrary.

of the fraternal Syrian people. It supports resolutions
pertaining to Syria. A recent example of that is the
support of the OIC and its members for resolution
73/100, entitled “The occupied Syrian Golan”.

The EU has admitted the Greek-Cypriot
Administration as a full member, despite the
overwhelming Greek-Cypriot vote in 2004 against
a comprehensive settlement. That position is totally
disconnected from the facts and continues to be in
contravention of the very treaties that founded the
bicommunal partnership republic in 1960. Since then,
the EU has been unable to adopt a balanced position on
the Cyprus issue. The explanation of vote read today
reminds us once again that as long as the EU continues
to espouse this biased approach, it will not be able to
contribute to impartial efforts to reach a solution.

Syria’s membership in the OIC was suspended
because of the crimes and violations perpetrated by the
Syrian Government against the unarmed Syrian people.
The Syrian Government is responsible for the murder of
more than half a million Syrians and the displacement
of nearly 7 million people externally and 6 million
people internally. Is that not reason enough to suspend
its membership in the OIC? The Syrian Government
has perpetrated crimes against the Syrian people and
has used internationally prohibited weapons, including
toxic gases and barrel bombs. Is that not reason enough
to suspend its membership in the OIC? The Syrian
Government is detaining tens of thousands of Syrians
in its jails, subjecting them to torture and starvation,
and has murdered women, children and the elderly. Is
that not reason enough to suspend its membership in
the OIC?

As for the document referred to in the statement
delivered by the EU representative, the plain fact is
that the Organization of Islamic Cooperation’s 2025
Programme of Action is fully in line with international
law and the Charter of the United Nations. Its
provisions related to the Cyprus issue describe some
of the necessary components of a viable solution that
will be based upon the political equality of both sides
on the island. We regard any contrary initiative as illintentioned and as an attempt to further hinder the
settlement of the Cyprus dispute. Such a settlement
would undoubtedly contribute to the security and
prosperity of the entire eastern Mediterranean region.
We therefore urge the EU to play a positive role in
efforts to that end and, accordingly, to keep its promises
to the Turkish Cypriots.
Mr. Alhakbani (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me to exercise the right of reply to what the
representative of Syria said about my country, which
is the host country of the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation (OIC).
We strongly reject the false and invalid accusations
made by the representative of Syria against my country.
We have grown accustomed to the representatives of
the Syrian authorities distorting facts and lying in
their statements. That is no surprise, coming from the
representative of the Syrian Government, which has
violated all international laws and norms as well as
humanitarian and ethical laws.
The OIC, which was attacked by the representative
of Syria because of the suspension of its membership
in the OIC, is the organization that defends the causes

All of the Syrian Government’s attempts to divert
attention away from the gross and blatant violations it
has perpetrated against its people will never succeed.
That is why its OIC membership was suspended. It
is regrettable that the representative of the Syrian
Government opposed resolution 73/135, which calls for
cooperation between the United Nations and the OIC.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): I would like to
exercise my right of reply to the comments made by the
delegation of Armenia.
As is well known, the continuing aggression of
Armenia against Azerbaijan and the resulting military
occupation of the territories of my country amount to
serious breaches of obligations arising from peremptory
norms of general international law. Consequently, the
international community as a whole has a legitimate
interest and is committed, under international law, to
putting an end to those breaches by lawful means.
The Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC)
has consistently expressed its principled position on
the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan and has
reaffirmed that the acquisition of territory through the
use of force is inadmissible under the Charter of the
United Nations and international law; urged the strict
implementation of Security Council resolutions 822
(1993), 853 (1993), 874 (1993) and 884 (1993); called for
the immediate, complete and unconditional withdrawal

18-4366027/29

A/73/PV.52

of the armed forces of Armenia from the Nagorno
Karabakh region and other occupied territories of
Azerbaijan; and called for the resolution of the conflict
on the basis of the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
inviolability of the internationally recognized borders
of Azerbaijan.
The OIC’s position fully complies with international
law and the relevant Council and Assembly resolutions.
The resolutions on cooperation between the United
Nations and the OIC, including the one just adopted
(resolution A/73/135), make it clear that the two
organizations share the common objective of fostering
peaceful and political solutions to conflicts in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
the relevant Council resolutions. That same position was
expressed by the Council in its presidential statement of
28 October 2013 (S/PRST/2013/16).
Instead of blaming others, Armenia must look
at itself and realize, finally, that the achievement
of peace, security and stability will be possible only
if the consequences of Armenia’s aggression are
eliminated — that is, if Armenia’s armed forces
immediately, unconditionally and completely withdraw
from the territories of Azerbaijan; the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of my country are restored; and the
right of internally displaced Azerbaijanis to return to
their homes and properties is guaranteed and fulfilled.
Ms. Ioannou (Cyprus): I regret having to take
the floor in right of reply in respect of the statement
recently made by Turkey. Let me first invite the Turkish
delegation not to refer to my country with the use of
arbitrary names it has unilaterally coined, but rather to
respect the official name of Cyprus as a State Member
of the United Nations.
I will not speak to the compatibility of the language
of the Organization of Islamic Cooperation regarding
Cyprus with the language in Security Council and the
General Assembly resolutions on Cyprus. Instead,
I invite fellow representatives to read the relevant
United Nations resolutions, in particular Security
Council resolutions 541 (1983) and 550 (1984), and
to make up their own minds in that regard. Through
those resolutions, the authoritative organ for the
maintenance of international peace and security has
spoken definitively and has condemned the purported
secession of Cyprus.
I hope that Turkey will provide tangible support
in the process of finding a settlement to the Cyprus
28/29

13/12/2018

problem. It can do that, first and foremost, by agreeing
to withdraw its guarantees and troops. Mention was
made of the plan that was rejected in 2004. A significant
portion of the Cypriot population rejected that specific
plan — not reunification of the island — simply
because it was imposed on the Cypriots and would
have essentially rendered Cyprus a vassal State
through provisions that are manifestly contradictory to
the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United
Nations. Indeed, the occupied areas of Cyprus are a
part of the European Union (EU), but the EU acquis
remains suspended in those areas until reunification
occurs. That, of course, is not the fault of anyone but
the occupying Power.
Mr. Al-Arsan (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): I exercise my right of reply to the right of reply
exercised by my colleague the representative of the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
I would like to very briefly address him by saying
that we were discussing objective matters related to
the current method of work of the Organization of
Islamic Cooperation (OIC). As for the statement of the
Saudi representative, it regrettably contains false and
unfounded allegations that reflect the unbalanced and
unwise position taken by the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
vis-à-vis the crisis in Syria.
When we speak of supporting terrorism, I hope that
my Saudi colleague will recall the facts and evidence.
We were not the ones, as he knows, who established
Al-Qaida and the Taliban. He knows where Da’esh,
Jabhat Al-Nusra and Hayat Tahriri Al-Sham are getting
not only their money and weapons but also their
ideological distortions of our true religion of Islam.
We call upon him and the OIC to conduct a wise and
transparent review of the OIC’s actions in order to return
it to the right path. We call upon him to do so because
the Middle East region which brings us together is in
danger today. We call upon the OIC to undertake such
a review and to reconsider its decisions in view of the
tension in that region. The OIC knows that creating new
conflicts, disputes and a state of false animosity against
a country or countries will not benefit the region. It
knows the countries I am referring to in the Middle
East region, which are original members of the OIC.
Mr. Grigoryan (Armenia): I am compelled to take
the floor to respond to the usual round of fabrications
voiced by the representative of Azerbaijan. The
Azerbaijani delegation is once again, in typical fashion,
18-43660

13/12/2018

portraying reality upside down. The representative of
Azerbaijan has failed to mention the principle of the
equal rights and self-determination of peoples, which,
along with other principles, constitute the essence of
the proposal submitted by the co-Chair mediators,
which Azerbaijan continuously disregards.
Lastly, I would like to remind my colleague that
the approach of the international community vis-à-vis
the Nagorno Karabakh conflict is well reflected in
the statement and proposals of the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe Minsk Group
co-Chairs.
Mr. Musayev (Azerbaijan): The misinterpretations
that we have just witnessed in the comments made by the
representative of Armenia are particularly astonishing
as they are being made at the United Nations,
whose Security Council adopted four resolutions
condemning the use of force against Azerbaijan and
the bombardment and occupation of its territories, in
addition to reaffirming respect for the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Azerbaijan, the inviolability of
international borders and the inadmissibility of the use
of force in the acquisition of territory.
Furthermore, in response to Armenia’s territorial
claims and forcible actions, the Council reaffirmed
that the Nagorno Karabakh region is an integral part
of Azerbaijan and demanded the immediate, complete
and unconditional withdrawal of the occupying forces
from all of the occupied territories of my country.
In other words, through its resolutions, the Council
acknowledged that is a fact that acts of military force
were committed against Azerbaijan, that such acts
are unlawful and incompatible with the prohibition of
the use of armed force in international relations and
run counter to the Charter of the United Nations and
its purposes, and that such acts constitute an obvious
violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Azerbaijan.

A/73/PV.52

The actions that Armenia describes as the exercise of
the right to self-determination have been unequivocally
qualified by the Security Council and other authoritative
international organizations as the unlawful use of
force and the commission of other serious crimes.
Armenia’s annexationist and colonialist policy has no
chance of succeeding. The Nagorno Karabakh region
has always been and will remain an inseparable part of
Azerbaijan. The military occupation of the territories
of Azerbaijan is temporary and will never produce the
political outcome desired by Armenia. Yerevan must
stop its futile attempts to mislead its own people and
the international community, engage constructively
in the conflict-settlement process and comply with its
international obligations.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 128?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President: I should like to consult
members regarding an extension of the work of the Fifth
Committee. Members will recall that at its 3rd plenary
meeting, on 21 September, the General Assembly
decided that the Fifth Committee would complete its
work by Friday, 14 December.
However, I have been informed by the Chair of
the Fifth Committee that the Committee requests an
extension of its work to Friday, 21 December, in view of
the expectation that such an extension would facilitate
reaching consensus on the pending draft resolutions
before the Committee.
May I therefore take it that the General Assembly
agrees to extend the work of the Fifth Committee until
Friday, 21 December?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.

18-4366029/29
