S/PV.7829

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-first year

7829th meeting

Thursday, 8 December 2016, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. González de Linares Palou . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Spain)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Stehelin
Mr. Akahori
Mr. Ibrahim
Mr. Van Bohemen
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Ciss
Mr. Yelchenko
Ms. Mulvein
Ms. Coleman
Mr. Rosselli
Mr. Medina Mejías

Agenda
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for Genocide and OtherSerious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 1 August 2016 from the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/669)
This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

16-42328 (E)
*1642328*

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

08/12/2016

Report of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (S/2016/670)
Letter dated 17 November 2016 from the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2016/975)
Letter dated 17 November 2016 from the President of the International Tribunal
for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/2016/976)

2/28

16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of
Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in
the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991
International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide
and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory
of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed
in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
Letter dated 1 August 2016 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/669)
Report of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (S/2016/670)
Letter dated 17 November 2016 from the
President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals addressed
to the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/975)
Letter dated 17 November 2016 from the
President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former
Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2016/976)
The President (spoke in Spanish): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Carmel
Agius, President of the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal

S/PV.7829

Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and
Prosecutor of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2016/669, which contains the text of
a letter dated 1 August 2016 from the President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council. I also wish to draw the attention of members
to document S/2016/670, which contains the report of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
I furthermore wish to draw the attention of Council
members to document S/2016/975, which contains the
text of a letter dated 17 November 2016 from the President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals addressed to the President of the Security
Council. And, finally, I wish to draw members’ attention
to document S/2016/976, which contains the text of a
letter dated 17 November 2016 from the President of the
International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
the Former Yugoslavia since 1991, addressed to the
President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Judge Agius.
Judge Agius (spoke in Spanish): I should like to
begin by expressing my sincere congratulations to you,
Sir, on your country’s assumption of the presidency
of the Council for December. Your country is known
for its tireless support for international justice and
was, as a member of the Security Council in 1993, an
indispensable force in the creation of the Tribunal.
(spoke in English)
I take this opportunity to thank you, Sir, and your
country, along with Angola, Malaysia, New Zealand and
Venezuela — all outgoing members of this body — for
their resolute support to the Tribunal. At the same time,
I warmly welcome the incoming Security Council
members, which will see the Tribunal through to the
end of its mandate. I look forward to working with them
during 2017. I should also like to thank the Informal
Working Group chaired by Uruguay, as well as the
Office of Legal Affairs.

16-423283/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

On behalf of all the judges and staff members of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), I wish to commend the Security Council for
its prompt reaction to the Tribunal’s urgent request
concerning the composition of the Appeals Chamber.
Resolution 2306 (2016), which amended the statute
of the Tribunal, was not only adopted in a very short
period of time, but it also demonstrated the Council’s
readiness and commitment to support the Tribunal.
The completion strategy report (see S/2016/976)
before the Council demonstrates that the Tribunal has
continued to work vigorously and diligently since its
last report (see S/2016/454). With only one trial, one
appeal and one contempt case remaining, the Tribunal’s
mandate is nearly complete, although it is not over
and we shall face some formidable challenges in the
coming year. It will be noted that, during the current
reporting period, the Prosecutor v. Mićo Stanišić
and Stojan Župljanin appeal was delivered, and I can
confirm that we are still on track to deliver judgements
in both the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić trial and the
Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. appeal by November 2017. In
addition, proceedings in the trial case of Prosecutor v.
Goran Hadžić were terminated following the death of
the accused.
The Tribunal’s ongoing progress is due to the
relentless efforts of all staff and judges, to whom I
express my heartfelt thanks for their outstanding work
and dedication. In the light of the projected completion
dates of these cases, I have recently submitted a request
for a final extension of the terms of office of the Judges.
I use the term “final” precisely because I am confident
that the Tribunal will close its doors at the end of 2017.
I remain hopeful that this request will be favourably
considered by the Security Council.
Council members will also find that the
aforementioned report contains a special section on
the Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS)
evaluation, and in accordance with resolution 2256
(2015) sets out the Tribunal’s implementation of the
OIOS recommendations. I wish to assure all Security
Council members that the Tribunal took the evaluation
and recommendations very seriously. Everything that
could feasibly and appropriately be done was done,
bearing in mind our mutual interest that the Tribunal
should stay on course to complete all its judicial work
by 30 November 2017. The Tribunal’s best efforts must
therefore be measured against the context and purpose
of that important commitment.
4/28

08/12/2016

I draw attention to OIOS’s third recommendation,
which the Tribunal has partially implemented. A code
of professional conduct for the judges of the Tribunal
was adopted unanimously at the plenary of judges,
held on 6 July, with immediate effect. In relation to a
disciplinary mechanism, the Tribunal did not implement
that recommendation, bearing in mind the lack of time
and resources, although the judges considered it to be
desirable. ICTY judges know that they are not above the
law and that they are custodians of the justice system
and ought to be held accountable for any breach of their
ethical or professional duties. Our report also identifies
the lack of a disciplinary mechanism as a systemic
issue that affects other courts and tribunals and a wide
number of United Nations high-level and non-staff
officials. The Tribunal therefore suggests that the
General Assembly address this more comprehensively
at an organizational level.
Overall, the OIOS evaluation was a valuable
experience. However, the Tribunal regrets that it was
carried out at the very end of its lifespan and that,
as a result, it was not possible to implement certain
recommendations. Further, the OIOS evaluation focused
on efficiency, almost to the exclusion of other factors
such as effectiveness and, most fundamentally of all,
fairness and due process. This reflected an unfortunate
misunderstanding of the Tribunal’s primary aim and
function — which are to deliver justice — and its
unique nature as an international judicial institution.
There is a systemic institutional problem with
international justice. It is called politics. While the
Tribunal appreciates that political sensitivities may
arise in certain circumstances as a result of cooperating
with the ICTY, these can never constitute an excuse for
failing to do so. Cooperation is a vital responsibility
flowing from the statute of the Tribunal itself, and
reflects the collective will of the Security Council in
our common fight against impunity.
I am referring to the pending contempt case of
Prosecutor v. Jojić et al., in which the Republic of
Serbia has yet to execute the arrest warrants for three
indicted persons that were issued 22 months ago. It has
further failed to file any monthly progress reports since
May 2016. The Trial Chamber seized of the case advised
me in September of Serbia’s continued non-cooperation
under article 29 of the Tribunal’s Statute. In addition,
one week ago theTrial Chamber made public
international arrest warrants and orders to surrender
the three indictees, which it had issued confidentially
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

in October. I therefore request the Security Council’s
support on the matter. In particular, I urge the Council
to ensure that Serbia abides by its duties under article
29 of the Tribunal’s Statute and complies with the
Tribunal’s orders. Furthermore, the Tribunal calls on
all Member States to execute the international arrest
warrants and orders to surrender.
In the past, the Security Council has called on
States to cooperate with the Tribunal pursuant to their
obligations under article 29. There is no reason that
this contempt case should be treated any differently,
particularly when what is at stake is the integrity of the
Tribunal’s administration of justice. Indeed, contempt of
court sabotages the Tribunal’s ability to conduct fair and
efficient legal proceedings. Furthermore, Serbia’s past
cooperation does not excuse its current non-compliance
or release it from its ongoing obligations. If the Jojić
et al. case is not heard and concluded before the end
of November 2017, it will constitute a serious blow
to all of the efforts to pursue accountability that the
Council and the Tribunal have made together over a
quarter of a century. I trust that the Security Council
will take the necessary steps to prevent such a failure of
international justice. I would like to assure the Council
that my insistence that the case be heard is not in any
way an attempt to extend the duration or life of the
Tribunal. The Tribunal stands ready to dispose of the
case expeditiously, in accordance with due process and
fair trial rights.
While I take enormous pride in closing down an
institution of the calibre of the ICTY, I can assure the
Council that it is by no means an easy task. Indeed, the
last point I would like to raise is one that the Council
is very familiar with by now, and it concerns the
Tribunal’s staffing situation. Let me emphasize that my
commitment to concluding the Tribunal’s work on time
is unwavering. However, I feel compelled to continue
to raise the issue because it concerns circumstances
beyond and outside my control, and because it has a
significant impact on the functioning of the Tribunal.
The reality is that staff attrition will, if left unchecked,
increase the risk that the Tribunal will not be able to
complete its remaining cases by the end of November
2017. In that connection, the Tribunal has formulated a
proposal for the consideration of the General Assembly,
which is being discussed with the Secretariat. If
adopted, the proposal will help to mitigate the risk
posed by staff attrition, and I very much hope that
Member States will lend their support in that regard.

S/PV.7829

On the Tribunal’s side, we have exhausted all available
options and are now relying on the Organization to find
an adequate solution.
In conclusion, I would like to say that we should
not forget that the development of an international
justice system is a long-term project and that, in the
grand scheme of things, we are just getting started.
The Tribunal has played an enormous role in those
beginnings. Not only has it changed the way we think
about and react to impunity, it has served as a powerful
catalyst for the establishment of other international
courts and tribunals. As we approach our final year of
operations, there is much to reflect on and be proud of.
The Tribunal looks forward to completing its remaining
cases and cementing its significant legacy during 2017,
and to continuing to work with the Security Council
towards the conclusion of its mandate.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Agius for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Judge Meron.
Judge Meron: It is an honour to appear before the
Security Council once again. I would like to congratulate
Spain on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I also remain deeply grateful to the Security
Council’s Informal Working Group on International
Tribunals, for its support of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and to Uruguay
for its able leadership of the Working Group. Finally, I
would like to express my sincere thanks to Mr. Miguel
de Serpa Soares, Under-Secretary-General for Legal
Affairs and United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Stephen
Mathias, Assistant Secretary-General for Legal Affairs,
and their colleagues in the Office of Legal Affairs for
their ongoing and critically important assistance.
Less than two weeks ago, we opened the Mechanism’s
new premises for the Arusha branch. Her Excellency
Ms. Samia Suluhu Hassan, Vice-President of the
United Republic of Tanzania, presided over the opening
ceremony, with Mr. De Serpa Soares representing the
Secretary-General. The new premises would not have
been possible without the exceptional generosity of the
Government of Tanzania. The success of the project
is also due in very large part to the dedication of the
Mechanism’s Registrar, Mr. John Hocking, and his
staff. I would like to take this opportunity to express
my deep gratitude to Mr. Hocking for his exceptional
service to the Mechanism since 2012, and to extend

16-423285/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

my sincere welcome to Mr. Olufemi Elias, who was
recently appointed to be the next Registrar.
The new premises include a dedicated archive
facility, which will enable the archives of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR)
and the Mechanism to be housed together at the Arusha
branch, as the Council has directed. I should note that
the Government of the Republic of Rwanda, at a senior
level, recently informed me of its firm view that the
archives should be physically located in Rwanda, while
at the same time accepting United Nations management
and ownership of the archives, as set out in the
Mechanism’s statute. Our new premises in Arusha
are minimalist in design and efficient in their use of
resources, and they reflect best practices in myriad
ways as, indeed, we strive to do in all aspects of our
work in the Mechanism. It is significant in that regard
that the premises were completed under budget, for
we recognize that the Mechanism stands not only as
a symbol of accountability and the rule of law but as a
new model of, and for, international justice — a modest,
efficient and cost-effective model that must succeed if
international justice and the fight to end impunity are
themselves to succeed in the long run.
As detailed in my written report (see S/2016/669),
the past six months have seen the Mechanism make
good progress on a number of fronts, from its cases
to the development of its regulatory framework. In
the appeal cases of Karadžić and Šešelj, briefing is
ongoing before the Mechanism’s Appeals Chamber,
while the pretrial conference in the Stanišić and
Simatović retrial is anticipated in the first quarter of
2017. Of the 214 judicial decisions and orders issued
during the reporting period, nearly 40 per cent related
to requests for access to confidential information, just
one of the many ways in which the Mechanism provides
assistance to national jurisdictions. That work has been
supported by an exceedingly lean staffing structure
in Chambers. The Mechanism has also taken steps to be
fully self-standing by the end of 2017, while continuing
to carry out key functions such as the protection of
vulnerable witnesses.
The Mechanism is able to do a great deal on its
own, but it is also dependent upon cooperation from
others. The Mechanism is deeply grateful for the
assistance provided to it by the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia and for the support provided
by its host States. The Mechanism also remains reliant
upon cooperation from Member States when it comes
6/28

08/12/2016

to the apprehension of the remaining fugitives, the
enforcement of sentences and the identification of a
resolution for the difficult situation involving those
acquitted or released individuals currently present in
Arusha. I call upon all Member States to support our
efforts in that regard.
It is in that context that I am compelled, by virtue
of my role as President, to raise the serious matter of
the continuing detention of Judge Aydin Sefa Akay, a
situation that is having an impact upon the effective
discharge of the Mechanism’s mandate, and about
which I previously briefed the members of the Council.
Judicial independence is a cornerstone of the rule of
law, and it is a long-standing and consistent practice to
afford international judges privileges and immunities
in order to protect the independent discharge of their
judicial functions. The statute of the Mechanism,
adopted by the Council — acting under Chapter VII of
the Charter of the United Nations — follows that same
practice in according the judges of the Mechanism
diplomatic immunity for those periods of time in which
they are engaged in the business of the Mechanism. As
a result of that legal framework, Judge Akay enjoyed
diplomatic immunity from the time of his assignment
to the Ngirabatware proceedings, on 25 July 2016, and
will continue to enjoy such immunity until the end of
those proceedings. To my great regret, notwithstanding
the diplomatic immunity to which Judge Akay is
entitled, he remains detained and unable to carry out
his duties as a judge on that case.
Some may believe that, from the Mechanism’s
perspective, the situation could be resolved by my
replacing Judge Akay on the bench of the Ngirabatware
case, thereby enabling that case to proceed. Let me be
clear: that option is simply not open to me as a matter
of law and justice. I do not consider it possible, under
the circumstances, to reconcile full respect for the
fundamental principle of judicial independence with
the removal of Judge Akay from the bench to which
he has been assigned. I therefore respectfully call
upon the Members of the Council to do their utmost
to bring about a timely and satisfactory resolution to
that situation.
In conclusion, I wish to assure the Government
of Turkey that, in raising the matter of Judge Akay’s
detention before the Council, I do nothing more than
what I am compelled to do to fulfil my duties as the
President of the Mechanism, that is, to defend the
institution and the law governing it. It pains me to do
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

so. I wish to underscore my full respect for the right
of all States, including Turkey, to address legitimate
law enforcement concerns in accordance with the rule
of law. At the same time, all States must respect their
obligations arising from Council resolutions adopted
pursuant to Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter.
In that context, I appeal to the Government of Turkey,
with its strong legal traditions stretching back for
many centuries, to release Judge Akay in the spirit of
humanitarianism so as to enable him to perform his
judicial duties in the Ngirabatware case. In doing so,
the Government of Turkey would not only demonstrate
its support for a Chapter VII tribunal but would play a
vital part in enabling the Mechanism to carry out the
important mandate entrusted to it.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank Judge
Meron for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: In accordance with my dual role,
I will report today about both International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals activities
in Arusha and The Hague.
My Offices are firmly focused on three priorities:
expeditiously completing trials and appeals; locating
and arresting the remaining eight fugitives indicted by
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR);
and providing assistance to national jurisdictions
prosecuting war crimes, crimes against humanity
and genocide.
I first turn to trials and appeals. In The Hague,
the ICTY is in the final phase of its mandate. Only
two cases remain, and it continues to be expected that
the Tribunal will complete its work before the end of
next year. This week, my Office is making its closing
arguments in the trial of Ratko Mladić, one of the most
complex and important cases in the Tribunal’s history.
Mladić was one of the Tribunal’s last fugitives, and
his arrest in 2011 was a significant moment for the
victims and for international criminal justice. Over
the course of his trial, my Office submitted evidence
from more than 150 witnesses and more than 7,800
exhibits to prove Mladić’s guilt on all 11 charges in
the indictment, including genocide in Srebrenica and
in the municipalities of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
delivery of the judgment in the Mladić case is expected
in November 2017.

S/PV.7829

In relation to ICTY appeals, the judgment in
Stanišić and Župljanin was issued on 30 June 2016,
confirming the sentences of 22 years of imprisonment
imposed by the ICTY Trial Chamber. In the Prlić case,
my Office is continuing preparations for the appeal
hearing, which is expected to take place next spring.
During the reporting period, the case against Goran
Hadžić was terminated, following his death in Serbia.
My Office deeply regrets that the case was not brought
to an end with a verdict on the charges. We share the
dismay and disappointment of the victims. It would be
beneficial to identify and reflect on lessons learned
from that case.
With respect to Mechanism trials and appeals in
The Hague, pretrial proceedings remain under way
in the Stanišić and Simatović case, with the retrial
expected to commence sometime in the first quarter
of 2017. In the Šešelj and Karadžić appeals, we filed
our appeal briefs on 18 July and 5 December 2016,
respectively. We are now intensively working on our
response to the 50 grounds of appeal raised by the
Karadžić defence team.
Regarding the Arusha branch, no trials or appeals
are currently ongoing. However, during the reporting
period, my Office conducted two investigations, one in
relation to a contempt case and the second in relation to
a completed case. Furthermore, my Office is monitoring
five ICTR cases that have been referred for trial to the
national courts of Rwanda and France.
In a notable development during the reporting
period, the Mechanism Appeals Chamber issued its
decision in the Uwinkindi case, rejecting the accused’s
application to revoke the referral of his case to Rwanda
and reaffirming that conditions exist for fair trial in
Rwanda. My Office hopes that positive development
will support continued cooperation by third-party States
with Rwanda in extradition and related proceedings.
Cooperation by the countries of the former
Yugoslavia with the ICTY and Mechanism Offices
of the Prosecutor remains critical to the completion
of our mandate, including in particular our trials and
appeals. My Office echoes President Agius’ grave
concern that Serbia continues to ignore and breach its
legal obligation to cooperate with the ICTY. We join the
President in again urging Serbia to return to the path of
full cooperation.

16-423287/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

Our second priority is locating and arresting the
remaining eight ICTR fugitives. All victims share the
same hope of seeing those responsible for the crimes
against them brought to justice, so it remains of critical
importance that these eight fugitives be arrested and
stand trial.
During the reporting period, we completed our
overall review of tracking efforts to date, and major
steps are now being undertaken to resolve the challenges
identified. My Office hopes to be able to report positive
results in the future from our renewed efforts.
Our final priority is assisting national judiciaries
prosecuting war crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda. In relation to Rwanda,
my Office continued its close cooperation with
the National Public Prosecution Authority and the
Prosecutor-General. This cooperation remains smooth
and effective, and there are no issues to report. My
Office underscores, in that regard, that the search for
fugitives is not limited to the eight remaining ICTR
indictees. Rwandan authorities have identified more
than 500 suspects who are present in other countries.
These case files must be processed and prosecutions
must be brought where there is sufficient evidence of
guilt. My Office encourages third-party States to work
with Rwandan authorities and ensure that those cases
are completed.
In relation to the former Yugoslavia, the situation is
unfortunately more mixed. While judicial accountability
for war crimes continues, political trends are moving
in a negative direction. My Office recognizes that
results are being achieved in national prosecutions of
war crimes. As one notable example, the Prosecutor’s
Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina has been building on
past results in the Category II cases by continuing to file
significant indictments against senior- and mid-level
suspects, as well as for historically under-addressed
crimes such as conflict-related sexual violence.
However, during the reporting period regional
judicial cooperation experienced a significant setback
with the failure of Serbian authorities to enforce the
war crimes conviction in the Djukić case for more than
a year. Serbia adopted its National Strategy for the
Prosecution of War Crimes and Chapter 23 Action Plan,
which my Office has welcomed on several occasions,
but so far there has been little evidence that these
commitments are being implemented. The Serbian
Government has failed for almost a year to appoint
8/28

08/12/2016

a new Chief War Crimes Prosecutor. The promised
and much-needed additional staff and resources for
the War Crimes Prosecutor’s Office have not yet
been provided. Activities to strengthen the Special
Investigative Service for War Crimes within the police
remain pending. During my last visit to Belgrade, I
underscored that progress on war crimes justice will
not be achieved if Serbia does not put into practice
the steps it identified in the Strategy and Action Plan.
Serbian authorities gave me assurances that immediate
action would be taken, but unfortunately none of those
commitments has been honoured.
With respect to Croatia, there continues to be
a disconnect between the official commitment to
supporting war crimes justice and what is happening in
practice. As previously reported, Croatian Government
policy is obstructing judicial cooperation in certain
war crimes cases, including Category II cases prepared
by my Office. We have listened to Croatia’s concerns,
but it must be emphasized that, whatever the intention,
current policy represents political interference with
the justice process. My Office again urges Croatia to
bring its policies in line with its commitments. These
and similar political issues are negatively impacting
national war crimes prosecutions, as my Office
warned six months ago. Concrete cases are not moving
forward, and regional judicial cooperation is under
significant stress.
My Office is further concerned that politicians
and Government officials from the region are still
undermining trust in judicial accountability for war
crimes and calling into question the independence and
impartiality of the judiciary. This poses a real risk to
the rule of law throughout the region. Reactions to
the recent arrests of 10 suspects in Orašje, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, starkly illustrated this worrying trend.
The glorification of war criminals also continues
throughout the region, as demonstrated by Republika
Srpska National Assembly’s decision to officially
decorate convicted war criminals. As long as the political
environment and mindset do not support war crimes
justice, it will be extremely difficult to meet the public’s
legitimate expectations for meaningful accountability.
Let me be clear that it is possible to reverse these
negative political trends. My Office calls upon officials
in the region to act responsibly and refrain from
politicizing ongoing investigations and prosecutions.
My Office also urges Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

and Serbia to return to constructive regional cooperation
and swiftly undertake steps to rebuild trust in judicial
accountability for war crimes. The international
community can help by providing positive incentives and
utilizing conditionality policies. As always, my Office
stands ready to work with the countries of the former
Yugoslavia and support initiatives to improve mutual
trust and move the accountability process forward.
On a more positive note, the Office of the Prosecutor
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals continues to receive numerous requests
from colleagues and Governments around the world to
assist in strengthening domestic accountability for war
crimes. At a time when international justice is the topic
of much discussion, there should be agreement that one
step forward is to ensure that national judiciaries are
able to prosecute international crimes.
We feel privileged that colleagues and partners
throughout Africa fully support the work of the
Office of the Prosecutor of Residual Mechanism and
are eager to work with my Office to develop national
judicial capacities. As just one example of what can be
done, my Office, with the generous financial support
of partners, was recently able to train 30 prosecutors
and professionals from Kenya, Rwanda, South Sudan,
Tanzania and Uganda on the prosecution of conflictrelated sexual violence.
Similarly, during my missions to the former
Yugoslavia, victims associations and prosecutors
expressed their appreciation for my Office’s support
and engagement in strengthening national capacities.
Reflecting this commitment, our publication on lessons
learned in the prosecution of conflict-related sexual
violence will now be translated for national prosecutors
in the countries of the former Yugoslavia.
With the presentation of final arguments in the
Mladić case, ICTY took another significant step closer
to completing its mandate. My Office is continuing
its downsizing accordingly. At the same time, the
transition of responsibilities from ICTY to the
Residual Mechanism continues as foreseen in Security
Council resolutions.
I would like to close by expressing my Office’s
gratitude to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon. Since
his first visit to ICTY in early 2007 until today, the
Secretary-General has provided steadfast support for
my Office’s work and the fight against impunity. On
behalf of the Offices of the Prosecutor of the ICTR,

S/PV.7829

ICTY and the Residual Mechanis, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for standing behind us and giving
us his full support, and I look forward to our continued
cooperation
with
Secretary-General-designate
António Guterres.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
On behalf of all the members of the Security
Council, I would like to express our profound gratitude
to the three briefers for their participation in this
meeting and for their detailed, useful and informative
reports. We also thank and commend them for their
excellent work.
Before giving the floor to the members of the
Security Council and the representatives of other
States, I should like to remind all speakers to limit their
statements, to the extent possible, to a maximum of
five minutes in order to allow the Security Council to
complete its work expeditiously. In that regard, I take
this opportunity to remind speakers that the presidency
shall activate the light on their microphone in order to
encourage them to complete their remarks. Delegations
wishing to make extensive statements should kindly
distribute them in writing and to deliver abbreviated
versions in the Chamber.
I now give the floor to members of the Council.
Mr. Rosselli (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish): I should
like to reiterate Uruguay’s steadfast commitment to
the work of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, and to upholding the principle
of independence of justice. My country recognizes
the significant contribution of these Tribunals to
international justice in cases of crimes against
humanity, war crimes and genocide, and their roles in
ensuring accountability and promoting reconciliation.
I shall refer first to the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia. We note with satisfaction the
continued progress of the judicial activities of that
Tribunal and the reaffirmation of the forecast that it
will finish its judicial work on time and achieve its
closure at the end of 2017. At the same time, we take
due note of the two situations that could affect that
forecast, to which President Agius referred. The first
refers to the three individuals accused of contempt of
court in the Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj case and the

16-423289/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

08/12/2016

arrest warrants issued in January 2015, which remain
pending. This situation has been highlighted by the
President and the Prosecutor of the Tribunal. The second
of them refers to the difficulties facing the Tribunal for
retaining its staff until the end of its work, in particular
officials with the greatest experience.

(ICTR), I feel a special sense of connection with the
work of the Tribunals. Back then, none of us expected
that we would still be sitting in the Security Council
23 years later considering the Tribunals’ completion
strategies. New Zealand agrees that this has taken far
too long.

As current Chair of the Informal Working Group
on International Tribunals, we will closely follow
developments in both situations and are willing to
cooperate as far as we can to reach a solution. We call upon
all members of the Organization to actively contribute
to resolving these situations and share our belief that
the interests of international justice must prevail over
circumstancial political and financial factors.

We must all take our share of the responsibility for
this situation. It is true that the Tribunals could have
done more to expedite their work, but it is also clear
that political factors have also played a major role in
this delay. Governments have not always provided the
level of cooperation required and the Council has not
been as effective or active in supporting progress as we
believe it should have been.

I will now turn to the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. We are pleased to
note the forecasts for the duration of various judicial
mandates are the same as those stipulated in the report
of 20 November 2015, including all updates. We take
note of the priority for the Mechanism of the search
and prosecution of the eight people accused by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda who are
still on the run, as well as of the importance to that end
of inter-State cooperation. We also refer to the problem
of the reintegration of persons released or acquitted and
of the dialogue that the Mechanism has with the States
who have indicated their willingness to receive one or
more of such persons.

As the ICTY enters its final year, New Zealand
agrees that its exclusive focus should remain on
completing its work by the end of 2017. Both the
Presidents’ reports and Prosecutor’s reports highlight
the challenges to be faced in meeting this deadline, but
it must be met. The Council and the United Nations
must support the ICTY in achieving this. In this regard,
we support the adoption of an incentives package for
staff members to encourage them to remain with the
ICTY until the end of their contracts. That is sensible
business planning and we commend the Tribunal for its
perseverance on this issue.

As Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, we take note with great concern
of the situation with regard to the case of the defendant
Agustin Ngirabatware and Judge Akay. The situation
is very delicate. We call on all the actors involved to
reach a solution for the benefit of justice and with the
due guarantees for all parties.
Before concluding, I want to thank the Office of
Legal Affairs and the Secretariat for their continued
support for our work, as Chair of the Group, and, on a
personal level, to highlight the great respect we have for
the authorities of the International Criminal Tribunals
who are present in the Chamber today.
Mr. Van Bohemen (New Zealand): New Zealand
remains a strong supporter of the work of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. As someone who worked on the
Security Council resolutions that established the ICTY
and the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
10/28

The cooperation of all relevant States with the
ITCY remains essential to its completion strategy. It is
axiomatic that all States are required to cooperate with
the Tribunals in order to ensure justice is delivered. That
obligation applies particularly to the States of the region.
These requirements are set under international law and
should not be subject to domestic law constraints. In
that connection, we urge Serbia to lend its full support
to the ICTY’s work. While we understand that it is
important to respect the different competencies of the
judiciary and the executive, the national obligation to
cooperate remains and cannot be ducked by suggesting
the issue is for someone else to address.
We have taken note of the deficiencies identified
by the evaluation report (S/2016/441) of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS), but at this stage
in the Tribunal’s life cycle, we believe the focus must
be on the practical and the achievable. It makes little
sense to divert precious resources from core completion
work. We therefore welcome the practical alternative
suggestions provided by the Tribunal. We are pleased
to see the Mechanism’s continued commitment to
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

maximizing effectiveness and efficiencies and we
commend the flexibility it has shown during the
transition phase with the ICTY, including through the
One Office approach and dual hatting of some staff.
New Zealand raised the important ICTR legacy
issue of access to archives issue during the Council’s
last debate in June (see S/PV.7707). We understand
and support the desire of the Rwandan Government to
have the originals of the archives located in Rwanda.
This desire is not peculiar to Rwanda. Any of us in a
similar situation would want documents critical to our
national history to be located in our own territory. We
recognize there are practical and process issues to be
worked through, and hope these can be resolved. This
is an important issue of principle.
The Mechanism’s report also highlights the
increasingly urgent need for a comprehensive solution
to the issue of relocation. We reiterate our call to
the Mechanism to develop a process for risk-based
assessments for relocation of those acquitted and for
released persons remaining in the Arusha safe house.

S/PV.7829

on the ICTR archives and the relocation of released or
acquitted persons.
Mr. Stehelin (France) (spoke in French): France
would like once again to thank and confirm its support
for the staff of the Tribunals for the work they are
undertaking in order to carry out the legal proceedings.
While the President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals is requesting a
final extension until 2017 to complete that work, it is
extremely important that he be able to count on the
engagement of all his staff until the end.
We pay tribute in particular to the commitment of
President Agius to take the lead. By adopting resolution
2306 (2016), on 6 September, which authorized the
urgent nomination of an ad hoc judge on a temporary
basis within the Appeals Chamber, the Council sought
to give its full support to these efforts. It is in this
same spirit that France supported the extension of the
mandate requested by the ICTY President in his letter
of 4 November.

As New Zealand prepares to complete its
current term on the Council, I wish to offer some
concluding thoughts on how the Council makes use
of its relationships with relevant international legal
institutions in discharging its mandate. These organs
all have their own areas of primary competence, but
they all operate at the intersection of international law
and peace and security. Overall, it is hard to escape the
impression that Council members appear less aware of
the legal and judicial contexts which could support their
work than they were when New Zealand last served on
the Council two decades ago. Politics now seems to
dominate completely and it is hard to argue that this
has made the Council more effective. The question I
want to leave with Council members is: how can we
do better?

The Tribunal will bring its work to a close in 2017,
and we recall the significant achievements of the ICTY
in the service of justice and peace. In the view of the
French delegation, it should be an opportunity to take
stock of the achievements and good practices of this
Tribunal, as well as avenues for improvement for more
effective justice. The ICTY has played a pioneering
role in bestowing its experience to other international
judicial institutions. That outstanding work must
evolve and continue to be dynamic. But more than
ever, the States of the region must show that they have
the will to put the achievements of the judiciary at the
service of stability over the long-term. They therefore
must continue to cooperate fully with the ICTY as
well as with the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council.

At the macro level, the members of the Council
need to accord greater respect to the mechanisms it
establishes for the administration of justice. While the
Council may be a political body, the judicial mechanisms
it establishes must manifest independence, transparency
and freedom from politics — the hallmarks of justice
in any credible legal system. At the more immediate
level, New Zealand encourages the Council and its
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals
to be active in monitoring the issues we have raised
in our statement, including the Mechanism’s progress

In 2016, in accordance with resolution 2256 (2015),
an assessment of the working methods of the ICTY was
conducted by the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS), which resulted in recommendations. The French
delegation welcomes the fact that a code of conduct
was annexed for judges of the Tribunal to the report of
6 July 2016 following the recommendation contained
in the OIOS report (S/2016/669). We are encouraged
by the Tribunal’s willingness to reformulate certain
recommendations, which attests to a more in-depth
exploration of finding ways for improvement and

16-4232811/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

meaningful dialogue with regard to management. More
than ever, as victims call for justice to be done, such an
effective approach must become a continual concern.
The branches of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and ICTY of the Residual
Mechanism, the role of which is temporary, are
committed to the same dynamic. France is pleased
that the institution is inspired by the good practices of
the ICTR and the ICTY and is actively seeking new
solutions to improve its functioning. In that regard,
every State must do everything possible to ensure that
this temporary entity can work in full compliance with
its statute and procedural safeguards.
Following the ICTR, the ICTY will also soon
conclude its work. If the Security Council decided to
establish those international criminal tribunals in the
1990s, it was because of its conviction that the States
concerned and their citizens would be the first to
benefit from the progressive strengthening of the rule
of law, by which the independence of the judiciary is
fully assured and the duty to remember fulfilled. Each
of those States will henceforth be the best agents to
ensure that what are known as intermediate criminals
are tried in a context of increased regional and mutual
cooperation, and lastly, in the effort towards regional
reconciliation and the preservation of memory.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China thanks President Agius, President Meron and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their respective briefings on
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
Over the past six months, the ICTY has continued to
make progress in its work. It delivered a judgment in the
appeal case of Prosecutor v. Mićo Stanišić and Stojan
Župljanin, terminated the trial case of Prosecutor v.
Nyiramasuhuko et al. (“Butare”), and made continued
progress in the trial of Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and
the appeal of Prosecutor v. Prlić et al. China expresses
its appreciation for those activities. China has taken
note of the challenges facing the Tribunal that President
Aegis and Prosecutor Brammertz referred to in their
respective reports (S/2016/976 and S/2016/976, annex
II) and hopes that the Tribunal will take measures to
enhance efficiency and overcome its difficulties. China
believes that the ICTY should implement its completion
strategy as soon as possible and conclude its work by
30 November 2017.
12/28

08/12/2016

With regard to the Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals, China congratulates it on the
official opening of its Arusha branch. China is pleased
to learn that the Residual Mechanism has taken over
all the remaining work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
1994 and 31 December 1994 (ICTR) and continues
to carry out its judicial activities. The International
Residual Mechanism has also opened the retrial of the
Stanišić & Simatović case, formulated new rules and
procedures, issued a large number of judicial decisions
and orders and cooperated with other countries
with regard to their own domestic prosecutions.
China appreciates those activities. We hope that the
International Residual Mechanism will consider the
request that it should be small, temporary and efficient,
and continue to strengthen and improve its work.
The ICTY will conclude its work by the end of
November 2017. China hopes that it will cooperate
closely with the International Residual Mechanism to
ensure the smooth transfer of its remaining work to the
Mechanism. China will continue to support the work of
the two institutions.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
thank Uruguay, which chaired the Security Council
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals,
and the Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations
for their work.
Mr. Ciss (Senegal) (spoke in French): The Senegalese
delegation welcomes this second biannual Security
Council debate convened this year on the progress in the
work of the International Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of
International Humanitarian Law Committed in the
Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 (ICTY),
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other
Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan
Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other Such
Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring
States between 1 January 1994 and 31 December 1994
(ICTR) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

The Senegalese delegation would like to take this
opportunity to congratulate Judge Carmel Agius,
President of the ICTY; Judge Theodor Meron, President
of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor
of the ICTY and Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I also
extend my thanks to Ambassador Elbio Rosselli,
Permanent Representative of Uruguay, whom I warmly
congratulate, as well as his team, for the outstanding
work carried out as Chair of the Informal Working
Group on International Tribunals.
Without any doubt, the establishment of the Criminal
Tribunals was one of the most relevant initiatives of the
United Nations and, at the same time, an important
contribution to the preservation and development of
international law, the execution of justice, international
criminal jurisprudence and the fight against impunity.
That ad hoc judicial system has also benefited from the
support of the international community, in particular
the Security Council, and the cooperation of every State
to carry out its mission. It is against that backdrop hat
we must contextualize the decision taken by Senegal to
take in prisoners of the ICTR, the implementation of
which is in its final phase.
That broad support can be explained by the
primary goal of implementing a preventive mechanism
to prevent the repetition of atrocity crimes, which
are a “shame on humankind”. Nevertheless, it is
regrettable that abominable violations of international
humanitarian law continue to be committed throughout
the world. The international community must be seized
of such violations regardless of their political interests
to show the perpetrators of those despicable crimes
that they are an affront to our collective conscience
and that the perpetrators cannot escape justice. The
same international community must also acknowledge
that the politicization of the pursuit of justice not only
compromises the neutrality and quality of the decisions
delivered but also, and above all, severely affects
international peace and stability, the preservation of
which is the raison d’être of the Council. It is, moreover,
more important than ever that national judicial systems
finally take the baton to ensure the continuity of the
efforts of the international community. It is particularly
incumbent upon States to work at the national level to
combat impunity and establish equal justice for all.
This debate is taking place in a special context
marked by the arrest of one of the Mechanism’s judges,

S/PV.7829

Mr. Aydin Sefa Akay, who was accused of belonging
to a terrorist organization. Obviously, the Senegalese
delegation is closely following that situation and
commends the work being carried out by the Office
of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals to find
a solution. And we also appreciate Turkey’s valuable
cooperation. We call on all parties to maintain dialogue
and consultations to ensure that the law — the guarantor
of peace and security — prevails.
In resolution 2256 (2015), the Security Council
called on the ICTY not only to respect the timetable for
the completion of its work, but also to reduce the duration
of trials. The issue of the reintegration of those who have
been acquitted or who have served their sentences, the
optimal use of financial and administrative resources,
access to archives, the issue of the resettlement of 14
Rwandans and the audit practices within the Tribunal
and the Mechanism to improve their functioning are,
inter alia, challenges that cannot be overlooked. The
same goes for the issue of attrition of staff, which also
deserves special attention. In that respect, we welcome
the commitment firmly demonstrated today to respect
those time frames.
Moreover, the cooperation by the ICTY in the
Office of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) review
of the Tribunal’s working methods, in accordance with
resolution 2256 (2015), is very encouraging. We remain
convinced that the process of evaluation is perfectly
compatible with respect for judicial independence. It is
also a guarantee of the proper administration of justice,
which itself remains a guarantee of the credibility of the
international criminal justice system. Furthermore, the
follow-up to the OIOS recommendations concerning
the establishment of, on one hand, a code of conduct
and a disciplinary mechanism applicable to judges and,
on the other hand, a system of centralized information
on downsizing, remain paramount to us.
Finally, the temporary nature of the Tribunal’s
mandate, as well as that of the Residual Mechanism,
implies the need to adopt management that embraces the
diversity of systems and ensure a balanced geographical
representation within it. Those are principles for which
no derogation will be tolerated, taking into account the
survival of our institutions and the future of our planet.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have carefully reviewed the reports of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

16-4232813/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

(ICTY) (see S/2016/670) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2016/669
and S/2016/975) from the past six months. We are
pleased to note that the ICTY report does not contain
information of further delays in the proceedings, which
will be completed by the end of 2017. The Tribunal,
despite being considerably behind the deadline set by
resolution 1966 (2010), will still complete its work.
There is still hope that planned time frames for judiciary
proceedings will be reduced, in accordance with
what the Security Council urged in resolutions 2193
(2014) and 2256 (2015). We call on ICTY leadership
to make every efforts to ensure that proceedings are
finished expeditiously.
The Security Council continues to take measures to
ensure the smooth and uninterrupted work of the ICTY.
Recently in the Tribunal’s statute, an ammendment was
introduced to allow it to involve a judge on the register
of the Residual Mechanism to work in the Appeals
Chamber. That concerns resolution 2306 (2016), which
was promptly adopted at the request of the Tribunal.
We believe that the Tribunal is adequately staffed
and has been provided with sufficient funding. Delays in
court proceedings, of which the Council was previously
informed, were due to, according to our estimates, more
administrative failures, such as, for example, uneven
distribution of workload among judges, imprecise
legal assessment of the complexity of cases and the
unnecessarily long preparation of cases. We understand
the desire of the leadership of the Tribunal to retain
staff with institutional memory. However, we believe
that requests for all sorts of bonuses do not meet the
conditions of service of the United Nations. They make
us wonder to what extent the Tribunal’s staff is actually
committed to its goals.
As for the case of contempt of court, initiated by
the Tribunal in connection with the concluded case of
Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj, we would like to refer to
a decision of the Security Council that approved the
strategy of completing the ICTY’s work in 2002 and
2003, a well as resolution 1966 (2010), which states
that the Tribunal must focus its efforts on judicial
prosecution and bringing to justice high-level officials
who are suspected of being responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law committed
in the former territory of Yugoslavia starting in 1991.
Cases on contempt of court obviously do not apply.
Possible options to ensure the interests of justice in
this situation, including the transfer of minor cases
14/28

08/12/2016

to national jurisdiction, are also given in the Council
resolutions to which I referred. In any case, this topic
should not have influence the strategy of closing down
the Tribunal.
It is clear that there is no relation to the task of
ensuring justice for the most serious crimes on which
the Tribunal is focused, and the identification of issues
such as the political climate and mentality in one
country or another, or the historical world view, staffing
solutions. We urge the officials of the Tribunal not to be
distracted by such trifles from the objectives set by the
Tribunal’s statute and the decisions of the Council.
My delegation has for several years advocated
an initiative to conduct an independent review of the
work in the ICTY. At the final stage of the Tribunal’s
mandate, the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) conducted such an assessment, in accordance
with resolution 2256 (2015). As we expected, in some
cases, auditors found problems to which we have
repeatedly tried to alert the Council, including the
lack of clear and sound guidelines for the duration
of proceedings. We are grateful to the OIOS for its
work. Unfortunately, the Tribunal did not accept all
the recommendations addressed to it. We hope that
the analysis of the OIOS recommendations and their
implementation will continue.
We are closely watching the work of the Residual
Mechanism. We would like to recall that, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010), the Mechanism is a
temporary, compact structure established in order to
complete the process of closing down the ICTY and the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. It is not a
new model of an international judicial authority. The
duration of the mandate of the Mechanism is limited and
conditioned by a biennial review cycle of its activities
undertaken by the Security Council.
The Mechanism’s report does not give any
preliminary forecasts for the period of consideration of
certain cases, which have been on its register for almost
a year. We make a call to fix that problem in future
reports. We expect from that body strict adherence to
efficiency and transparency, including the timing of
proceedings. We hope that the Mechanism will use
all procedural opportunities inherent in its statute,
including in the event of unforeseen circumstances.
Mr. Akahori (Japan): Japan is deeply committed
to the rule of law and fully supports the activities of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

S/PV.7829

(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals. We highly value their important
role in the fight against impunity.

(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals back to New York. I thank them for
their very comprehensive briefings.

We appreciate the Tribunal’s efforts in delivering
the Appeals Chamber’s judgment on Prosecutor v. Mićo
Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin in June, which handed
down 22-year prison sentences to those responsible
for crimes against humanity and violations of the laws
or customs of war. Japan hopes that the judgment will
help to bring justice to the region. The judgment was
delivered in line with the projected timeline despite
serious staff attrition. We commend the leadership of
President Agius and call upon the ICTY to maintain
its judicial timeline as it approaches closure at the
end of 2017. The Tribunal requires full cooperation
from Member States to carry out its mandate. We are
therefore concerned by instances of non-cooperation.
We recall that Member States are required to cooperate
fully with the ICTY. The relevant States must meet
their obligations.

My delegation welcomes the notable progress made
by the ICTY and the Residual Mechanism during the
reporting period. In particular, we wish to congratulate
the Residual Mechanism on the official launching of
its new premises in Arusha last month. We commend
the Government of Tanzania for its crucial role and
valuable contribution in that regard.

We thank the Office of Internal Oversight Services
(OIOS) for its report (S/2016/441) and recommendations.
Japan takes note of implementation efforts by the
Tribunal, which resulted in a code of conduct. While
the implementation of the OIOS recommendations
is important, we must not forget that the Tribunal’s
priority should continue to be the completion of its
judicial work by the end of next year.

Turning to the ICTY, Malaysia is reassured by
the commitment expressed by its President that the
judicial work of the Tribunal remains on track and
is to be completed by November 2017. We welcome
the progress made in the cases of Prosecutor v. Mićo
Stanišić and Stojan Župljanin, Prosecutor v. Prlić
et al. and Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić during the
reporting period.

Turning to the Mechanism, we first offer our
congratulations on the Mechanism’s opening of its
new premises in Arusha in November. We request the
Mechanism, which is now in the phase of handling the
retrial and appeals from the ICTY, to work effectively
and efficiently to deliver its judgments as projected
and, if possible, to shorten its time frame. Arresting
remaining fugitives is a priority for the Mechanism,
and we take note of the overall review by the Prosecutor
of efforts in that area. We hope that new steps based
on such a review will bring positive results, and once
again call upon all the relevant States to cooperate fully
with the Mechanism.

Malaysia takes note of the evaluation by the Office
of Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) on the methods
and work of the ICTY and the Tribunal’s response to
the OIOS report (S/2016/441). We welcome the adoption
of a code of professional conduct by the judges of the
Tribunal, in line with the OIOS recommendations. While
other recommendations of the OIOS may have some
merit, we believe that at this point the Tribunal should
focus its time and resources on completing its judicial
work within the stipulated deadline, instead of being
distracted by administrative and management issues.

Japan expresses its gratitude to the dedication of
both the ICTY and the Mechanism. We strongly hope
that the work of both bodies will help victims see the
justice that they have long awaited.
Mr. Ibrahim (Malaysia): I, too, would like to
welcome the Judges and Prosecutor representing the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia

Malaysia is encouraged by the smooth functioning
of the Residual Mechanism in assuming responsibility
for a number of functions of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY. We
reiterate our call on Member States to fully support
the Mechanism, especially in tracking the remaining
fugitives indicted by the ICTR, to enforce sentences
and to relocate those who have served their sentences
or who have been acquitted by the Tribunal.

At today’s briefing, we have again heard from Judge
Agius on how staff attrition continues to seriously
impact the work of the Tribunal and could potentially
affect its completion strategy. We believe that, on
this last leg of the Tribunal’s work, Member States
should redouble their efforts to support the Tribunal in
addressing that critical challenge.
Malaysia views the reversing trend in cooperation
with the ICTY as deeply disturbing, especially in the

16-4232815/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

context of revisionist movements in the region and the
glorification of war criminals. These are warning signs
that must not be ignored by the international community,
as they could undermine the great strides that we have
made in recent decades towards ending impunity for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. In that
regard, we urge Serbia to uphold its legal obligations
to resume cooperation with the Tribunal, including by
executing the Tribunal’s arrest warrants. We also call
on the relevant Member States in the former Yugoslavia
to intensify the pace and effectiveness of war crimes
prosecutions by their national authorities for cases
being referred to their national jurisdictions.
More than 20 years ago, the Security Council
decided to create the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda to try those responsible for serious
violations of international humanitarian law, including
genocide, mass rape and ethnic cleansing. The painful
truth is that if the Security Council had the political
will to prevent or stop the mass atrocities committed
in Rwanda and in the Balkans region and to uphold
its responsibility to maintain international peace and
security under the Charter of the United Nations,
there would have been no need for either Tribunal to
be created.
However, in the bloody aftermath of the conflicts
in Rwanda and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Security
Council owes it to the victims to bring the perpetrators
to justice for their heinous crimes. We also owe it to the
victims to remain firm in our commitment to justice
and accountability, many years later, and to fully
support the Tribunals in fulfilling their mandates until
the end of operations. We simply do not have the moral
standing to disown the Tribunals.

08/12/2016

the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY) and the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals. They are leading the fight
against impunity, holding perpetrators to account and
achieving justice for victims. That is work that is sadly
in great demand across the world today — in Syria, in
Iraq and in so many other places.
We are pleased that the ICTY’s work remains on
track as it heads towards closure in 2017. While we
regret that the Prosecutor v. Goran Hadžić trial could
not be completed, it is undeniable that progress has
been made. The Prosecutor v. Mićo Stanišić and Stojan
Župljanin appeal has concluded, substantial steps have
been taken towards completion of the Prosecutor v.
Ratko Mladić trial, and the Prosecutor v. Jadranko
Prlić et al. appeal continues to progress. Transition to
the Mechanism also continues on schedule.
We are grateful for the efficiency and downsizing
measures that have taken place in order to achieve
this, and we were happy to support the amendment to
the ICTY statute enabling the appointment of ad hoc
Appeals Chamber judges, which is a necessary practical
step on the Council’s side to enable the Tribunal to
complete its work. We recognize the difficulties caused
by staff attrition, and we appreciate the efforts made
to counteract that. We hope that staff will remain in
their roles until the end of the mandate to complete the
Tribunal’s work.

Malaysia is therefore incredulous that the priorities
of ensuring justice and due process seem to be buried
in overwhelming concerns about budget and deadlines.
There is no doubt that the historic legacy of the ICTY
and the ICTR in ending impunity and in laying the
foundation for international criminal justice will
remain long after the Tribunals’ closure. What is less
obvious is whether the Security Council will also be on
the right side of history in supporting the Tribunals and
the Residual Mechanism all the way in ending impunity.

Cooperation with the ICTY by all States remains
as important as ever. We welcome the continued
cooperation between the Office of the Prosecutor
of the ICTY and the authorities of the States in the
region. However, we are concerned that the political
environment is having a negative impact on regional
judicial cooperation, and we echo the Prosecutor’s call
for urgent steps to be taken to mitigate and reverse the
situation. We are particularly concerned that the arrest
warrants for the three individuals in the contempt cases
have still not been executed. We urge Serbia to meet its
obligation to cooperate and surrender those individuals
to the Tribunals. Lack of agreement at the regional level
to extradite war crimes suspects also severely hinders
efforts to bring prosecutions for war crimes. This
hampers reconciliation and could undermine the legacy
of the ICTY.

Ms. Mulvein (United Kingdom): At the outset,
I would like to reiterate the United Kingdom’s
continued support for and commitment to the work of

Turning to the recommendations of the Office of
Internal Oversight Services (OIOS) , we are pleased that
the ICTY has already implemented the recommendation

16/28

16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

on developing a code of professional conduct for judges.
We believe all international tribunal judges should be
subject to such codes. We also welcome the ICTY judges’
indication of their willingness to accept a disciplinary
mechanism and that they consider this desirable. We
agree, but we think it is too late in the Tribunal’s life
to implement all the OIOS recommendations. That
risks diverting resources from completing the core
functions, which must be the focus. Finally, on the
ICTY, we welcome plans for legacy work, and we will
be supporting the ICTY legacy dialogue.
Turning to the Mechanism, we are pleased with
its work in the past six months, including on ensuring
a smooth transition for the ICTY to the Mechanism.
Judicial work is proceeding efficiently, including on
the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
retrials and the appeals in the cases of Prosecutor v.
Radovan Karadžić and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj
transferred from the ICTY. We are concerned by the
situation of Judge Akay, noting that the SecretaryGeneral has asserted immunity, but Turkey has
disagreed with that position. We also note that there
are ongoing legal proceedings before the Mechanism.
We hope that an appropriate resolution can be found as
quickly as possible.
It is important that all those indicted by the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda be
apprehended and face trial before the Mechanism. We
are grateful to the Prosecutor for his ongoing efforts
to locate and arrest fugitives, and we call on all States
to cooperate to that end. Equally, as in the former
Yugoslavia, national prosecutions are essentially for
ensuring justice for all victims of crimes committed
in Rwanda. We thank the Prosecutor for his ongoing
work in that respect and encourage cooperation from
all relevant States.
We welcome the reduction in numbers of released
and acquitted persons residing in Arusha, as well as
the more efficient approach to the upkeep of those who
remain there and ongoing efforts regarding relocation.
We hope to hear positive developments in that regard in
due course.
Finally, we welcome the opening of the new
premises of the Mechanism’s Arusha branch. The
Mechanism has a vital role to play in the international
criminal justice system. I would therefore like to
close by re-emphasizing our continued support as it

S/PV.7829

carries out the residual functions of the Yugoslavia and
Rwanda tribunals.
Ms. Coleman (United States of America): The
United States extends its sincere appreciation to
President Agius, President Meron and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings today to the Security
Council as well as for their leadership and contributions
to advancing justice for victims of the worst atrocities
committed in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.
Without the diligence and determination of jurists
and staff at their tribunals, perpetrators of the worst
crimes known to humankind — genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity — could continue to live
freely in impunity, which is an unacceptable outcome.
The persistent efforts of these international criminal
tribunals resulted this year in reaching significant
milestones that serve to warn would-be perpetrators
everywhere that there will be no escape from justice.
Earlier this year, former Republika Srpska President
Radovan Karadžić was found guilty and sentenced to 40
years in prison for genocide, crimes against humanity
and violations of the laws and customs of war — a
historic conviction that once seemed impossible. Just
this week, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) commenced closing arguments in
the case of Bosnian Serb military commander Ratko
Mladić, who stands accused of genocide of Bosniaks
from Srebrenica, terrorizing the population of Sarajevo
and taking United Nations peacekeepers hostage.
The United States supports the work of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals to conclude expeditiously the retrial of the case
in Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
and the appeals proceeding in the cases of Prosecutor
v. Radovan Karadžić and Prosecutor v. Vojislav Šešelj.
The ICTY establishes facts through judicial process,
which is critical to countering those who seek to distort
facts, revise history or rewrite reality.
The United States notes with great concern the
detrimental impact of increasingly diverse and divisive
political speech in the region about the pursuit of justice
for war crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Such inflammatory rhetoric can harm regional
cooperation among the States of the former Yugoslavia,
which is essential to promoting accountability for
war crimes.
The United States would like to reiterate the
importance of full cooperation of all concerned States

16-4232817/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

with the ICTY. The United States remains concerned
that three arrest warrants for individuals charged with
contempt of court in relation to witness intimidation
in the Šešelj case have remained unexecuted in Serbia
for 22 months. Recognizing that cooperation is an
ongoing obligation essential to the functioning of the
Tribunal, the United States calls on Serbia to execute
these arrests expeditiously. Failure to fully cooperate
with the Tribunal in accordance with its statutes and
the resolutions of the Security Council compromises
the core functions of the international justice system
and must be addressed with appropriate urgency.
The United States commends recent efforts by
the Prosecutor’s Office to review its fugitive tracking
efforts and implement revised strategies to address
key challenges so that the eight remaining fugitives
from the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
may be swiftly located, arrested and brought to justice.
The United States is unwavering in its commitment
to ensuring that these fugitives are apprehended and
brought to justice, and we continue to offer a reward of
up to $5 million for information leading to the arrest or
transfer of these eight men. The United States would also
like to express our sincere appreciation for the Tribunal’s
efforts, especially the Office of the Prosecutor, in
building capacity among national prosecutors.
The pursuit of justice for victims in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia must not end with the closure of these
Tribunals. While both Tribunals have successfully tried
many high-level perpetrators, further accountability
for crimes committed depends on fair and effective
trials for alleged mid- and lower-level perpetrators in
national courts.
The United States remains deeply concerned about
the Mechanism’s casework, which has been severally
impaired while Judge Aydin Sefa Akay, who was
expected to be working on a case before the Mechanism,
remains detained in Turkey. We recall that the Security
Council designed the Mechanism in a way that provides
for judges to work remotely, except for sittings or as
directed by the President. We reiterate the importance
of judges being able to carry out this important work
on behalf of the United Nations. With this in mind, we
hope that this matter can be resolved expeditiously.
Thanks to the unrelenting dedication of these
Tribunals, the victims of horrific atrocities have
received a meaningful measure of justice. Promoting
justice and accountability is all the more critical
18/28

08/12/2016

in the present moment when leaders’ horrific acts
against civilians have so far been met with impunity in
places such as Syria and South Sudan. The successful
completion of the work of the Mechanism will serve to
prove that justice is not an afterthought in the work of
advancing international peace and security but the core
of it.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Welcoming the progress
reflected in the recent reports of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
(see S/2016/670) and International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (see S/2016/669), my delegation
considers today’s meeting and the forthcoming
adoption of a resolution reappointing the ICTY judges
and Prosecutor to be of utmost importance, in the light
of the planned closure of the Tribunal in 2017. In this
regard, I would like to commend the measures and
efforts undertaken by the President of the Tribunal
to ensure the timely conclusion of all cases before
the ICTY.
Today, as we are in the final stage of the ICTY’s
work, we should pay special attention to existing
problems and challenges that the Tribunal continues to
face, while acknowledging its well-known achievements
in combating impunity and its contribution to
international criminal justice and the rule of law.
First, I would like to raise the issue of cooperation
with the Tribunal. According to article 29 of the ICTY
statute, cooperation and judicial assistance is one of
the preconditions for the successful fulfilment of the
Tribunal’s mandate. Unfortunately, for over 22 months,
Serbia has failed to act to execute the Tribunal’s
arrest warrants for three Serbian indictees. In this
regard, we would like to underline that there can be
no justification for refraining from cooperation and we
urge the Government of Serbia to return to the path of
full compliance with its obligations.
The ICTY, the International Criminal Tribunal
for Rwanda and other international criminal courts,
including the International Criminal Court, were
created to ensure global justice and responsibility for
grave international crimes. With this in mind, we are
particularly concerned about the recent trend to suspend
or reduce cooperation with international criminal
tribunals. We are also seeing instances of States
deciding to withdraw from treaties they had previously
signed. We regret these decisions and consider them
to be a step back, undermining prevention efforts
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

and due prosecution of the most serious crimes. The
international community must come together in its
strong support for the work of the criminal tribunals
in order to protect the right to justice of all victims of
mass atrocities.
The second problematic issue noted by the
President of ICTY is staff attrition. We are concerned
about this problem and acknowledge the efforts the
Office of the President and the Registrar to address
it. Taking into consideration the potential exodus of
highly experienced experts while the ICTY’s mandate
is approaching its end, we need lend our support to
the proposals to strengthen the Tribunal’s resources in
order to address this administrative challenge.
On a different note, my delegation welcomes the
project of holding a series of legacy and closing events
under the rubric “ICTY legacy dialogues”, which has
been developed by the Tribunal to summarize best
practices from over 20 years of its work and bolster
transitional justice efforts in the region. We would
also like to mention another positive effort aimed at
gathering the Tribunal’s knowledge and expertise in a
single location by creating the first ICTY Information
Centre, to be located in the Sarajevo City Hall in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
With respect to the Mechanism, my delegation
commends its judicial activities and the issuance of more
than 800 orders and decisions since its establishment, as
well as the ongoing efforts of the Residual Mechanism
to reduce costs and improve procedures and operations.
We welcome the active work of the Mechanism with
respect to preparations to take over responsibilities for
all remaining aspects of the ICTY’s functions after
its closure next year, including preservation of the
archives. We cannot afford the luxury of forgetting
the lessons of history that were learned at a staggering
cost in human lives. Otherwise, joint efforts to prevent
horrible crimes in future will be doomed to failure.
To conclude, I would like once again to stress the
necessity of cooperation with international criminal
tribunals to ensure their effective functioning.
We urge all States to cooperate with the ICTY and
the Mechanism and to respect their mandates in full
compliance with their obligations under the relevant
Security Council resolutions.
Mr. Kandeel (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We
have read the reports under consideration today (see

S/PV.7829

S/2016/669, S/2016/670, S/2016/975 and S/2016/976)
very attentively and wish to commend the progress
made by the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR) and the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). We express our support for
their continued efforts to complete their work within
the established time frame.
We congratulate the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals following
the opening of the headquarters of the Mechanism, in
Arusha. We thank the Government of Tanzania for
hosting the Mechanism.
The Security Council, in creating the two
international criminal tribunals, reaffirmed the
principles of justice and the rule of law and thereby
demonstrated the commitment of the international
community to dealing resolutely with war crimes and
crimes against humanity; to ensuring accountability
for the perpetrators of such crimes; and to enshrining
the principle of the combat against impunity at the
international level.
Both Tribunals have made tremendous and
praiseworthy efforts in ensuring fair trials, the protection
of witnesses and reparations for victims. The ICTR has
completed its work; the ICTY will do so next year; and
the Residual Mechanism, with its two headquarters, in
The Hague and in Arusha, will take over the Tribunals’
case files. In that respect, we welcome the transfer of
power to the Residual Mechanism.
As we near the end of the ICTY’s mandate, the
Council must continue to help the Tribunal to complete
its work as soon as possible. It is vital to arrive at
effective solutions to the various challenges it faces
in this respect, in particular making the most of the
experience of the Tribunal’s staff on the eve of the
completion of its mandate.
The delegation of Egypt will continue to support
the work of the Tribunal. In that respect, we reiterate
the need to ensure the optimal use of the financial and
administrative resources available so as to facilitate the
work of the Residual Mechanism and the ICTY.
International criminal tribunals are an essential
instrument created by the international community in
order to guarantee and enshrine international law and
to prosecute those responsible for serious violations of
such law. That is why the experience gleaned in, and
the lessons learned from, the work of both Tribunals

16-4232819/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

must be studied and recorded so that they can serve as
a reference in future, so as to prevent similar problems.
Indeed, the judicial legacy of the two Tribunals belongs
to the international community as a whole. The United
Nations and its Member States must take the steps
necessary to preserve this legacy.
In conclusion, Egypt is following with great interest
the issue of the detention of one of the Mechanism’s
judges in his country of origin following the levelling
of accusations against him. We hope that current
contacts between the President’s secretariat with the
authorities of that country will allow for the finding of
a solution that makes it possible to preserve the dignity
and independence of the international judiciary, in
accordance with international law and the Charter of
the United Nations charter.
Mr. Medina Mejías (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We welcome and thank
Judge Theodor Meron, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; Judge
Carmel Agius, President of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia; and Prosecutor Serge
Brammertz for their semiannual briefings. We also
thank the Office of Legal Affairs, in particular to
Mr. Miguel de Serpa Soares and Mr. Stephen Mathias,
for their work and for their timely dialogue.
We take this opportunity also to acknowledge the
leadership of the delegation of Uruguay, Chair of the
Informal Working Group on International Tribunals.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela supports
the efforts of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to bring to justice
the perpetrators of crimes against humanity and war
crimes, in violation of international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. The work carried
out by these bodies has reaffirmed the international
community’s commitment to combat impunity for
such heinous crimes, so as to prevent their recurrence.
These efforts help to bolster the rule the law at the
international level by combating impunity and ensuring
that justice is done for the victims.
With the finalization of the work of the ICTY and the
transfer of its archives to the Residual Mechanism, we
deem it necessary to enhance cooperation between the
Mechanism and States in order to guarantee compliance
with the mandate conferred upon it in resolution 1966
(2010). This relationship is vital to helping ensure that
20/28

08/12/2016

we achieve the projected goals, particularly in terms of
the arrest of fugitives and compliance with the relevant
judicial orders.
To that end, we welcome the cooperation between
the Prosecutor’s office and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia and Croatia during the reporting
period, which represents a positive factor in bolstering
the Tribunal’s work in this transitional phase. Despite
the various difficulties encountered in this undertaking,
we urge a strengthening of the cooperative relations
between those countries and this judicial forum.
Similarly, we believe that the support of other
States and of international organizations is vital to a
successful outcome in pending cases. To that end, we
deem necessary to ensure access to documents, the
relevant information and witnesses, as well as ensuring
the protection of witnesses and their relocation, so as
to facilitate the consolidation of the rule of law in the
territory of the former Yugoslavia.
Our country also values the contributions of the
Office of the Prosecutor in bolstering the national
juridical institutions of the nations that formed part of
that territory in terms of the prosecution of war crimes
and their perpetrators.
We wish to highlight the efforts and dedication of
the ICTY in working to conclude its functions within
the established time frame, that is, by December
2017, in line with the strategy agreed in that respect.
While the judges should carry out their duties with
independence and impartiality, we are convinced that
they must conduct judicial trials and deliver their
sentences in a timely manner, in accordance with the
universal principle of due process.
In that connection, we support and recognize the
work and efforts of the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and his
team for the progress achieved and their effectiveness,
economy and transparency. Moreover, we support the
strategic plan adopted by the Residual Mechanism,
consisting of stepping up efforts to find suitable places
for the relocation of staff, thereby providing them
with appropriate assistance, which will help to reduce
overhead costs. We urge the Mechanism to maintain
its pace of work as set out in its management report in
order to ensure that there is a successful and smooth
transition from the Tribunal.
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

Finally, we reiterate our support to the Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia to continue taking the necessary
steps to complete its work in an expeditious manner
and ensure that all cases that are still being tried be
concluded without delay in 2017, just as envisaged.
Doing so will allow the international community to
fulfil its commitment to the promote the rule of law
and put an end to impunity.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We are grateful to the
honourable judges, Mr. Carmel Agius and Mr. Theodor
Meron, and to Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for
participating in today’s meeting. We are equally
grateful to Uruguay for its important work in chairing
the Working Group on the International Tribunals. The
insightful briefings provided by the judges and the
Prosecutor are meaningful instances of the important
work being performed by the International Tribunals,
the establishment of which by the Security Council
was a decisive initiative for preserving the ideals of
international justice and ensuring the prevalence of
justice over impunity. We fully support the work of
the Tribunals, being aware that their legacy will leave
a decisive imprint by strengthening international
criminal justice.
We acknowledge the assessment by Judge Carmel
Agius and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz on the
significant progress achieved in concluding the work
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
(ICTY), the recommendation for the completion
strategy and the delivery of its final verdicts before its
closure by the end of 2017. We are, however, concerned
about staff attrition in the ICTY. In our view, a viable
solution, with support by Member States, should be
found to counter that trend in order to allow the Tribunal
to complete its mandate in a smooth and timely manner.
We recognize the efforts of the Tribunal to complete
its work expeditiously, as well as the judges’ efforts to
identify the means to speed up pending cases. In that
regard, we urge the Republic of Serbia to cooperate
fully with the ICTY by handing over, without delay, the
three individuals indicted whose arrest warrants have
yet to be executed, in order to allow the Tribunal to
finalize its work. We also call on other countries of the
former Yugoslavia to cooperate with the Tribunal fully
and in good faith.
Regarding the International Criminal Tribunal for
Rwanda (ICTR), we stress the importance of States’
cooperation with the International Residual Mechanism

S/PV.7829

for Criminal Tribunals. As such, we call on the States
concerned to investigate, arrest prosecute or extradite,
in accordance with their applicable international
obligations, all fugitives accused of genocide and crimes
against humanity residing in their territories. We take
note and commend the Mechanism cooperation with the
countries of the former Yugoslavia and with Rwanda
by keeping the authorities updated on its activities on
the transition of responsibilities and in the provision of
assistance to national jurisdictions. We acknowledge
that the Mechanism continues to draw upon best
practices and lessons learned from the ICTY and ICTR
in pursuing ways to improve its operations, procedures
and working methods and to maintain flexibility in its
staff assignments in order to maximize effectiveness
and efficiency.
We commend the construction and inauguration
last November of the Mechanism’s new premises in
Arusha, with dedicated archives and facilities and
allowing for the collocation of the ICTR Mechanism.
As Judge Meron highlighted,
“[it] stands not only as a symbol of accountability
and the rule of law, but as a new model of and
for international justice ... that must succeed if
international justice and the fight to end impunity
are themselves to succeed in the long run.”
We equally welcome the appointment by the
Secretary-General of Mr. Olufemi Elias as the new
Registrar for the Mechanism.
It is with great concern that we learned of the arrest
of Judge Aydin Sedaf Akay. We appeal to the Turkish
Government for his release. His detention violates the
principle of the independence of justice and the judges’
privileges and immunities, thereby creating a feeling of
uncertainty for other judges.
Finally, we would like to highlight that the tenets of
international criminal justice embodied in the Criminal
Tribunals for the Former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
were crucial for the recovery processes following the
appalling events that occurred in those territories.
The establishment of the Tribunals as a response to
the atrocities committed in the former Yugoslavia and
in Rwanda were instrumental in preserving trust in
international law and ensuring that those responsible
for serious human rights violations and violations of
international humanitarian law faced trial and were held
accountable, that judicial mechanisms were put in place
as a deterrent and a warning that such crimes would

16-4232821/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

08/12/2016

not left unpunished and that redress to the victims was
guaranteed. Ultimately, the Tribunals made a tangible
contribution to the fight against impunity and the
strengthening of international criminal law.

genocide. We hope that the measures adopted by the
Prosecution will bear fruit, and once again we call on
States that may have information to make it available
without delay.

The President (spoke in Spanish): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Spain.

No international tribunal can fulfil its mandate
without the essential cooperation of States, which, let us
not forget, is an obligation under international law. We
must recall once again that Serbia must implement the
orders of arrest issued by the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia, and return to the path of full compliance
that it always followed in the past, whatever the nature
of the proceeding.

First of all, I want to join the other members of the
Council, and I believe that we are all together in this
regard, in thanking the Ambassador and representative
of Uruguay for the excellent work he has done and
continues to do, together with his team, at the helm
of the Informal Working Group on International
Criminal Tribunals.
I would also like to commend the efforts of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), headed by Judge Agius, for
adapting to the completion strategy. In fact, all of the
sentences it has delivered this year have been within
the established deadlines. Such work is praiseworthy
given that the ICTY has achieved its goal despite the
complex circumstances it has faced, especially due to
staff attrition. We certainly trust in the capacity of the
Tribunal to overcome such difficulties and complete its
operations next year, according to plan. My country will
support the extension of the mandates of the judges and
the Prosecutor for the periods that have been requested.
The International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals that Judge Meron has been
honourably leading for more than four years now has
become a model institution for its ability to apply the
lessons learned from previous experiences with a view
to ensuring both effectiveness and transparency in the
management of delivering justice at the highest level.
Since that is of the utmost importance within a justice
system, we trust that the Tribunal will continue to
operate in that same manner.
Regarding the work of the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR) and the ICTY, the smooth
and efficient transitions to the Residual Mechanism are
most noteworthy. It was not easy, but was achieved in
the case of the Rwanda Tribunal, and it appears that
the same will happen for the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The operations of both institutions seem
to be satisfactory, but some concerning issues remain.
Eight defendants of the Tribunal for Rwanda are still
on the run, which is an unacceptable challenge to the
law and an intolerable affront to the victims of the Tutsi
22/28

One year after the closure of the Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia, it is more important than ever that
the countries of the region take over and continue with
a true commitment to investigating and prosecuting
pending war crimes caes, which remain insufficient in
pace and number. A degree of political accountability
and a continued effort to ensure respect for the rule of
law are needed in order to educate new generations and
promote true reconciliation based on acknowledgement
of the facts, and in which there is no historical
revisionism, denial of the facts and lawfully proven
crimes, or glorification of perpetrators.
I conclude by reiterating the strong support of
Spain for the work, first, of the Tribunals, and now
of the Mechanism, which are evidence of the firm
commitment of the international community to
combating impunity. Their pioneering jurisprudence
has opened up new paths in international law, and
their work has given hope to many victims, not only
in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, but around the
world by demonstrating that, in spite of appearances,
justice is possible when there is enough political resolve.
It is now our responsibility to preserve the legacy of the
Tribunals as testimony to the past, but also as proof of
the strength of law and value of justice, and as a lesson
to future generations so that the terrible events that led
to their creation are never repeated.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Vukašinović (Bosnia and Herzegovina): We
too wish to extend our gratitude to the leadership of the
International Tribunal on Former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

Tribunals for their respective reports and today’s
detailed briefings on the progress of legal proceedings,
the completion strategy implementation and the transfer
of the Tribunal’s functions to the Mechanism.
We are entering a final chapter in the work of the
ICTY. It is a culmination of all the efforts to bring
to justice those responsible for the horrific crimes
committed in the former Yugoslavia. Our continued
strong support is therefore as important as ever.
Furthermore, their legacy is important for the future
of international criminal justice. We note the continued
progress and steady work of the ICTY in its last
reporting period. We further acknowledge in that regard
the Tribunal’s commitment to completing its work
expeditiously by a targeted date, the judges’ efforts in
identifying further measures to expedite the pending
cases, and the overall effort to ensure the smooth
transfer of functions to the Residual Mechanism, in
accordance with resolution 1966 (2010). We encourage
the Tribunal to make every effort to meet the targets of
its completion strategy and forecast delivery dates of
judgements in order to avoid any further delays.
During all this time, the cooperation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina with the ICTY has remained steadfast and
full, and will continue as such with the Mechanism.
Since the very beginning, Bosnia and Herzegovina has
fully cooperated with the ICTY and implemented all its
decisions and rulings. Our support for the work of the
ICTY demonstrates our commitment to the rule of law
and sustainable peace.
The expiration date for the pursuit of justice will
not arrive in 2017, nor is the delivery of justice solely
dependent on the remaining work of the Mechanism.
Further accountability depends also on the efforts
of national judicial systems in the region, as well as
on their mutual, successful and strong cooperation.
Bosnia and Herzegovina remains committed to further
strengthening its national judicial system at all levels
in order to bring to justice the persons responsible
for atrocity crimes. We have adopted a justice sector
reform strategy for the period 2014-2018 that will
contribute to the long-term reinforcement of the rule
of law and further consolidate the judicial system,
including measures to improve judicial independence
and efficiency.
At the same time, the implementation of the
national war crimes strategy continues to improve the
consistency of juridical practices throughout the entire

S/PV.7829

country at all levels. The implementation of the strategy
is a complex process in which many institutions of
Bosnia and Herzegovina participate at all levels of
authority. Despite numerous challenges, important
results have been accomplished. That is reflected in
a steady increase in the efficiency of prosecutions of
war crimes cases and certain progress in resolving
outstanding Category II cases, as well as in issuing
important indictments. In that regard, we welcome in
particular the support of the European Union for the
implementation of the strategy, and the support of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations Development Programme,
principally in connection with witness protection
activities and the appropriate assistance and support
to victims.
We are also pleased that the European Union has
agreed to extend the joint European Union-ICTY
Training Project for National Prosecutors and Young
Professionals from the former Yugoslavia, as it has
played a very important role in building the capacities
of national justice sectors for the past eight years in
order to ensure an efficient transition from the ICTY to
national war crimes prosecutions.
We also remain committed to the promotion of
stronger and more coordinated regional cooperation
as the best possible continuation of the work of the
Tribunal and the preservation of its legacy. In the joint
efforts to deliver justice for numerous victims of our
region lies the true strength of reconciliation, while
in their remembrance and testimony lie a lesson and a
reminder for future generations.
We welcome the continued activities carried out
by the Residual Mechanism in the reporting period in
increasingly assuming its designated responsibilities,
and hope that the Mechanism will draw and build upon
the best practices of the ICTY and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in order to fulfil
its mandate.
The closure of the ICTY does not imply the end of
my country’s fight against impunity. Fighting impunity
in a complex, multinational State is a prerequisite
for achieving national reconciliation and long-term
stability in the country and the region. In that regard,
processing war crimes, regardless of the national or
religious origin of the perpetrators and victims, is of
crucial importance to achieving our goals of building a

16-4232823/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

peaceful and prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina that
is fully integrated into the European Union.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mrs. Rugwabiza (Rwanda): At the outset, let me
congratulate the delegation of Spain on its assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
Let me also congratulate the delegation of Senegal for
the exceptional work done during its presidency in the
month of November.
I thank Judge Theodor Meron, President of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals; Judge Carmel Agius, President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia; and Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and Prosecutor of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I also thank all
previous speakers.
As we reflect on the activities of the Residual
Mechanism for International Tribunals, let me
reiterate our belief that, despite serious shortcomings,
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR) produced a substantial body of jurisprudence,
including definitions of the crime of genocide, crimes
against humanity, war crimes and rape as a weapon
at war, as well as forms of responsibility, such as
superior responsibility.
The Court also went further to conclude, in its
judicial notice on 2 September 1998, that genocide
was indeed committed in Rwanda against the Tutsi as
a group, and, on 16 June 2006, the Appeals Chamber
issued a judicial notice that it was “a fact of common
knowledge” that “between 6 April and 17 July 1994,
there was a genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic
group”, and the Appeals Chamber also issued a judicial
notice that

08/12/2016

Despite that, however, let me express our concern
about ongoing attempts by perpetrators of genocide
and their henchmen to deny the occurrence of the 1994
genocide committed against the Tutsi in the names
of scholars, the media and politicians, and to distort
facts and attempt to rewrite history. As such actions
continue to be an ugly shared reality, we call upon
States Members of the United Nations, individuals,
institutions and the broader international community to
denounce, in no uncertain terms, such attempts to deny
or trivialize acts of genocide, or to minimize its scale.
We not only call on Member States and all concerned to
denounce those actions, we also exhort them to call to
account all those who indulge or support the denial of
genocide or revisions of genocides.
It is also regrettable that none of the remaining
ICTR indicted fugitives have been arrested in the
past five years, in addition to other suspects against
whom there is ample and quite indisputable evidence.
We once again call on Member States, especially
those harbouring genocide fugitives, to honour their
obligations to the Charter of the United Nations and the
Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the
Crime of Genocide to arrest, and place all suspects on
trial, in accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions, or extradite them to where they can be
tried, including in Rwanda. Anything short of that
raises serious questions as to the credibility of Member
States’ stated commitment to international justice.
We are equally concerned by the worrying pattern of
early releases of convicted genocide masterminds. The
observed pattern of reducing the sentences of genocide
convicts on appeal is quite alarming.

“there is no reasonable basis for anyone to dispute
that, during 1994, there was a campaign of mass
killings intended to destroy, in whole or at least in
very large part, Rwanda’s Tutsi population”.

We commend recent efforts by the Government
of Canada, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the
United States Government for recent arrests and
extraditions to Rwanda, and hope that more countries
will do so in respect of genocide suspects residing in
their territories. We also welcome the prosecution and
subsequent convictions of Octavien Ngenzi and Tito
Barahira in the Cour d’assises in Paris, as well as the
recent confirmation through appeal of the sentence of
Pascal Simbikangwa.

We believe that those were legal doctrines and tests
for assessing components of the crime of genocide,
including the prosecution of 93 individuals, mainly the
masterminds. That stood as an important contribution
to the pursuit of justice after genocide, to reconciliation
and to healing in my country, Rwanda.

We regret that the status of progress in monitoring
of cases referred to national courts outside Rwanda
remains quite disappointing, while the procedures in
two cases referred to Rwanda in 2012 and 2013 are well
advanced. Last year, we noted with concern the decision
by the French prosecution to drop charges against

24/28

16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

Wenceslas Munyeshyaka, a decision that contradicts
the nature and scale of the crimes committed in the
light of available evidence.
The crime of genocide is imprescriptible — we will
not cease to repeat that point. Rwanda will continue
to legally pursue and seek answers from individuals,
institutions and Governments for the allegations
of acts of omission or commission, without which
the genocide could have either been prevented, or
deterred expeditiously, or, at the very least, we expect
the Member States to refuse to grant safe havens to
perpetrators of genocide.
Allow me to come back to an issue that is important
to my Government, that of the ICTR archives. While
we have, on many occasions and at different levels,
expressed our view on the issue of the archives and on
the urgent need for them to be relocated to Rwanda,
while remaining the property of the United Nations,
we are concerned by the lack of engagement by
stakeholders, as well as the unilateral decision to store
the genocide archives in a specific location without
involving Rwanda. In that regard, I wish to state that
the fate of those important pieces of our history cannot
be decided merely on the basis of budgetary, logistical
or administrative considerations.
Rwanda also wishes to clarify to the Security
Council, and put on record, that a significant part
of those documents, which comprise today’s ICTR
archives, were obtained from Rwanda and were released
only to provide evidence in court, not for possession.
They are yet to be returned to Rwanda.
The ICTR archives are the most comprehensive
account of the 1994 genocide against the Tutsis, a piece
of history that my country will not stop demanding
to have restored to it — for the genocide happened in
Rwanda, not on the moon, and that is where that part of
our history belongs. Should any party have problems
with our request, which is legitimate, we are open to
engaging in a candid conversation. That is what we are
asking for in order to address our outstanding demand.
In conclusion, let me assure everyone here of my
country’s unwavering commitment to work with all
Member States and with the United Nations to bring
to justice all perpetrators, deniers or revisionists of the
genocide against the Tutsi who are still at large.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I give the floor
to the representative of Croatia.

S/PV.7829

Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): Allow me first to
welcome the Presidents of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Judges
Agius and Meron, as well as Prosecutor Brammertz.
I thank them for today’s briefings and reports, and
reassure them again of Croatia’s full support for their
continuous efforts to ensure accountability and promote
the fight against impunity.
Last month we marked the sorrowful twentyfifth anniversary of the tragedy of the Croatian city
of Vukovar. This is no ordinary event for Croatia;
on the contrary, the tragedy of Vukovar has a special
place in our history and our memory, so I pay a tribute
to Vukovar by starting my speech today in this way.
Besieged for three long months in 1991, that once
prosperous baroque city on the Danube was leveled
to the ground with 6.5 million projectiles. Finally, on
18 November 1991, the city fell into the hands of its
invading oppressors.
Today, 938 white crosses in the Vukovar cemetery
recall some of the victims — those exhumed from mass
graves in and around the city. This includes the site at
Ovčara, where some 270 sick and wounded were taken
from the Vukovar hospital and brutally executed. The
crosses also stand as a reminder of the 86 children
killed during the siege, the youngest being a sixmonth-old infant. Some 291 persons from Vukovar are
still missing.
For the horror of Vukovar, which at the time was
the largest massacre in Europe after the Second World
War, the ICTY convicted two persons. One has died in
the meantime; the other was sentenced to 10 years in
prison and released early. Such a misbalance between
the magnitude of crime and the smallness of justice
served is something we shall always have in mind while
making the final, historical evaluation of the Tribunal.
Throughout the years, Croatia has spoken
extensively in this Chamber on the subject at hand. Our
position regarding the ICTY is well known. So while
we face the Tribunal’s final chapter in its 23 years of
existence, let me just add the following.
It is important to note that regional cooperation
in criminal matters is evolving not in a vacuum, but
against the backdrop of conditions so clearly described
in the reports before us. These circumstances must
change; they must improve in order to fully pave the
way for the advanced regional cooperation that we long

16-4232825/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

for. Any assessment of this complex field must take that
into account.
The judiciary in some parts of the region, while
still struggling with inherent deficiencies, appears also
to be increasingly subject to unwarranted interference
as regards the prosecution of war crimes. For instance,
in Bosnia and Herzegovina we note with concern
inconsistencies in the prosecutorial approach, depending
on the nationality of the accused, thus resulting in
different laws and legal institutions being involved in
war crimes prosecutions against individuals belonging
to the different constituent nations in that country.
We emphasize the need to establish a consistency
of jurisprudence across the country and to achieve
better harmonization of case law in criminal matters.
In parallel, the level of expertise needs to be improved
in order to ensure international and European standards
in the prosecution of war crimes, as well as consistency
in the evidentiary and legal characterization of cases.
We emphasize once again the utmost importance of
refraining from any form of manipulation or bias in
investigation and prosecution processes. The work of
the judiciary must remain impartial and independent,
outside and above daily politics. That goes both for
cases transferred by ICTY to national courts and to
those initiated by domestic prosecutors.
Croatia, as a State member of the European Union
(EU) whose judicial system was under intense scrutiny
during its successful accession to the EU and with an
established record of accomplishment in prosecuting
war crimes, stands ready to assist its neighbours in that
regard. Croatia will not be deterred in its staunch support
for the European and Euro-Atlantic perspective of the
region, in particular that of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
the best impetus for the strengthening its institutions
and the independence of its judiciary, as well as for
guaranteeing the equality of its constituent peoples.
Let me reiterate again that full cooperation with
ICTY must be ensured and that both the Tribunal and
the Mechanism must receive all necessary support to
complete their mandates on time. Croatia is carefully
following all remaining cases before the ICTY and
the Mechanism and expects their efficient and swift
conclusion. While ICTY has irreversibly shaped
contemporary international criminal justice and the
world’s attitude towards impunity, let us not forget that
the work is not done yet and that countless victims are
still waiting for justice to be served. In this regard,
26/28

08/12/2016

the final chapter in the work of the Tribunal and the
Mechanism must also live up to expectations, in
particular with regard to the scrupulous interpretation
and appropriate implementation of international
humanitarian and human rights law.
Finally, Croatia is considering with interest the
proposal developed within the Tribunal for a series of
legacy and closing events. We are ready to take part
in these events, share our experiences and engage in
discussions on how best to ensure its lasting legacy.
The President (spoke in Spanish): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Backović (Serbia): I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to speak to the Council for the first time as
representative of the Republic of Serbia. Let me welcome
the Presidents and the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY)
and the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals. I thank them for their semi-annual reports.
The fight against impunity for serious international
crimes is a milestone for the principle of the rule of law
at the international level. The unambiguous willingness
of States to cooperate with ICTY regarding all acts that
the Security Council recognizes in Tribunal’s statute
as serious international crimes should be viewed as
a contribution to that fight. Serbia’s contribution in
that regard is best evidenced by the statistics on its
cooperation with the ICTY. Parallel to that cooperation,
the authorities of my country continue to fight impunity
for core international crimes through proceedings
before national courts.
The Republic of Serbia has handed over 45 defendants
to the Tribunal out of the total of 46 whose surrender
had been demanded from Serbia. One defendant
committed suicide before he could be handed over to the
Tribunal. Of that number, 14 defendants were arrested
in the Republic of Serbia; 4 defendants were arrested
abroad within the framework of cooperation between
national security services with foreign agencies; and
27 defendants voluntarily surrendered.
Serbia also gave ICTY Prosecutors free access
to important evidence located in Serbia, such as
documents, archives and witnesses. So far, Serbia
has positively resolved 2,151 out of 2,172 requests
for assistance received from the Office of the ICTY
Prosecutor, and 7 requests for assistance from the
Office of the Mechanims Prosecutor. Serbia has allowed
16-42328

08/12/2016

ICTY and ICTR

757 witnesses to testify freely despite their right and/or
obligation to withhold testimony due to State, military
or official secrets. Various defence teams issued 1,332
requests, and no pending requests for assistance or
disputes in that regard have been recorded. Serbia
carried out all 11 requests for witness protection. It
is also important to note that Government agencies
successfully monitored all the provisional release
cases and ensured that all the accused were returned to
detention at the ICTY’s request. The Serbian authorities
are currently monitoring two provisional release cases.
In addition to cooperating with the ICTY, Serbia
remains committed to improving the efficiency of
domestic war crime proceedings, as evidenced by the
obligations that Serbia has undertaken in accordance
with its action plan under chapter 23 of its national
strategy for the prosecution of war crimes, adopted by
the Serbian Government earlier this year, as well as by
the fact that eight indictments for war crimes against
15 individuals have been confirmed in Serbia in 2016.
Accountability for core international crimes,
regardless of the national, ethnic or religious status of
the perpetrators and victims, as well as reconciliation
and cooperation in the region, continue to be priorities
for Serbia. However, it is important to note that not
all of those goals can be attained by Serbia acting
unilaterally; for that, regional cooperation is necessary.
Serbia is committed to improving that cooperation, and
of course a similar commitment on the part of other
countries in the region is needed, too.
We are aware that the fact that a new war crimes
prosecutor has not been elected has caused some delays
in implementing the strategy in Serbia, but I am pleased
to inform the Council that the new election process
has almost been completed. It must be carried out in
accordance with our Constitution and the relevant
laws, and with full respect for the autonomy of the
public prosecutor’s office and the independence and
democratic proceedings of the National Assembly. None
of those authorities should be exposed to any pressure
or inappropriate internal or external influences when
deciding on candidates for the position of war crimes
prosecutor. However, the war crimes prosecutor’s
office has been performing its duties diligently, as the
number of confirmed indictments testifies. That is
also in line with Serbia’s commitment to strengthening
its institutions, regardless of who the leaders of those
institutions are.

S/PV.7829

Despite the clear legal arguments to the contrary,
there is still criticism concerning the case of the
Prosecutor v. Jojić et al. case in the new report of the
Tribunal (S/2016/670). According to arrest warrants
issued by the ICTY Trial Chamber in a case of contempt
of court, Serbia is once again facing accusations of the
non-extradition of three individuals, Petar Jojić, Vjerica
Radeta and Jovo Ostojić. In that regard, I would like to
remind the Council of the decision of the Belgrade High
Court issued on 18 May, which stated that in this case the
legal conditions for executing the Tribunal’s warrants
were not met, because our law on cooperating with the
ICTY stipulates that legal grounds for executing ICTY
arrest warrants are provided only by indictments for
core statutory crimes — such as grave breaches of the
Geneva Conventions of 1949; violations of the laws or
customs of war; genocide, and so forth — as opposed
to indictments for contempt of court. Naturally, the
Serbian law on cooperation with the ICTY closely
follows the provisions of the ICTY Statute.
By its adoption and full implementation of its
law on cooperation with the ICTY, Serbia has proved
its commitment to prosecuting all the crimes that the
Security Council has listed in the ICTY statute. Under
Serbia’s Constitution, our courts operate autonomously
and independently, and pass judgement in accordance
with the Constitution, the country’s laws and the
generally accepted rules of international law and other
ratified international treaties.
Serbia has never failed to execute an ICTY arrest
warrant based on the ICTY statute and the generally
accepted rules of international law. The Belgrade
High Court decision does not preclude similar future
cooperation. However, there is no legal basis for the
extradition in this case. The French authorities applied
an identical provision of French law to an identical
situation in refusing extradition in the case of Florence
Hartmann. That decision was not reported to the
Security Council as improper in any way. To sum up,
the statute simply does not provide for the surrender of
indictees accused of being in contempt of court. That
is not written in the statute. Presumably, if the Council
had intended that indictment for crimes other than
serious crimes could serve as a basis for extradition, it
would have written that into the statute. Article 29, as
mentioned, does not provide for that, and I invite the
Council to take a look at it. Nor does any other provision
in the statute. That interpretation does not succeed, and
probably would not succeed under the domestic laws of

16-4232827/28

S/PV.7829

ICTY and ICTR

the countries of most of the members of the Council. It
is very possible that the Council’s intention of providing
for the Tribunal’s prosecution and personal jurisdiction
only of serious crimes has to do with the resources that
the Council was able to dedicate to it at the time.
The second point that I would like to make has
to do with the confirmation of the judgement in the
case of Mr. Đukić. That judgement was rendered by
the authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and since
Mr. Đukić is now in Serbia and Belgrade, the judgement
has to be confirmed. The confirmation process has
so far taken a year. Six hearings were held at which
Mr. Đukić did not appear, owing to health problems,
for which he presented doctor’s notes as evidence. As a
result, the judge has ordered his health to be assessed by
an expert witness to decide whether he is well enough
to be present at the confirmation hearing. Serbia has
not refused or failed to confirm the judgement. I do not

28/28

08/12/2016

believe that the period of a year that has elapsed so far,
compared with the length of time that the Tribunal has
taken in some cases, is excessive. There is therefore no
reason to point to this case with any criticism. Needless
to say, Serbia is committed to respecting all of its
international and bilateral agreements in that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to point out that Serbia’s
cooperation with the ICTY has been second to none.
Serbia remains committed to contributing actively to
the Tribunal’s efforts to accomplish its mission, as
well as to effectively prosecuting war crimes before its
domestic courts. That is the only way we can achieve
justice for the victims, regardless of their national,
ethnic or religious origin. We will continue to strive for
reconciliation, cooperation and stability in the region.
The citizens of all the former Yugoslav republics
deserve it.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

16-42328
