A /75/PV.99

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-fifth session

99th plenary meeting

Monday, 30 August 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bozkir . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Turkey)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 14 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation
of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major
United Nations conferences and summits in the
economic, social and related fields
Draft resolutions (A/75/L.125 and A/75/L.126/
Rev.1)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Costa Rica to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.125
Mr. Carazo (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): Costa
Rica, along with Mexico and Slovenia and supported
by a large number of sponsors, is pleased to present
to the General Assembly draft resolution A/75/L.125,
entitled “World Wetlands Day”, which was developed
as an effective follow-up to resolution XIII.1 of the
thirteenth meeting of the Conference of the Contracting
Parties to the Convention on Wetlands of International
Importance especially as Waterfowl Habitat, in which
the Conference unanimously invited the United
Nations to recognize 2 February of each year as World
Wetlands Day.
Wetlands are vital to people and nature given their
intrinsic value and the benefits and services that they
provide, which can be measured in billions of dollars
every year. Such ecosystems directly or indirectly
supply the majority of fresh water in the world for both
human and animal consumption and for irrigation.

They provide fertile areas for a wide range of crops,
including rice, which is of crucial importance to a
large part of humankind, fisheries and other sources
of nutrition for billions of people who depend on those
coastal wetlands.
I myself have had the opportunity to plant rice in
wetlands. It is an amazing experience to see how day
by day the interaction between water and plant matter
is transformed into life and food. It is also important
to highlight that wetlands are also crucial to the
efforts to regulate the global climate. For example,
peatlands, mangroves and seagrasses naturally store
carbon. Peatlands cover only 3 per cent of the Earth’s
surface but they store 30 per cent of all the Earth’s
carbon. Mangroves, coral reefs and floodplains prevent
disasters caused by floods during extreme climatic
events, being important to nature-based solutions for
adaptation and resilience.
Despite all the benefits that they provide, wetlands
have been seriously threatened for several decades.
Wetlands are disappearing three times faster than
forests. According to the Global Wetland Outlook 2018,
35 per cent of wetlands have been lost since 1970.
Recent assessments by the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem
Services concluded that 75 per cent of the Earth’s
land surface has been significantly altered by human
actions, including the loss of 85 per cent of wetland
area, making them the ecosystems with the highest rate
of deterioration, loss and degradation.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-23489 (E)

*2123489*

A/75/PV.99

Wetlands are essential to achieving the United
Nations Sustainable Development Goals. There is
an overwhelming lack of awareness of the benefits
and services they provide, so if this draft resolution
is adopted, it could leverage the considerable global
platform of the United Nations to strengthen efforts to
promote the wise use of wetlands and raise the level of
attention on this important issue.
We are confident that this international day will
further encourage Governments to promote campaigns,
actions and habits towards those goals. Furthermore,
the support of other actors, like the media, the private
sector and citizens, would help accelerate their
conservation and wise use.
The final result that we present today for the
consideration of the Assembly is a sign of the
commitment of all delegations to this common cause.
We commend the constructive and positive attitude of
those who joined us in producing a robust document
to highlight the crucial role of wetlands. We also
thank those countries accompanying Costa Rica in
co-sponsoring this draft resolution and the Ramsar
Convention on Wetlands of International Importance
Especially as Waterfowl Habitat for its guidance during
this process.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burkina Faso to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.126/Rev.1.
Mr. Tiare (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French): As
we are about to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.126/
Rev.1, solemnly proclaiming 7 October each year as
World Cotton Day, I would like to pay tribute to the
hundreds of millions of people worldwide for whom
the cultivation of cotton is a vital resource. Today is an
important day for them and I would like to congratulate
the member countries of the Cotton-4 — Benin, Cote
d’Ivoire, Mali, Chad and my own country, Burkina
Faso — as well as all of the sponsors for having placed
this issue on the agenda of the General Assembly.
We note that cotton, considered white gold in many
countries, is a natural fibre that provides both cloth and
food, thus contributing to improved food security and
nutrition. Moreover, its cultivation continues to make
enormous strides in sustainability and environmental
responsibility and helps to reduce poverty by
providing sustainable and decent jobs to millions of
people worldwide.
2/7

26/08/2021

According to statistics, cotton is grown in more
than 100 countries on 2.5 per cent of the world’s arable
land — some 35 million hectares — making cotton one
of the most widely grown crops in terms of land use.
Cotton is also a highly traded agricultural product, with
over 150 countries involved in its export or import.
In addition, cotton biodegrades faster than synthetic
alternatives, reducing the amount of plastics that enter
our environment.
Despite all its benefits and obvious popularity, the
role of cotton as a catalyst for sustainable development
in least developed and developing countries suffers
from a lack of visibility as we enter the decade of action
of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. That
is why, through the adoption of this draft resolution,
we wish to fill this legitimate need for visibility and
recognition of the role of cotton in the sustainable
development process.
Thus, the declaration of World Cotton Day will
undoubtedly contribute to raising awareness in the
international community of the important contribution
of cotton to the achievement of the 2030 Agenda.
That is why, on 7 October each year, the international
community and cotton stakeholders will celebrate
World Cotton Day, raising awareness among the target
public of the many advantages of cotton, from its
qualities as a natural fibre to the many benefits derived
from its production, processing, trade and consumption
throughout the world. In view of the importance of
this day, which enables us to elevate the livelihoods
of the millions of people involved in the production of
cotton and related industries, I call on all delegations
to adoption this critical draft resolution on behalf of its
sponsors and all of the countries that are members of
the Cotton-4.
I would like to thank all the delegations that
actively participated in the negotiation process for
their commitment, their constructive spirit and their
flexibility that made it possible to submit a consensual
text for adoption. I am very grateful to all the delegations
that have already sponsored the draft resolution and I
invite those that have not yet done so to do so now.
The President: Before we proceed to take a decision
on the draft resolutions, delegations wishing to make a
statement in explanation of vote before the voting on
either or both of the draft resolutions are invited to do
so now in one intervention, Before giving the floor for
explanations of vote before the voting, may I remind
21-23489

26/08/2021

delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Vigersky (United States of America): The
United States will join the consensus on draft resolution
A/75/L.126/Rev.1, and we thank Mali and Burkina Faso
for their facilitation. We note that while cotton plays an
important role in improving the livelihoods of millions
of people, we continue to see labour rights abuses in the
cotton sector, and we cannot overlook the exploitation
of those workers. On paragraph 7, we urge the United
Nations, civil society and the private sector to uphold the
labour rights of all workers, including in cotton supply
chains, and to stand firmly against the uses of child and
forced labour across the industry. We further note that
cotton, as a water-intensive crop, presents an important
opportunity for improved water resource management.

A/75/PV.99

United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
the United States of America, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.125?
Draft

resolution

A/75/L.125

was

adopted

(resolution 75/317).
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.126/Rev.1, entitled
“World Cotton Day”.
I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly

With many agricultural regions facing water
stress, the United States encourages the development
of on-farm water management, efficient irrigation and
other innovations to support a sustainable cotton sector.
The United States reaffirms its explanation of position
on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, as
delivered on 1 September 2015 (see A/69/PV.101).

and Conference Management): I should like to

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/75/L.125, entitled “World
Wetlands Day”.

State of Bolivia, Brazil, Burundi, Cameroon, the Central

I now give the floor to the representative of
the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.125, and in addition to the delegations listed in
that document, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria, Andorra,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Belarus, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, the
Central African Republic, China, Cuba, the Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon,
The Gambia, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, the Republic
of Korea, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, South Africa,
Suriname, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, TimorLeste, Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the

announce that, since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.126/Rev.1, and in addition to the delegations
listed in that document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Algeria,
Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, the Plurinational
African Republic, China, Comoros, Costa Rica, Cuba,
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Djibouti, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, The Gambia, Guinea,
Guyana, Gabon, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Jordan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritania,
Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nigeria, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Sao Tome
and Principe, Senegal, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Timor-Leste, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Viet
Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.126/Rev.1?
Draft resolution A/75/L.126/Rev.1 was adopted
(resolution 75/318).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 14.

21-234893/7

A/75/PV.99

Agenda item 73 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
(a) Strengthening the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations
Draft resolution (A/75/L.127)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saint Kitts and Nevis to introduce
draft resolution A/75/L.127.
Mr. Liburd (Saint Kitts and Nevis): I have the
honour, on behalf of the 14 States members of the
Caribbean Community (CARICOM), to introduce draft
resolution A/75/L.127, entitled “Solidarity with and
support for the Government and people of Haiti in the
aftermath of the recent earthquake”, under sub-item (a)
of agenda item 73.
Eleven years after Haiti was struck by a devastating
earthquake, our sister country was ravaged yet again
by a 7.2-magnitude earthquake on 14 August. That was
followed by Tropical Storm Grace on 16 August, which
resulted in flooding and landslides.
The most recent report published by the Caribbean
Disaster Emergency Management Agency has recorded
a death toll of at least 2,000 persons and more than 9,000
people injured. The latest count shows that 684,000
people are in need of humanitarian assistance, while
approximately 138,600 families have already registered
in shelters in the most affected area of the country.
The draft resolution therefore expresses deep
concern about the devastating effects of the earthquake
and the subsequent tropical storm, as well as the urgent
need to restore normal conditions for the population.
The draft resolution also notes the need for scaling
up access to and the administration of vaccines to
address the ongoing public-health crisis caused by the
coronavirus disease pandemic.
It further reiterates the need for a continued high
level of support for and commitment to immediate
humanitarian relief in the medium and long terms
that reflects a spirit of international solidarity and
cooperation in addressing those natural disasters.
As CARICOM States, we cannot overemphasize
the environmental vulnerability that our small island
developing States continue to face. The draft resolution
4/7

26/08/2021

thus invites the international community to continue
its efforts to increase support and encourages the
international financial institutions and organizations
to respond generously with immediate relief in Haiti.
That also includes bilateral and multilateral donors.
It requests the Secretary-General, to the extent of his
authority, to continue to support rehabilitation efforts
in Haiti.
An informal consultation was held on Tuesday,
24 August that solicited the views of all Member States
on the draft. We thank delegations for their constructive
engagement and look forward to their support for the
text, as amended. We hope that those amendments are
amenable to all delegations, given that our primary
consideration in this process was to maintain, to the
extent possible, agreed language.
Finally, CARICOM member States would like to
thank all the delegations that co-sponsored this draft
resolution and humbly ask those that have not yet done
so at this time to do likewise and co-sponsor it.
The President: We shall now proceed to consider
draft resolution A/75/L.127.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/75/L.127, entitled “Solidarity with and
support for the Government and people of Haiti in the
aftermath of the recent earthquake”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
Affairs and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/75/L.127, and in addition to the delegations listed in
that document, the following countries have also become
co-sponsors of A/75/L.127: Albania, Algeria, Andorra,
Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, the Plurinational
State of Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Canada, the
Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, the Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea,
Eritrea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Gabon, the Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia,
21-23489

26/08/2021

A/75/PV.99

Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, the Marshall
Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, the Federated States of
Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Nauru, Nepal, the Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, the Niger, Nigeria, North
Macedonia, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Rwanda, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Turkey,
Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the
United States, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, Viet Nam and Zimbabwe.
The President: May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/75/L.127?
Draft resolution
(resolution 75/319).

A/75/L.127

was

adopted

The President: I shall now give the floor to those
members who wish to make a statement after the
adoption of resolution 75/319.
Mr. Rodrigue (Haiti) (spoke in French): First of
all, I would like to warmly thank, on behalf of the
people and the Government of Haiti, all delegations for
their invaluable support for resolution 75/319, entitled
“Solidarity with and support for the Government and
people of Haiti in the aftermath of the recent earthquake”,
which supports the Government and the people of Haiti
in the aftermath of the earthquake that just struck the
country and which the General Assembly just adopted
by an overwhelming majority. That is without a doubt
a tangible sign of the attention and the solidarity of the
international community towards the people of Haiti at
this agonizing moment in its history.
Once again, my country, Haiti, has been battered
by a major natural disaster, which has left a heavy toll
in terms of loss of human life and property, injuries
and destroyed or severely damaged infrastructure.
The entire southern peninsula has been severely
impacted. All communes, towns and villages sustained
considerable damage. The commune of Azile, in Nippes
department, was wiped off the map. Not a single home,
not a single building is left.

We should point out to that less than 48 hours
after the earthquake, tropical storm Grace struck the
affected area, causing major flooding that increased
the damage and the suffering of an already exhausted
people. The latest figures reported by the national
emergency operations centre indicate more than
2,200 confirmed deaths, 332 missing and 13,000
wounded. More than 136,800 families are affected,
and approximately 700,000 people require emergency
humanitarian assistance.
In terms of infrastructure, the damage is also
considerable: 30,122 homes of various sizes were
destroyed and 42,737 others damaged. The public
buildings, churches and schools that traditionally
served as temporary shelters were severely affected.
Roads were cut off and bridges damaged, and landslides
and mudslides have made it difficult to provide first aid
to the affected areas. The earthquake of 14 August and
the floods caused by tropical storm Grace also had a
devastating impact on agriculture and livestock in an
area that was considered the breadbasket of the country,
inflicting serious economic damage and aggravating
the existing acute food insecurity.
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity
to express here, on behalf of the people and the
Government of Haiti, our most profound gratitude to the
international community as a whole and in particular
to our brotherly countries of the western hemisphere,
namely, those of the Caribbean Community, as well
as to international organizations, non-governmental
organizations and the citizens of the world for the
support and assistance that we received following that
tragedy. The Haitian diaspora as a whole also deserves
our praise and admiration for its rapid and effective
mobilization in order to provide assistance to their
compatriots. The speed of the response provided by
the international community and the support that it
continues to provide to those affected are truly signs of
the international compassion and solidarity that prevail
in disasters of that scope, of which the United Nations
is the symbol.
The United Nations, through the SecretaryGeneral, assured the people of Haiti of the solidarity of
the Organization and promised to stand alongside Haiti
and to support it at every step of the way as it emerges
from the crisis. The involvement of the United Nations
has taken the form of the two-day visit made to Haiti
by the Deputy Secretary-General, Amina Mohammed,
during which she visited the affected areas in order to

21-234895/7

A/75/PV.99

see for herself the extent of the damage and to ensure
that the actions undertaken by the United Nations
offices in Haiti meet the real needs of the victims.
Her arrival in Haiti also provided great comfort to
families in distress, and we are extremely grateful for
that compassion.
The United Nations country team mobilized
to provide assistance to the victims and help those
in need. On the very day of the earthquake, local
and international humanitarian partners, under the
leadership of the Government, quickly set up a vast
relief operation. Search and rescue teams and medical
brigades were dispatched to hard-to-reach areas in
order to try to find survivors, provide emergency
medical care and deliver drinking water and food to the
victims of the earthquake.
We would like to thank the Resident Coordinator,
Mr. Bruno Lemarquis, and the country team for their
commitment and their dedication. The United Nations
and its partners launched an appeal for funds totalling of
$187.3 million in order to provide emergency aid to the
more than 800,000 people affected by the earthquake,
namely, shelter, water and sanitation, emergency
medical care, food, protection and rapid recovery. We
would like to express our gratitude for that initiative,
which was crucial to tackling the major humanitarian
challenge that our country is facing. We call upon the
generosity of all our international partners and friendly
countries to help the Government to meet the basic
needs of the people affected.
Today Haiti faces a major challenge. Even before
the earthquake, the socioeconomic situation of the
country was troubling owing to the combined effects
of pre-existing needs, the ongoing political crisis,
socioeconomic challenges, growing insecurity and
the impact of the pandemic. The earthquake and
tropical storm Grace considerably worsened an already
very complex humanitarian situation. Indeed, the
Government is already thinking about reconstruction.
The results of an initial satellite evaluation of the impact
of the earthquake have shown that the damage would
require the disbursement of $1.12 billion. A recovery
and development plan for the southern peninsula was
launched with the objective of stressing the importance
of linking emergency assistance and sustainable
development, and the short term and the long term.
However, thanks to the resilience of the Haitian
people and their courage and bravery, and with the help
6/7

26/08/2021

of the international community, we are certain that we
can recover from this calamity. As I said earlier, the
Government is already thinking about reconstruction.
It is from that point of view that the resolution we just
adopted becomes relevant. By asking the international
community to step up its humanitarian assistance and
efforts to help Haiti recover, the resolution is launching
an urgent appeal to partners to give the country the
support it needs to face its catastrophic situation. At this
stage, we will need generous, sustained and consistent
support to rebuild the country on a new basis and
strengthen its prospects for sustainable development.
Mr. Biang (Gabon): At the outset, on behalf of the
Group of African States, I would like to express my
sincere condolences to the Government and the people
of Haiti on the devastating consequences that the recent
earthquake caused the Haitian nation. The second
in a decade, the earthquake hit Haiti at a time when
the country was beginning to find new paths towards
healing, following the death of President Jovenel Moïse
and the political uncertainties that were beginning to
fade with the formation of the new Government. The
harrowing scenes of destruction, the loss of lives and
the disappearance of livelihoods, amid the ongoing
pandemic, have really stretched the physical and mental
resilience of the Haitian people.
In solidarity with the Haitian people, the Group
of African States fully supports resolution 75/319, put
forward by the Caribbean Community. We endorse
in particular the call to strengthen the coordination
of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations system, as well as all its resolutions on
international cooperation on humanitarian assistance in
the area of natural disasters from relief to development,
for the sake of Haiti.
We urge all humanitarian agencies not to relent in
their efforts and to continue to mobilize all the resources
required to assist the country in its time of need. We
encourage the international financial institutions to
support the rebuilding of Haiti with flexible financial
arrangements during this moment of vulnerability. In
that regard, the African Group commends the Caribbean
Community, the United Nations and all the State and
non-State organizations that have assisted Haiti.
Finally, we urge all Member States to come together
to show our love to the people of Haiti and give our
full support to resolution 75/319 for the much-needed
21-23489

26/08/2021

humanitarian assistance to Haiti, its development and
enduring prosperity.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): The
United States stands with the people of Haiti at this
difficult time, as they work to recover from a series of
multidimensional crises. In the short span of three days,
Haiti was hit by two natural disasters — a devastating
7.2-magnitude earthquake followed by a tropical
depression. Those events have resulted in thousands of
lost lives, tens of thousands of people injured, hundreds
of thousands of lost homes and extensive damage to
critical infrastructure. We offer our condolences to all
those affected.
Displaced people desperately need emergency
shelter, food, water, medicine and other core relief.
The affected communities were already struggling
to combat the coronavirus disease pandemic and
overcome gang violence and insecurity. The 2021
humanitarian response plan for Haiti is currently
only 16 per cent funded, leaving a shortfall of nearly
$200 million dollars, not including last week’s flash
appeal of $187 million dollars. We must act together
now to respond and bring urgent relief to the people
of Haiti.
The United States is proud to co-sponsor resolution
75/319, which we just adopted. We are also proud to
have stepped up to deliver emergency response aid
over the past couple of weeks. At the direction of the
United States Agency for International Development
(USAID), the United States Joint Task Force Haiti has
conducted 364 missions, assisted or saved 436 people
and delivered over a 163,000 pounds of relief supplies.
USAID’s Disaster Assistance Response Team arrived in
Haiti shortly after the earthquake hit and has assessed
needs, determined priorities and delivered assistance
by air, land and sea. Our team has reached over a
dozen hard-hit communities in south-western Haiti,
with further missions planned to provide additional
aid to people as quickly as possible. USAID is working
closely with United Nations partner organizations,
including the World Food Programme, the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
International Organization for Migration, to jointly
identify and meet critical humanitarian needs. On
26 August, during an official visit to Haiti, USAID

A/75/PV.99

Administrator Samantha Power announced $32 million
additional dollars in funding to support ongoing relief.
Those actions reflect our steadfast commitment to
provide timely humanitarian relief to those in need. We
urge other Member States to do the same.
Yet the cooperation and coordination needed to
respond to humanitarian challenges cannot be simply
a reactive effort. The United States reaffirms its longstanding commitment to working with global partners
to enhance countries’ resilience to the impacts of the
climate crisis and their ability to better prepare for,
and respond to, natural disasters. That includes sharing
knowledge, data and tools to help countries predict,
prepare for and adapt to change. In the immediate and
medium terms, we remain committed to helping offer
relief and support to the people of Haiti. We are urge
other countries to join us in this effort.
The President: I join Member States and the global
community in commiseration with the Government and
the people of Haiti on the devastation and the loss of
lives as a result of the recent earthquake and the added
distraction of tropical storm Grace.
The looming impact of climate change and disaster
is visible in most parts of the Caribbean, a situation I
had the opportunity to observe first-hand during my
recent visit. As Haiti was still in a recovery process
from the earthquake of 2010, the earthquake of
14 August has further exacerbated the socioeconomic
and humanitarian challenges in the country. I therefore
join the collective call for global solidarity for
immediate humanitarian relief and recovery action to
assist the Government and the people of Haiti to build
back better.
With reference to my appeal for vaccines for all, I
would like to urge for the scaling-up of efforts to ensure
that the wider Haitian population be vaccinated in order
to avert a deeper catastrophe. As I have reiterated, it
is a moral and practical imperative that we cover all
people, with particular support for the poorest and the
most vulnerable.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of sub-item (a) of agenda item 73.
The meeting rose at 11 a.m.

21-234897/7
