A/RES/73/210

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
14 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 91

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/560)]

73/210.

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 23 (I) of 10 February 1946, 97 (I) of 14 December
1946, 364 B (IV) of 1 December 1949, 482 (V) of 12 December 1950, 32/144 of
16 December 1977, 33/141 A of 19 December 1978 and 51/158 of 16 December 1996,
Recalling also its resolution 71/328 of 11 September 2017, which recognizes
that multilingualism is a core value of the Organization that contributes to the
achievement of the goals of the United Nations,
Conscious of the obligations resulting from Article 102 of the Charter of the
United Nations and the importance of treaties in the development of international law
and the international legal order,
Noting with appreciation the role of the Secretariat, in particular the Treaty
Section of the Office of Legal Affairs, in the implementation of Article 102 o f the
Charter,
Noting that the considerable increase in the number of treaties submitted for
registration over the past years has led to the growth in the volume of work carried
out by the Treaty Section, contributing to the accumulation of unpublished t reaties,
Noting also that, while the authentic texts of registered treaties are promptly
made available online through the electronic treaty database, there is currently a
significant backlog in the publication of the United Nations Treaty Series due to
growing delays in the translation of treaties related, inter alia, to the limited resources
available for the publication process,
Recognizing the importance of the expeditious processing, registration and
publication of treaties and treaty-related actions,
Supporting the efforts of the Secretary-General to increase the efficiency of the
registration and publication process within available resources and to enhance the role
played by the Treaty Section in assisting Member States in this area,

18-22527 (E)

160119

*1822527*

A/RES/73/210

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

Welcoming the measures taken by the Treaty Section to expedite the publication
of the United Nations Treaty Series and to provide electronic access to all of its
publications on the website of the United Nations Treaty Collection, and recognizing
the role that new technology can play in the accessibility of the United Nations Treaty
Series,
Recognizing that practice and technology have developed considerably since the
last amendment to the General Assembly regulations to give effect to Article 102 of
the Charter, and acknowledging the importance of maintaining consistency with
treaty-making practice in the international community,
Bearing in mind the provisions of the Vienna Convention on the Law of
Treaties, 1 and considering its adoption on 22 May 1969 by the United Nations
Conference on the Law of Treaties,
Convinced of the need to further gather and exchange views on practice relating
to the strengthening and promoting of the international treaty framework,
1.
Recalls Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations, reaffirms the
importance of the registration and publication of treaties, as well as their accessibility,
and stresses that the regulations to give effect to Article 102 should be useful and
relevant to Member States and should be kept updated to assist States in implementing
their obligations thereunder;
2.
Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Review of the
regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter of the United Nations ”, 2
submitted pursuant to its resolution 71/148 of 13 December 2016, and the
recommendations contained therein for consideration by the General Assembly;
3.
Amends the regulations as detailed in the annex to the present resolution,
which, as amended, will apply as from 1 February 2019;
4.
Notes that some Member States consider that there remain outstanding
issues where the regulations may need further consideration or possible updating;
5.
Reaffirms its support for the annual treaty event organized by the
Secretary-General;
6.
Welcomes the organization of workshops on treaty practice by the Treaty
Section at Headquarters and at the national and regional levels as an important
capacity-building initiative, encourages the Treaty Section to continue to do so as
regularly as possible, and invites States to continue to support this activity;
7.
Also welcomes efforts to build the capacity of States in treaty law and
practice, and invites Member States to consider providing targeted technical
assistance, upon request, at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels, in particular
to developing countries, in order to develop and enhance their treaty practice,
including in the use of information and communications technology;
8.
Further welcomes the efforts made to develop and enhance the United
Nations electronic treaty database, which provides online access to comprehensive
information on the depositary functions of the Secretary-General and the registration
and publication of treaties under Article 102 of the Charter, and encourages the
continuation of such efforts in the future, while bearing in mind the challenges that
many developing countries face in accessing information and communications
technology;
__________________
1
2

2/7

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1155, No. 18232.
A/72/86.
18-22527

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

A/RES/73/210

9.
Recognizes the importance of the legal publications prepared by the Treaty
Section, and stresses the need to update the Summary of Practice of the SecretaryGeneral as Depositary of Multilateral Treaties in the light of new developments and
practices;
10. Acknowledges the efforts of the depositaries in the registration of treaties
under Article 102 of the Charter, and encourages the continuation of such efforts in
the future;
11. Calls upon the Secretary-General to ensure the expedited publication of
the United Nations Treaty Series, in accordance with the regulations, through the
prompt provision of editorial and translation services, to enable effective
dissemination of and access to treaties;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to provide, at its seventy-fifth session, a
report, following broad consultations with Member States, with information on
practice and possible options to review the regulations, taking into account
outstanding issues identified by Member States;
13. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session
the item entitled “Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework ”.
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

Annex
Regulations to give effect to Article 102 of the Charter
of the United Nations
Part One
Registration
Article 1
1.
Every treaty or international agreement, whatever its form and descriptive name,
entered into by one or more Members of the United Nations after 2 4 October 1945,
the date of the coming into force of the Charter, shall as soon as possible be registered
with the Secretariat in accordance with these regulations.
2.
Registration shall not take place until the treaty or international agreement has
come into force between two or more of the parties thereto.
3.
Such registration may be effected by any party or in accordance with article 4 of
these regulations. Without prejudice to the right of a party to a treaty or international
agreement to submit it for registration, when a treaty or international agreement
designates a depositary, the depositary is encouraged to effect registration unless
otherwise provided in the treaty or international agreement or agreed by its parties.
4.
The Secretariat shall record the treaties and international agreements so
registered in a register established for that purpose.
Article 2
1.
When a treaty or international agreement has been registered with the
Secretariat, a certified statement regarding any subsequent action which effects a
change in the parties thereto, or the terms, scope or application thereof, shall also be
registered with the Secretariat.
2.
The Secretariat shall record the certified statement so registered in the register
established under article 1 of these regulations.
18-22527

3/7

A/RES/73/210

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

Article 3
1.
Registration by a party, in accordance with article 1 of these regulations,
relieves all other parties of the obligation to register. Registration by a depositary, in
accordance with article 1 of these regulations, relieves all parties of the obligatio n to
register.
2.
Registration effected in accordance with article 4 of these regulations relieves
all parties of the obligation to register.
Article 4
1.
Every treaty or international agreement subject to article 1 of these regulations
shall be registered ex officio by the United Nations in the following cases:
(a) Where the United Nations is a party to the treaty or international
agreement;
(b) Where the United Nations has been authorized by the treaty or
international agreement to effect registration;
(c) Where the United Nations is the depositary of a multilateral treaty or
international agreement.
2.
A treaty or international agreement subject to article 1 of these regulations may
be registered with the Secretariat by a specialized agency in the following cases:
(a) Where the constituent instrument of the specialized agency provides for
such registration;
(b) Where the treaty or international agreement has been registered with the
specialized agency pursuant to the terms of its constituent instrument;
(c) Where the specialized agency has been authorized by the treaty or
international agreement to effect registration.
Article 5
1.
Any submission for registration under article 1 or 4 of these regulations shall
include a certified copy of the treaty or international agreement, either in electronic
or hard-copy format, together with a statement certifying that the text is a true and
complete copy thereof.
2.
The certified copy shall reproduce the text in all the languages in which the
treaty or international agreement was concluded, including all annexes or attachments
constituting an integral part of the treaty or international agreement. In the case of
multilateral treaties or agreements, it shall also include the text of all reservations or
declarations made or confirmed by the parties at the time of deposit of their
instruments of consent to be bound, in all authentic languages in which these
reservations or declarations were made.
3.

The certifying statement shall set forth:
(a)

The full title of the treaty or international agreement;

(b) The date(s) and place(s) of conclusion of the treaty or international
agreement;
(c)
force;

The date on which the treaty or international agreement has come into

(d) The method whereby it has come into force (for example: by signature, by
ratification, approval or acceptance, by accession, etcetera);
4/7

18-22527

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

(e)

A/RES/73/210

The authentic languages in which it was concluded;

(f) When applicable, the names and official titles of the persons that have
signed the treaty or international agreement on behalf of each party.
4.
In the case of multilateral treaties or agreements, the certifying statement shall
include, in addition to the information described in paragraph 3 of this article:
(a) A list of all the parties to the treaty or international agreement, indicating
the date of deposit of each party’s instrument of consent to be bound, the nature of
such instrument (ratification, approval, acceptance, accession, etcetera) and the date
of entry into force of the treaty for each party; and
(b) A certification that it includes all reservations or declarations made by
parties thereto.
5.
The requirements set forth in this article shall also apply to subsequent actions
submitted pursuant to article 2 of these regulations.
Article 6
The date of receipt by the Secretariat of the United Nations of the treaty or
international agreement registered shall be deemed to be the date of registration,
provided that the date of registration of a treaty or agreement registered ex officio by
the United Nations shall be the date on which the treaty or agreement first came into
force between two or more of the parties thereto.
Article 7
A certificate of registration signed by the Secretary-General, or his or her
representative, shall be issued to the registering party, or specialized agency or
depositary, and also, upon request, to any party to the treaty or international
agreement registered. Certificates of registration shall also be made public through
electronic means.
Article 8
1.
The register shall be kept in the English and French languages. The register shall
comprise in respect of each treaty or international agreement, a record of:
(a)

The serial number given in the order of registration;

(b)

The title given to the instrument by the parties;

(c)

The names of the parties between whom it was concluded;

(d) The dates of signature, ratification, approval or acceptance, exchange of
ratification, accession, and entry into force;
(e)

The duration, where appropriate;

(f)

The language or languages in which it was drawn up;

(g) The name of the party, specialized agency or depositary which registers
the instrument and the date of such registration;
(h)

Particulars of publication in the treaty series of the United Nations.

2.
Such information shall also be included in the register in regard to the statements
registered under article 2 of these regulations.
3.
The texts of registered treaties or international agreements, together with the
certifying statements, shall remain in the custody of the Secretariat.
18-22527

5/7

A/RES/73/210

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

Article 9
The Secretary-General, or his or her representative, shall ensure that the register
is publicly accessible, including through electronic means.
Part Two
Filing and recording
Article 10
The Secretariat shall file and record treaties and international agreements, other
than those subject to registration under article 1 of these regulations, if they fall in
the following categories:
(a) Treaties or international agreements entered into by the United Nations or
by one or more of the specialized agencies;
(b) Treaties or international agreements transmitted by a Member of the
United Nations which were entered into before the coming into force of the Charter,
but which were not included in the treaty series of the League of Nations;
(c) Treaties or international agreements transmitted by a party not a member
of the United Nations which were entered into before or after the coming into force
of the Charter which were not included in the treaty series of the League of Nations.
Article 11
The provisions of articles 2, 5 and 8 of these regulations shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to all treaties and international agreements filed and recorded under
article 10 of these regulations.
Part Three
Publication
Article 12
1.
The Secretariat shall publish as soon as possible in a single series every treaty
or international agreement which is registered or filed and recorded, in the original
language or languages, followed by a translation in English and in French. The
certified statements referred to in article 2 of these regulations shall be published in
the same manner.
2.
The Secretariat will, however, have the option not to publish in extenso a
bilateral treaty or international agreement belonging to one of the following
categories:
(a) Assistance and cooperation agreements of limited scope concerning
financial, commercial, administrative or technical matters;
(b) Agreements relating to the organization of conferences, seminars or
meetings;
(c) Agreements that are to be published otherwise than in the series mentioned
in paragraph 1 of this article by the United Nations Secretariat, or by a specialized or
related agency.
3.
In deciding whether or not to publish in extenso a treaty or international agreement
belonging to one of the categories mentioned in paragraph 2 of this article, the
Secretariat shall duly take into account, inter alia, the practical value that might accru e
from in extenso publication. Treaties and international agreements that the Secretariat
intends not to publish in extenso shall be identified as such in the register, it being
understood that a decision not to publish in extenso may be reversed at any ti me.
6/7

18-22527

Strengthening and promoting the international treaty framework

A/RES/73/210

4.
Any State or intergovernmental organization may obtain from the Secretary General a copy of the text of any treaty or international agreement which it has been
decided, pursuant to paragraph 2 of this article, not to publish in extenso. The
Secretariat shall likewise make a copy of any such treaty or agreement available to
private persons against payment.
5.
In respect of each treaty or international agreement registered or filed and
recorded, the series referred to in paragraph 1 of this article shall include at least the
following information: the registration or recording number, the names of the parties,
the title, the date and place of conclusion, the date and method of entry into force, the
duration (where appropriate), the languages of conclusi on, the name of the State or
organization that has registered it or transmitted it for filing and recording, and, if
appropriate, references to publications in which the complete text of the treaty or
international agreement is reproduced.
Article 13
The Secretariat shall make available the series referred to in article 12 of these
regulations through any electronic means that may be available. It shall send printed
copies of the series to Members of the United Nations, upon request.

18-22527

7/7
