United Nations

S/PV.4231

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4231

st meeting
Wednesday, 22 November 2000, 3:30 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. van Walsum . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Netherlands)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Namibia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Listre
Mr. Chowdhury
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Wang Yingfan
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Misran
Mr. Ouane
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Mustapha
Mr. Kuchynski
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Holbrooke

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian Question
Letter dated 21 November 2000 from the Permanent Representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2000/1109)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-75907 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4231

The meeting was called to order at 4.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
Letter dated 21 November 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council
(S/2000/1109)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Israel, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
and South Africa, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lancry
(Israel) took a seat at the Council table and Mr.
Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) and Mr. Kumalo
(South Africa) took the seats reserved for them at
the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received a letter dated 22
November 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, which will be issued as
document S/2000/1112, which reads as follows:
“I have the honour to request that in accordance
with its previous practice, the Security Council
invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine to the
United Nations to participate in the meeting of
the Security Council to be held on Wednesday, 22
November 2000, with regard to the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem.”
I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Permanent Observe of Palestine to
participate in the current debate, in accordance with the

2

rules of procedure and the previous practice in this
regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Kidwa
(Palestine), took a seat at the Council table.
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda. The
Security Council is meeting in response to the request
contained in a letter dated 21 November 2000 from the
Permanent Representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council, document
S/2000/1109. I should like to draw the attention of the
members of the Council to document S/2000/1107,
which contains the text of the identical letters dated 20
November 2000 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General and to the President of the Security
Council.
I call on the Permanent Observer of Palestine.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic):
Allow me first of all to congratulate you, Mr.
President, on presiding over the Council this month and
to express to you our gratitude for understanding the
very difficult time the Palestinian people are
experiencing. I should also like to take this opportunity
to particularly thank the President of the Council of last
month, Ambassador Andjaba, for the valuable efforts
he made to ensure that the Council assume its
responsibilities vis-à-vis the explosive situation
affecting the Palestinian occupied territories, Jerusalem
and the Middle East in general. These and other efforts
of the Council led to the adoption of resolution 1322
(2000) — a resolution of great value and significance
that has, like others, still not been implemented by the
occupying Power, Israel.
I should also like to thank you, Mr. President, for
responding so rapidly to the request of the Arab Group
to convene this emergency meeting of the Security
Council, despite the fact that we are on the eve of a
holiday. We commend you for your initiative. That
request by the Arab Group was made in the light of the
serious escalation of the violence by Israel in the past
few hours. In fact, at 6 p.m. Palestine time, Israeli
military helicopters, with the assistance of Israeli naval
gunships, undertook intensive attacks against numerous
targets in Gaza and other locations in the Gaza Strip.

S/PV.4231

The occupying Israeli forces launched over 50
rocket attacks against Palestinian Authority facilities
and buildings, including a police station, a preventive
security installation and Fatah movement buildings. In
the wake of these attacks and raids, at least one
Palestinian was killed, over 70 were injured and
considerable material damage was done. But after these
attacks — and this is of paramount importance — a
state of general panic swept through Gaza’s entire
population of over 1 million people. There is a threat
that this serious escalation in the situation will spread
to the entire Middle East region, leading to a situation
of unprecedented gravity that might have unknown
disastrous consequences.
Since 29 September — one day after the
unfortunate visit of Ariel Sharon to Al-Haram AlSharif on 28 September — we have sent 14 official
letters to the Security Council. In that official
correspondence we transmitted, inter alia, the names of
the Palestinian martyrs; today their number exceeds
225. We also detailed examples of Israeli conduct, how
they have been using their enormous war machine in an
excessive, disproportionate and indiscriminate use of
force, often without justification. We communicated to
the Council numerous instances of deliberate murder,
either by sniper fire or as a result of the use of other
weapons, including heavy weapons such as tanks and
other military equipment. We indicated how seriously
such deliberate actions have affected so many people.
More than 10,000 people have been injured, including
2,000 injuries caused by live ammunitions. Many of
those injured will be disabled for life, and one third of
the casualties are children under the age of 18.
We also communicated details of the massive
destruction that occurred in the bloody attack by the
occupying Israeli Power — the destruction of houses,
factories and plants — intended to make the land arid
and render it unproductive. The movement of people
and goods has been prohibited, which has had a
deleterious effect on the already weak Palestinian
economy.
All of these actions constitute a series of grave
violations and breaches of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. Many actions, such as those that I
have cited, constitute war crimes under the terms of
that Convention. They also represent a grave breach of
United Nations resolutions, including the resolutions of
this Council.

All of these events have been accompanied by a
stalemate in the peace process — a stalemate imposed
by Israel when its leaders proudly announced that they
have called a time-out in the peace process, as though
it were a basketball game.
All of this action has been accompanied by
reproaches directed against the Palestinian Authority.
The reality is that Israeli policies and practices stem
from the presence of Israeli occupiers and the policy of
settlement — a policy that has continued even after the
beginning of the peace process. The Israelis reproaches
demonstrate that their position is clearly racist. How
can they accuse the Palestinian people of putting their
children in front of murderous Israeli forces? Such an
accusation actually carries a clearly racist message. At
the same time, Israel has tried to back out of the Sharm
el-Sheikh agreement and has engaged in obstructionist
actions with regard to the fact-finding committee. That
committee was set up with great expectations, but it
has been unable to achieve anything. The reason, as the
Council has learned and as the press reported this
morning, are the obstructionist tactics of Israel. At least
one press agency has reported that the Israeli Ministry
of Foreign Affairs had sent a letter to the United States
Department of State indicating that the time was not
yet right for this committee to undertake its work. Yet
the committee was announced by President Clinton in
accordance with the terms of the Sharm el-Sheikh
agreement. However, in the view of the occupying
Power, the committee is now undesirable.
What, then, is the bottom line? What has been the
consequence of this Israeli campaign that was
unleashed on 28 September, and the attack on the first
Kiblah — the third-holiest site — in occupied East
Jerusalem? The consequence was a vast number of
victims and martyrs, and massive destruction. Another
consequence was the considerable harm done to the
Middle East peace process. The third consequence was
the creation of great tensions in the region. The fourth
consequence was that the region today, in its entirety,
may experience further clashes and confrontations.
Now the question that should be asked in the face
of this very serious reality is “How can we put an end
to this situation?” The responsibility of the Security
Council is consistent and clear in this regard, in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
First, specific, concrete measures need to be taken to
put an end to this deadly, bloody Israeli campaign
being waged against the Palestinian people and

3

S/PV.4231

Palestinian civilians. Secondly, the Security Council
must provide the necessary international protection for
Palestinian civilians under Israeli occupation.
Let us be frank with one another. The parties,
after all that has happened, cannot themselves alone
put an end to this situation. They need the assistance of
a third party. We absolutely fail to understand why
anyone is objecting to this, and why there is
procrastination. Is it emanating from the permanent
members or other members of the Security Council, or
is it coming from outside the Council?
Since 25 October, almost a month ago, we have
been requesting that a United Nations observer force be
established. President Yasser Arafat personally
participated in a meeting with the Council, and we
would like to thank the Council for giving us the
opportunity of that special meeting with our President.
He explained to the Council all the details of the
Palestinian point of view. He requested 2,000 military
observers, who would be equipped with light weapons.
Why 2,000? Because our estimates regarding the
practical requirements on the ground indicate that such
a number would be appropriate. This observer force
would have to act under the United Nations emblem
and auspices and under its supervision. The observers
would not be deployed to fixed locations or constant
lines, so it is clear that the only objective is to ensure
the safety and security of Palestinian civilians.
We took the necessary time to deal with all the
constructive proposals, particularly the ideas of France,
that were presented on this subject. We tried to take
these proposals and ideas into consideration when we
finalized our specific proposals.
As for the approval of Israel, we would stress
once again that approval by Israel, as an occupying
Power, cannot be a prerequisite for the Security
Council’s enacting the necessary measures. The
Council is not dealing here with a domestic situation of
one of its Member States; it is dealing with the only
United Nations Member State — I repeat, the only
United Nations Member State — that the Security
Council, in the 25 resolutions it has adopted regarding
the region, recognizes as an occupying Power. I repeat:
25 resolutions. This is the only case of its kind.
So we have said that Israel’s approval is not a
prerequisite for the Security Council measures to be
enacted. We think that practical cooperation with Israel
is a must for implementation of any resolution the

4

Council may adopt. This conclusion stems from the
legal obligation of Member States. This is one of the
obligations incumbent on Israel, as a United Nations
Member State, under the Charter of the United Nations.
We have also said that we are all duty-bound — all
of us, members or non-members of the Security
Council — to ensure this practical and pragmatic
cooperation.
Last Friday this Council agreed to entrust the
Secretary-General with conducting the necessary
consultations on this issue. We commended this
initiative; we responded favourably to the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts; and we have every intention of
continuing to respond favourably to his efforts.
Further, we would say that time is short; indeed it
is running out. The toll of casualties is increasing. The
destruction is becoming more serious. Things are
growing more complicated. All this warrants urgent
action in adopting the necessary resolution.
In full frankness and candour we urge the Council
to take the necessary measures at the beginning of next
week, so that only one month will have elapsed since
our first initiative, and so that this action will have
legitimacy in the eyes of the people who are enduring
the occupation. It seem legitimate and just for the
Council to act in its official capacity by adopting or not
adopting the draft resolution before it.
For some time we and the whole world were
awaiting the triumph of the peace process. We were
awaiting the admission of Palestine as a United Nations
Member State. Personally, I was expecting to be able to
work in a different environment and situation than the
one I now find myself in. But, unfortunately, the
occupying Power does not even wish to accept
anything as fundamental, elementary and self-evident
as the fact that the problem resides in occupation itself.
If the occupying force were prepared to put an end to
this occupation then all the disasters would disappear,
all the ills that our people are experiencing would come
to an end and the region would be rid of these
problems.
Why the clashes? Why all the warfare? Why the
accusations? The end of the occupation would lead to
an immediate end to all these problems. There is the
main reason for our misfortune, and therein lies the
remedy to it. One does not need to be a genius to come
up with this remedy. This has been the fate of all
peoples struggling for self-determination, freedom and

S/PV.4231

independence. Any situation in which there is suffering
can be remedied in this manner, and thus we can avoid
additional problems and bloodshed.

conflict between the two sides and declares that
all outstanding issues relating to permanent status
will be resolved through negotiations.”

Let me once again thank you, Sir, for having
convened this meeting and for having paid such close
attention to what I have been saying.

He further committed himself to restrain terrorist
elements from all factions. At that time, Mr. Arafat was
committing himself on behalf of all the Palestinian
people in order to ensure a calm environment
conducive to negotiations.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Israel, to whom I give the
floor.
Mr. Lancry (Israel): Once again, the Security
Council is meeting to consider the grave escalation of
violence in Israel and the Palestinian territories. Since
the last meeting of the Council on this issue, the
situation has, to the great consternation of most parties,
continued to deteriorate. Points of friction that had
previously been localized and contained in certain
areas have spread, engulfing the streets of Jerusalem
and other Israeli towns and cities. In the last three days
alone, two separate bombings have claimed the lives of
innocent, unarmed Israeli civilians. In an unimaginably
horrific attack in Kfar Darom, terrorists targeted
innocent children, whose only crime was in attempting
to reach their classroom.
Just a few hours ago, a car bomb exploded on a
crowded street in the Israeli city of Hadera at the
height of the rush-hour commute. Three Israeli citizens
were killed, and 41 were injured. Once again, we are
witness to the inhuman practice of terrorism, to the
senseless death of innocent men, women and children,
that does not advance the Palestinian cause.
Unfortunately, terrorism is not something foreign
to Israelis, and we have had several reminders in the
past few days of its tragic consequences. It must be
made clear that today’s tragedy is a direct result of the
release of terrorist prisoners from Palestinian Authority
jails. It is not the first time that the Palestinian
leadership has given freedom of movement to terrorists
and then claimed not to be responsible for their acts.
In this regard, I would like to recall the words of
Chairman Arafat, who, in a letter to the late Prime
Minister Rabin, expressly stated his commitment to the
peace process and the path of negotiated compromise.
These words stand in such stark contrast to the words
and action of the Palestinian leadership in the past few
weeks that they bear repeating:
“The PLO commits itself to the Middle East
peace process and to a peaceful resolution of the

Indeed, the current unrest and the deplorable
response of the Palestinian leadership give rise to
serious doubts on whether the Palestinians are intent on
maintaining that fundamental commitment made in
September 1993. Yet, despite these acts and numerous
others which have transpired over the last several
weeks, no United Nations body — not the General
Assembly meeting in an emergency session; nor the
Economic and Social Council, which this morning
passed a biased and one-sided resolution condemning
Israel; nor the Security Council — has spoken one
word of condemnation of the Palestinians.
Perhaps now the international community will
take notice of the fact that Israeli lives are, as they have
been for nearly two months, continuously in peril.
Perhaps now the world is capable of understanding
that, while Palestinian lives are endangered only when
they violently attack Israeli soldiers, Israelis are
targeted for the simple fact that they are Israeli.
By failing to speak any words of condemnation of
the Palestinians, the international community has
basically lent its approval to the unspeakable acts of
the Palestinians – the lynching of two Israeli soldiers in
Ramallah, the desecration of sacred Jewish holy sites
in Nablus, the attacks on innocent children in Kfar
Darom and Hadera and the continuous incitement in
the official media. This failure will only further
encourage them to continue along this violent route. I
cannot stress this point enough.
Palestinians are sustaining injuries as a direct
result of their own violent provocations. Palestinians
are sustaining injuries when they confront Israeli
soldiers and civilians with machine guns, firebombs
and other explosive devices. Palestinians are sustaining
injuries when, at the behest of their leaders, they
brutally attack and terrorize innocent civilians.
The same is not true of casualties on the Israeli
side. Israeli civilians have been attacked as they travel
on roads, shop for groceries in the marketplace and sit

5

S/PV.4231

peacefully
in
their
homes.
The
Jerusalem
neighbourhood of Gilo has continuously come under
fire from snipers in nearby Palestinian villages,
resulting in a number of injuries. A car bomb exploded
last week in the crowded Jerusalem market of Mahani
Yehuda, killing two Israeli civilians. On Monday,
Israeli schoolchildren were deliberately targeted by the
Tanzim, the paramilitary group that is an arm of
Chairman Arafat’s own Fatah faction, killing two
civilians and critically wounding several others. A day
later, an 18-year old Israeli, Itamar Yefet, was
murdered by a Palestinian sniper. None of these
individuals, least of all the children who were attacked
have sought involvement in the current crisis.
Nevertheless, the Palestinians consider them legitimate
targets, due merely to their nationality.
The dichotomy extends to the political level as
well. Through all the recent violence, Israel has tried to
exert the maximum possible restraint and to minimize
casualties to the greatest extent possible. We have
expressed our deepest sorrow at the loss of life
sustained by both sides. The Prime Minister and
Foreign Minister of Israel and their spokespeople have
regularly called upon Chairman Arafat to restrain his
people and to return to the path of peaceful
negotiations.
In contrast, Palestinian leaders have called, and
continue to call, for an escalation of the conflict. The
attempt to assert the moral equivalence of soldiers’
defending themselves against mobs of Palestinians
calling for their blood, and Palestinians carrying out
terrorist attacks against civilians in the heart of the
Israeli cities, is nothing less than depraved. Yet, there
is no international outcry. There is no call for a
commission of inquiry to investigate Palestinian
wrongdoing. There are no resolutions passed in
condemnation of Palestinian violations. There is not
even a clear call for the Palestinians to relinquish the
path of violence and return to the only legitimate
mechanism for addressing their grievances — through
peaceful, bilateral negotiations. The only words of
outrage and condemnation that the international
community can muster are directed solely at Israel.
I should like to remind the members of the
Council of the statement of the Secretary-General,
who, after visiting the region and conducting extensive
meetings with both sides, cautioned the members of the
international community to weigh their words
carefully. I submit to you, Mr. President, that the

6

United Nations official language that has been used
until now has not heeded this warning. I sincerely hope
that the same will not hold true today.
The attempt by the Palestinians to give this armed
intifada the veneer of a legitimate struggle, as though it
were their only means of achieving their objectives, is
a gross misrepresentation of reality. The Oslo peace
process has provided a viable mechanism for the
Palestinians to realize their goal of self-determination.
The face-to-face negotiations conducted within that
framework have yielded several key peace agreements
and have created a situation in which 98 per cent of
Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza live under
Palestinian rule. Moreover, the Oslo process has the
potential to end the conflict once and for all, meet the
needs of both sides and prevent further bloodshed.
Chairman Arafat, however, has been unwilling to
embrace the reality of peace and recognize that the
conflict is over and that the only path to peace and
security is through negotiation and compromise. He
knows full well that an honourable and just peace was
within reach at Camp David, and yet, instead of seizing
the moment, he chose to turn his back.
In calling for the deployment of a United Nations
protection force, the Palestinians are seeking to depart
from the bilateral track which was mandated by the
Oslo agreement and to pursue their goals unilaterally.
In fact, Chairman Arafat has first and foremost to
protect himself from his own destructive initiative, the
independence intifada, which is the source of all the
suffering that has transpired in recent weeks. As I have
said before, an international force, whether of
peacekeepers or of observers, is not needed to stop the
violence, nor is it clear that such a force would even be
successful.
There is, however, a clear and direct way to end
the bloodshed. The international community must call
upon the Palestinian leadership to exert every effort to
stop the violence, the rioting, the use of live
ammunition, the use of machine guns, the sending of
children to the front lines of rioting crowds and the use
of terror against civilians. This ability is well within
their power, and I would urge the members of the
Council to call upon Chairman Arafat to see that this is
done.
We still expect that the Palestinian leadership will
fulfil its basic commitment, as expressed in Chairman
Arafat’s letter to Prime Minister Rabin and in

S/PV.4231

subsequent agreements. I must emphasize that
Chairman Arafat spoke on behalf of all Palestinian
people, and that he cannot depart from this
responsibility. We can no longer accept the
reprehensible division of labour between the
Palestinian Authority on the one hand and Hamas and
the Islamic Jihad on the other.
Chairman Arafat, as the unchallenged leader of
the Palestinian people, has to assume, not only the
glory of that office but also, sometimes, the misery of
the task. Regardless of the current situation, Israel’s
ultimate objective will always be to secure a lasting
and comprehensive peace with the Palestinians and
with all our neighbours. We will continue to strive
towards that goal, notwithstanding the numerous
obstacles that imperil that lofty objective.
We believe that the Security Council, as the organ
with primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, is duty-bound to
encourage the parties to return to the path of bilateral
negotiation and compromise. The Council must call
upon the Palestinians to adhere to the commitments
they have undertaken to renew security cooperation
with Israel and to call, in clear and unequivocal terms,
for an end to the violence and a return to the
negotiating table.
Were the Palestinians to take these actions, I can
assure the Council that the bloodshed would end
immediately. That is, by the way, my answer to the
question raised by the Permanent Observer of
Palestine, Mr. Nasser Al-Kidwa, who asked, “How can
we put an end to this situation?” It may sound
unrealistic, but it is that simple. If Chairman Arafat
wills it, it is not a dream.
Mr. Holbrooke (United States of America): I
thank Ambassador Lancry and Ambassador Al-Kidwa
for their statements today.
For over 50 years, this great historic institution,
the Security Council, has been the site of many
important debates on the Middle East. The history of
the Middle East has been written not only in the region
but in this Chamber, sometimes productively,
sometimes less so. I do not feel that we are making a
contribution to peace with the kind of discussion we
are having here today, and I must say so quite frankly. I
do not view this kind of meeting as responsive to the
mandate of the Security Council to be a forum for
conflict resolution. I believe that this is much more in

the nature of a meeting designed to exchange verbal
barbs which are best left to different forums, and I am
saddened to see the Security Council, a historic
organization with a historic role, diminished in this
way. Nonetheless, we participate in this meeting, as we
always do, because the United Nations is the central
Organization of the world, and the Security Council is
its most important organ.
The cycle of violence in the Middle East has
tragically escalated again today with the bombing of
another busload of Israeli citizens, this time in Israel
itself, between Tel Aviv and Haifa. This morning in
Gaza, a number of Palestinians were killed by the
Israel Defence Forces (IDF) in circumstances that, in
the words of Secretary Albright this morning in
Washington, are still unclear.
We continue to believe that the parties must take
action to end the violence, to maintain calm and to
return to negotiations. This is the only viable path to
peace, as Chairman Arafat and Prime Minister Barak
have repeated time and time again.
At the start of this crisis, the Security Council
met in extended sessions and called for an immediate
end to the violence and a return to negotiations. Our
Government disagreed with the one-sided tenor of that
resolution and registered its disapproval by abstaining
on resolution 1322 (2000). We did, however, certainly
concur with those portions of the resolution that called
for an end to violence and stated that that was of
paramount importance in maintaining the peace
process.
To that end, our valiant Secretary-General, Kofi
Annan, President Clinton and other world leaders
worked hard to bring the parties to Sharm el-Sheikh to
reach agreement on ending the violence. In this regard,
President Mubarak of Egypt played an especially
important role.
Members of the Council called on the parties to
implement the obligations they accepted at the Sharm
el-Sheikh summit without delay to end the violence, to
set up a fact-finding committee and to discuss how to
best resume negotiations. There has been some
progress in implementing Sharm el-Sheikh, and we
must continue to urge follow-through by both parties
on their commitments.
We have reported to the Council on our efforts,
undertaken in consultation with the Secretary-General,

7

S/PV.4231

to establish the fact-finding committee agreed to at
Sharm el-Sheikh, and we note with approval that
Secretary-General Annan has already met with Senator
Mitchell and plans to meet with the entire committee in
the very near future.
In that meeting, Senator Mitchell outlined the
committee’s intended plan of action and the committee
will gather here in New York this weekend to begin its
work. The committee’s mandate is to investigate the
recent violence, with the objective of preventing its
recurrence. I urge the Council and all United Nations
Members to extend unambiguous support to this
committee.
Today is a sad day as well for the United Nations.
Instead of lending support for efforts undertaken at
Sharm el-Sheikh by both parties, the United Nations
has taken actions that undermine bilateral efforts at
reaching peace. This morning, the Economic and
Social Council narrowly endorsed a resolution
condemning Israel and calling for the creation of a
redundant inquiry commission and the dispatch of
rapporteurs, who will contribute little to ending the
violence that has gripped the region in the past two
months. That measure was not necessary and it was
supported by less than half the members of the
Economic and Social Council. In fact, only 21
members of the Economic and Social Council voted for
the resolution, out of a membership of 53, if I am not
mistaken.
We have made clear our view in Geneva, in the
General Assembly and in this Chamber that rhetoric
and unbalanced criticism diminish the role of the
United Nations and the United Nations opportunity to
play a constructive role at conflict resolution. The
Security Council will continue to follow events in the
region closely and has already directed the SecretaryGeneral to explore ways in which the United Nations
could assist the parties.
Regarding the proposal for a United Nations
observer or military presence, I repeat our position —
and I cannot state this too clearly — that any proposal
to introduce outside observers, peacekeepers or any
other form of United Nations-sponsored presence in the
region requires the agreement of the parties to the
conflict. They are in this room here today; they have
met; they know each other well; I believe they respect
each other as diplomats. Let them work it out and let
us, the Security Council, help them get there and then

8

endorse it, rather than participate in attempts to impose
something that is opposed by one side or the other.
Let me add also and be very clear, because
several people have made the analogy to East Timor a
year ago, that when we met on East Timor 14 months
ago, we did not impose a solution on Indonesia. It was
negotiated by the Security Council on behalf of the
world community and accepted by the Indonesians.
That is how we got there and Ambassador Andjaba
deserves great credit for his role in that, as did his
colleagues, many of whom are in this room. The
analogy to East Timor is correct and that is the analogy
we should follow, but let us not misapply it or misstate
it.
We must stand ready to help the parties in the
Middle East to implement the decisions they reached to
restore calm and return to negotiations. Engaging in
one-sided discussions is of no value and will aggravate
rather than reduce the tensions in the Middle East.
In conclusion, allow me, on instructions, to quote
briefly from Secretary Albright’s press statements this
morning in Washington:
“Both Israelis and Palestinians need to
accept the reality that there is no place for
violence, incitement and economic pressure in a
genuine search for Israel-Palestinian peace.
Whatever their differences on permanent status
issues, the only place for the parties to resolve
them is around a negotiating table, not through
unilateral actions designed to pressure, to
intimidate and to create facts on the ground.
There is no unilateral answer to this conflict and
there is no way to reconcile violence with
negotiations.
“Clearly, both Israelis and Palestinians feel
they are the aggrieved party and each feels the
other has failed to live up to its commitments, but
now is not the time for trading accusations. Now
is the time for both to make good on
commitments to take the practical steps agreed to
and to work to repair the damage to a negotiating
process and a partnership that still holds great
potential and promise.
“Fulfilling commitments and creating a
structure of accountability is essential. In this
regard, we” — that is, the United States — “will
be talking to Prime Minister Barak and Chairman

S/PV.4231

Arafat about creating a mechanism which will
allow Israelis and Palestinians to carry out these
commitments. The United States, for our part,
will continue to help Israel and Palestine as they
help themselves to turn the current situation
around and to move forward to an IsraeliPalestinian agreement.”
That is how Secretary Albright concluded. Once
again, I would ask the people who care about peace not
to begin the issue by calling for public meetings in the
Security Council, but to end it with public meetings in
the Security Council and to approach these issues in
the spirit of quiet diplomacy which is going to be
necessary to reduce the growing tension in the region.
Mr. Lavrov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation is deeply alarmed by
the further escalation of the Palestinian-Israeli
confrontation. The growing wave of terrorist acts and
retaliatory measures further destabilize the situation in
the Middle East.
The leaders of Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must do all they can without delay to stop
the escalation of tensions and to prevent the situation
from spinning definitively out of control. No reasons
can justify the increased use of force that is claiming
new victims among the Palestinian civilian population.
At the same time, it is necessary to adopt strict
measures to prevent the criminal acts by extremists to
kill Israeli citizens.
We stress the need for a speedy start to the work
of the fact-finding committee to establish the facts
behind the tragedy and to support the efforts of the
Secretary-General to that end. In the light of the
continued deterioration of the situation, it is also
essential to step up international assistance in the
implementation of earlier agreements in order to break
the chain reaction of violence. This will require
coordinated steps on the part of the sponsors of the
peace process and other interested parties.
Recognizing its responsibility for the fate of the
Middle East settlement, Russia continues to strive
energetically for a speedy settlement to the conflict,
which is wreaking terrible harm on Palestinians and
Israelis alike. These tasks are the subject of the
ongoing concern of the President of Russia, Vladimir
Putin, and Foreign Minister Ivanov, who are
maintaining close contacts with the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and their colleagues in the

United States, the United Kingdom, France, Israel and
the Palestinian leadership.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General
must keep the situation in the West Bank and Gaza in
sharp focus, particularly in the context of protecting the
civilian population. They must seek truly to assist an
end to the violence and the return of the parties to the
negotiating table. At the same time, in seeking a rapid
normalization of the situation, we must not lose sight
of the need to resume the regional negotiating process.
It is essential for lessons to be learned from current
events and for effective measures to be adopted to
consolidate the very architecture of the peace process
in order to make it more stable and irreversible, given
the close interrelationships between all the components
of the Middle East knot.
The path to a comprehensive settlement lies
through the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Madrid
principles, the bases for achieving peace in the region.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): The
Security Council is meeting once again this evening to
express the extreme concern of the entire international
community at the unleashing of increasingly
uncontrollable violence, which inexorably leads the
Palestinian and Israeli peoples into a never-ending
spiral of hatred, repression, vengeance and death.
Inexcusable acts of murderous violence,
disproportionate repression, more and more victims –
basically on the Palestinian side. Every day the
escalation increases one more step. On behalf of France
and on behalf of the entire European Union I wish to
express condolences to the families of all the victims. I
also wish forcefully to say that there is nothing
inevitable about the continuation of this tragedy. It is
possible to put an end to it. An end must be put to it.
On 20 November the 15 Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of the European Union met and adopted a
declaration the terms of which I wish to recall for the
Council:
“For weeks, every day has seen more
deaths, Palestinian or Israeli. That is not
tolerable. The European Union appeals to the
sense of responsibility of both sides, urging them
not to respond to provocation.
“The lack of progress achieved in the peace
process, including on the settlements’ problem,

9

S/PV.4231

lies at the heart of the Palestinian people’s
frustration and of the violence.

“The European Union is ready to contribute
to this. It is ready to shoulder its responsibilities.”

“The European Union exhorts the Israeli
and Palestinian leaders immediately to honour in
full the commitments they made in Sharm elSheikh five weeks ago now and in Gaza on 2
November.

I should like, following this quotation from the
declaration by the European Union, to emphasize, once
again, something that is clear — that there is no
alternative to the quest for peace. Violence must come
to an end and the peace negotiations must resume on
the basis of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as
well as the Oslo Accords.

“It asks the Israeli authorities:
“to withdraw their armed forces to the
positions they occupied prior to 28 September
and to put an end to the restrictions imposed on
the movement of people and goods in the
Palestinian territories;
“to lift the financial sanctions imposed on
the Palestinian Authority;
“in cases where the intervention of the
security forces appears absolutely indispensable,
to use only non-lethal methods, in accordance
with the appeal issued by the United Nations
Secretary-General.
“It asks the Palestinian Authority:
“to do its utmost to end the violence;
“to give strict instructions to the security
forces in order to stop the attacks against the
Israelis, in accordance with the announcement
made by President Arafat.
“The European Union asks the fact-finding
commission — created following the Sharm elSheikh summit, and in which the European Union
is represented by Mr. Javier Solana — to begin its
work on the ground as soon as possible.
“It supports the United Nations SecretaryGeneral’s endeavours to explore with the parties,
the terms and conditions of the deployment of an
observer mission, in accordance with the mandate
given by the Security Council.
“It continues to support President Clinton’s
efforts and personal commitment in the search for
peace.
“The aim naturally remains the resumption
of the dialogue and peace negotiations, the only
way out of the current crisis. The protagonists
know this. The top priority is the cessation of
violence.

10

The Security Council can play a useful role with
the consent of the parties to contribute to the search for
peace. The Secretary-General, last Friday, received
from the Council a mandate to consult with the parties
on the possibilities for, and the acceptable modalities
for, an observer mission of the United Nations. It is our
fervent hope that an agreement can rapidly be reached.
The events in recent days show that this is both
necessary and urgent.
Mr. Ouane (Mali) (spoke in French): Mali
associates itself fully with the statement which will
shortly be made by South Africa on behalf of the
Movement of the Non-Aligned. I should also like, in
my capacity as Coordinator of the Non-Aligned Caucus
in the Security Council for November to associate the
other members of the Caucus with that statement.
Nevertheless I wish here, in my national capacity,
to make a few brief comments. First, to recall the
constant position of Mali in favour of a just and lasting
settlement of the Israeli/Palestinian conflict. In that
respect, we firmly condemn the violence of the last
week which led to numerous casualties in the civilian
population, in particular, the Palestinian population.
We deplore the escalation of this violence and its
growing socio-economic repercussions. We would urge
the parties to show greater restraint in order to restore
calm and promote the resumption of dialogue.
And secondly, Mali fully supports the efforts of
the Secretary-General, particularly the four priority
objectives that he defined at the Security Council
meeting on 17 November.
Also, the agreements of Sharm el-Sheikh offered
some promise for the peace process, which is why we
would urge the parties to implement those accords
strictly.
Mali welcomes the talks in Washington and all
efforts to achieve peace.

S/PV.4231

My third comment relates to the dispatching of
observers to the field. This is a positive measure that
could usefully contribute to the cessation of violence.
The Council should attribute to it the highest priority.
This is a requirement of the international community
and the Organization’s credibility is at stake.
Mr. Chowdhury
(Bangladesh):
Violence,
violence and more violence. This is the only news we
are getting out of the Middle East for nearly two
months. Given the alarming deteriorating situation in
the area, this meeting could not have been more timely.
Permit me at this point to offer my delegation’s
sincere thanks to you, Mr. President, for convening this
open meeting of the Council on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. We
offer our sincere condolences to the families of all
victims of recent violence in the region.
At the outset, allow me to reiterate Bangladesh’s
total and unwavering support for the legitimate and
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people for a
sovereign and independent homeland of their own. We
believe that a just, lasting and honourable resolution of
the whole Arab-Israeli conflict can be achieved through
the implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967), 338 (1973) and 425 (1978).
I would like to express my delegation’s deep
concern and anxiety about the volatile situation in the
Middle East caused by continuing violence, by heavy
loss of life among innocent civilians and by Israel’s
continued use of excessive force and acts of
provocation against the Palestinian people in the
occupied territories. We condemn such provocation in
the strongest terms.
The latest Israeli missile attack does not stand up
to any logic. The bombing of a school bus, which
claimed two civilian lives and injured schoolchildren,
was a cowardly act of terrorism, and we condemn it.
This afternoon’s news of further violence is, again,
very disturbing. Resorting to force and violence has
only served to deal a mortal blow to the peace process.
It is sad that the Middle East situation had to
deteriorate so fast, particularly when it seemed that the
peace process was about to make a breakthrough. We
would like to commend the Palestinian leadership for
its commitment to reaching a peaceful solution to the
Middle East issue. Reaching an agreement at Sharm el-

Sheikh, against all odds, was eloquent testimony to the
Palestinian leadership’s commitment to peace.
Here, my delegation would like also to express its
deep appreciation for the continuing efforts of the
Secretary-General to contribute to a lasting solution of
the Palestinian issue, including his present involvement
in the dispatch of a fact-finding mission to the area. We
believe that subsequent deployment of international
monitors would help ease the situation in a big way.
Bangladesh has lent its support to the Middle East
peace process from the very beginning. We have not
lost trust in its ultimate success. We urge the
Palestinians and the Israelis to make their best
endeavour to put an end to the violence which has
vitiated the atmosphere in the region. Bangladesh
strongly believes that, once violence is shunned and
once dialogue begins, the peace process can indeed be
revived.
Mr. Wang Yingfan (China) (spoke in Chinese):
The past few days have seen a drastic escalation and
broadening of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict. There has
been a large increase in the number of casualties on
both sides, including many innocent children.
Casualties on the Palestinian side have been more
serious, the economy of Palestine has experienced a
serious setback, and the suffering of the civilian
population has intensified.
China is opposed to violence in any form. All
along, we have called on both sides to exercise restraint
and to take all necessary measures to prevent the
situation from deteriorating further. In the current
circumstances, we urge the Israeli side in particular to
exercise restraint. The use of excessive force can only
result in a vicious cycle of uncontrollable violence and
conflict, thus making the prospect of reviving the
Middle East peace process even more remote. This is a
very dangerous moment for the entire situation in the
Middle East. We are convinced that peace remains the
option for all parties: it is the only option.
In accordance with his mandate from the Security
Council, the Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, is
engaged in mediation and consultation among the
parties concerned. China supports the SecretaryGeneral’s efforts. We call on all parties concerned,
especially the Israeli side, to cooperate actively with
the Secretary-General, and we support the early start of
work by the international fact-finding committee. We
should give serious consideration to the proposed

11

S/PV.4231

deployment of international observers in the area of
conflict in order to create favourable conditions for
easing the situation and for a resumption of peace talks.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): The
United Kingdom welcomes this opportunity to discuss
the increasingly serious situation in the West Bank and
Gaza. We fully associate ourselves with the European
Union declaration, which Ambassador Levitte has just
quoted and which was agreed by European Union
foreign ministers on 20 November.
We urge both the Israeli Government and the
Palestinian Authority to implement the understandings
that were agreed at Sharm el-Sheikh and those that
were agreed subsequently, and to take immediate steps
to bring an end to the violence. We condemn all
violence. It was a cowardly act to bomb the school bus
in Gaza on 20 November. But the kind of excessive
retaliatory action which we have seen in recent days
and weeks cannot be justified and cannot be in the
interest of peace and of the resumption of negotiations.
Violence followed by retaliation followed by more
violence, as we have seen in today’s shameful bomb, is
a dead end. It leads nowhere.
We need to see an early return to diplomacy, and
we therefore welcome the first meeting of the factfinding committee, which will take place over the
coming weekend; we hope that the work of the
committee will proceed expeditiously. We also
welcome and support the efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and of others to find a mutually acceptable
basis on which to allow international observers into the
West Bank and Gaza. We continue to believe that
neutral observers, with the agreement and cooperation
of both parties, could play a constructive role in ending
the violence.
There was nothing in the statements we heard
from Palestine and Israel this afternoon to indicate that
the parties themselves will be able to bring violence to
an end without outside help.
The Security Council has an essential role to play
and should continue to keep the situation under close
observation.
Ms. Durrant (Jamaica): My delegation wishes to
thank you, Mr. President, for convening this open
meeting to discuss the situation in the Middle East,
including the Palestinian question.

12

On 7 October, the Security Council adopted
resolution 1322 (2000), which called for the immediate
cessation of violence, and for all necessary steps to be
taken to ensure that violence ceases, that new
provocative actions are avoided, and that the situation
returns to normality in a way which promotes the
prospects for the Middle East peace process. Since
then, the Security Council has had the opportunity to
be briefed in private meetings with the President of the
Palestinian
Authority,
with
the
Permanent
Representative of Israel and with the SecretaryGeneral.
Today’s meeting is a signal of the depth of our
concern at the deteriorating situation, which now poses
a threat to the stability of the region. We are concerned
at the almost daily loss of life, in many cases resulting
from the use of excessive force; nearly 300 persons,
many of them Palestinians, have lost their lives, and
more than 6,000 civilians have been injured. Jamaica
deplores the deaths and injuries among civilians
including innocent children, whether Palestinian or
Israeli, and we convey our sympathy and condolences
to the bereaved families.
The suffering of the people has been further
aggravated by the serious humanitarian and economic
situation in the Palestinian territories and by the plight
of vulnerable civilians, despite the strenuous
diplomatic efforts of the Secretary-General and of the
leaders of several countries — particularly the
Presidents of Egypt and of the United States of
America — to bring peace to the region. We urge the
parties to adhere to the ceasefire agreement reached at
Sharm el-Sheikh and to refrain from retaliatory action.
The establishment of a fact-finding mission to inquire
into the tragic events is an important part of that
process. We urge that its work begin forthwith.
A proposal has been made for the deployment of
a United Nations observer mission. We continue to
believe that this proposal, as well as others that could
deter further violence and act as confidence-building
measures and promote dialogue between the parties,
deserves the serious consideration of all concerned.
Jamaica continues to encourage an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli
conflict
through
an
active
negotiating process that takes into account the right to
security of all States in the region, including Israel, as
well as the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

S/PV.4231

Bearing in mind the responsibility of the Security
Council for the maintenance of peace and security, it is
important for the Council to remain actively seized of
this matter, to continue to support the diplomatic
initiatives of the Secretary-General, and to continue to
work to bring about a lasting and comprehensive peace
within the framework of Security Council resolutions
242 (1967) and 338 (1973).

escalation of violence carried out by Israeli forces that
has daily produced a growing number of victims and
brought harm to the Palestinian population. Tunisia
vehemently condemns these repeated acts of
aggression, which violate the most fundamental rights
of human beings, namely, the rights to life and dignity.
In addition, those actions also pose a threat to the peace
process.

Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic):
We would like to express our deepest gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having responded so promptly to the
request to convene this urgent public meeting to
discuss the grave and deteriorating situation in the
occupied Palestinian territories.

Tunisia appeals to the two co-sponsors of the
peace process and to the international community as a
whole to assume their responsibilities in the face of this
dangerous situation that threatens international peace
and security. We call on Israel to quickly assume its
responsibilities under Security Council resolutions —
the most recent of which is resolution 1322 (2000) —
and the Fourth Geneva Convention and other
international instruments. We further call on Israel to
renounce the policy of force, which will solve nothing,
and to act in a way consistent with international law
and agreements.

The Security Council is meeting formally for the
third time in a month and a half to consider the
situation in the occupied Palestinian territories. The
holding of that many formal meetings in such a brief
period, in addition to the many consultations that have
been taking place on this question and the resumed
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
illustrate the gravity and deterioration of the situation
in the occupied Arab territories, including Jerusalem —
a deterioration that has been taking place since last
September and that was eloquently described by the
Secretary-General after his visit to the region.
In order to confront that explosive situation, the
Security Council adopted resolution 1322 (2000) and
appealed to Israel, as the occupying Power, to avoid
any escalation. Unfortunately, the situation continues to
worsen further, due to Israel’s decision to resort to the
policy of excessive force and vengeance — without
taking into account the grave consequences of its
actions — in order to impose its will and to create a
fait accompli — in other words, more occupation. Even
though there is evidence of relative calm after
Chairman Arafat’s efforts, the forces of the Israeli
occupation have once again resorted to the excessive
use of force against Palestinian civilians and the posts
and symbols attesting to the existence of the
Palestinian Authority. The most recent reaction of the
occupying forces was to bomb Gaza intensively using
all sorts of weaponry, including air, land and sea
forces.
My country, which is actively and sincerely
taking part in the peace process, profoundly regrets this
grave and sad evolution of the situation. We express
our profound concern at the intensification and

We heard Ambassador Holbrooke describe the
background of this conflict and the Council’s reaction
to it over the course of 50 years. It has been said that
we are moving back to the time when the Council
created two separate entities. But we must ask: what of
the future form of the Palestinian State we are
discussing today? Is this a question of an autonomous
entity? Where is that Palestinian State we created? We
must base our discussions on reality, not on delusions
and distortion of facts.
The representative of Israel spoke of Israeli
forces being attacked. Well, where are those forces?
Are they inside Israel? Our countries know the
meaning of occupation. Is resistance to occupation an
act of aggression? When violence comes from official
authorities, it can only engender more violence. Peace
can only be established in an atmosphere conducive to
peace. There is no other option open to the parties but
the choice of peace and a return to the negotiating
table. That is why we repeat once again today our
sincere appeal to Israel to end its acts of repression.
Many people have experienced such occupation. We
know the consequences of such a policy. We call on
Israel to take measures to return normalcy to the region
and to create a climate conducive to the gradual
establishment of confidence, a requirement for the
continuation of peace negotiations.

13

S/PV.4231

In the same vein, like the majority of members of
the Council, we believe the time has come for the
Council to act in this critical situation by taking the
necessary measures to create a protection force for
Palestinian civilians — something that has been called
for by Palestinians themselves, as well as by many in
the international community. We hope the SecretaryGeneral will continue his mission so that the Council
may continue to give life to this legitimate project to
protect civilian Palestinians under occupation.
The situation confronting Palestine is a grave one,
and it poses inherent threats to the peace efforts in the
region and to the peace and security of the region in
general. This situation must not continue. It must not
be accepted as a fait accompli and as part of the daily
lives of the people of the region, where there have been
so many victims. The rights of the Palestinian people
must be protected. They must be able to create their
State, with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital. Based on
these views, we believe it is up to the Security Council
and all parties concerned to act rapidly so that the factfinding committee can do its work to determine
responsibility for the violence. More than ever before,
this situation requires a sincere and serious approach
by the international community, and especially the
Security Council, for the dangers to the future of the
region are incalculable.
It is time to reverse the situation. The priority of
the international community is to protect the
Palestinians and to put an end to the acts of violence,
aggression and violations of international law. Israel’s
responsibility is clear. What it must do is clear. The
international community, including this Council, have
recalled this on many occasions. It can start by ending
the violence and facilitating the work of the factfinding committee. My country is among those that
have always participated sincerely in the peace process.
But this process can only succeed if it is based on
international
legitimacy
and
United
Nations
resolutions, and not on a faulty basis. This is the only
way to bring about the success of the peace process,
which, while being in the interest of all, is also in the
interest of both Palestinians and Israelis and in the
interest of peace and security in the Middle East.
Mrs. Ashipala-Musavyi (Namibia): The South
African representative will soon make a statement in
his capacity as the Chairman of the Coordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM), and my
delegation would like to associate itself with that

14

statement. We also support the statement made by the
Coordinator of the NAM Caucus for the month of
November, the delegation of Mali.
We thank you, Mr. President, for having called
this timely meeting to deliberate on the situation in the
Middle East, including the Palestinian question. Before
my brief remarks, let me express my delegation’s
condolences to all the bereaved families and to take
this opportunity to express our thanks and appreciation
to the Arab countries and others outside the region who
have taken into their care the injured Palestinians.
Recently we had the honour and privilege to
listen to a briefing by President Arafat, a briefing that
included, among other things, a request for the United
Nations to deploy an observer force in the Palestinian
occupied territories. As my delegation has stated on
several occasions, we support that request, and we have
also emphasized that it is a request that is in line with
Security Council resolution 904, which was adopted on
18 March 1994 and called for the protection of the
Palestinians. Therefore, we believe that we, as the
Council, have a duty to follow through with the
implementation of our resolutions.
The events occurring in the occupied Palestinian
territories and in the region at large are cause for
severe concern and warrant corresponding and urgent
action by the Security Council. Time is of the essence,
and in view of the ongoing inputs of the SecretaryGeneral in the context of Security Council resolution
904 (1994), we believe that the deployment of the
United Nations observers will save lives, calm
emotions and pave the way for restoring the peace
process. We must restore the peace process because in
the end we have to deal with the fundamental problem
that is the cause of all this, namely the occupation of
Palestinian territories by Israel.
My delegation concurs with the Permanent
Observer of Palestine that the parties need assistance,
and that is, I believe, why we are here. We are here to
help the parties make peace. In this context, we thank
all those who have continued to contribute to the
search for peace, but we believe that the time has come
for the United Nations to become fully engaged.
Let me reiterate that a comprehensive settlement
of the present conflict can only be achieved by granting
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people,
including their right to self-determination. Full
implementation of Security Council resolution

S/PV.4231

242 (1967) and resolution 338 (1973) are essential to a
lasting solution to this conflict.

Council resolutions and agreements between the
parties.

Mr. Listre (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Unfortunately, for some days we have been witnessing
a marked deterioration in the Middle East with a
heightening of confrontation and increased loss of
human lives. I wish to express the sorrow and concern
of Argentina at the tragic events that continue to occur
in Gaza, the West Bank and Israel. I also wish to
convey my Government’s condolences to the families
of the victims of the recent wave of violence.

Mr. Kuchynski (Ukraine): Ukraine remains
deeply concerned over the further deterioration of the
situation in the Middle East. We are appalled by the
daily news of new casualties among the innocent
civilian population. My country was shocked by the
latest massive rocket attack by Israel, which used
heavy weaponry against Palestinian Authority facilities
and other buildings in Gaza and the West Bank.
Ukraine condemns such acts of excessive and
indiscriminate use of force, and urges Israel to stop
them immediately and unconditionally. Everything
should be done to ensure full respect by Israel for the
Fourth Geneva Convention. We also call on the
Palestinians to demonstrate restraint and refrain from
any violent actions. We condemn all acts of violence
and terrorism. We are convinced that there is no
alternative to returning to the negotiating table and
implementing
the
Sharm
el-Sheikh
summit
understanding.

The concern and alarm on the part of Argentina
are increased by the acts of terrorism that occurred
yesterday and today, acts of which Israeli children and
the peaceful population were innocent victims in a
marketplace in a situation that cannot be described as
provocative. We ask the parties to expressly condemn
those acts. We ask the parties to condemn those acts of
terrorism with the same conviction with which we
condemned Israel for the excessive use of force and
with the same conviction that we asked for the
implementation of the Fourth Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War of 12 August 1949.
We believe that the current delicate situation in
the Middle East requires that all the parties act with the
utmost responsibility and self-control. Violence can
only engender more violence. Israel and the Palestinian
Authority must persevere in the implementation of the
agreements reached at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit.
The international community must do everything in its
power to help the parties put an end to the violence.
We support the immediate deployment and
immediate action on the part of the fact-finding
committee presided over by Senator Mitchell, and we
believe that the earlier it begins its work, the more
positive the impact it will have in bringing about peace
in the region.
In this context, we also want to express
Argentina’s full support for the work being carried out
by the Secretary-General, to whom this Council gave a
clear and broad mandate last Friday to explore with the
parties concrete measures to put an end to the violence.
Although the short-term objective is to put an end to
the violence, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the
ultimate objective is the resumption of the peace
negotiations and a definitive resolution of the question
of Palestine on the basis of the relevant Security

It is our conviction that the solution to the
question of Palestine should be based on the full
implementation of Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973), as well as the Madrid Peace
Conference formula and the Oslo accords. My country
supports the constructive engagement of the SecretaryGeneral in the current crisis and strongly encourages
him to continue his efforts to try to find ways to stop
the violence and bring the parties back to the
negotiating table. We look forward to the early
commencement of the activities of the fact-finding
committee.
My country also welcomes the declaration of
20 November by the Foreign Ministers of the European
Union. We share in the growing perception that the
Security Council should take further measures to bring
the situation to normalcy and ensure the
implementation by the parties of resolution
1322 (2000).
My delegation is in agreement with the
assessment that, given the further worsening of the
situation, the presence of a third party, representing the
international community, is critically important if we
are to avert a large-scale war in the whole region. In
our view, under current circumstances, the idea of
deploying a United Nations observer mission, as
proposed by France, is becoming increasingly topical.

15

S/PV.4231

Finally, my country, which continues to be
involved in bilateral consultations on the issue with the
parties concerned, stands ready to contribute further to
efforts aimed at bringing the ongoing crisis in the
Middle East to an end.

encourage and convince the parties concerned — those
Council members that have great influence and
leverage with the parties to the conflict could play a
particular role in this regard — to accept such a United
Nations presence on the ground.

Mr. Misran (Malaysia): I, like other speakers
before me, thank you most sincerely, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting, and particularly for responding
at very short notice to a request by a State Member of
the United Nations for a meeting of the Council on the
grave situation in Palestine. This augurs well for the
credibility of the Council in the eyes of the larger
membership of the United Nations.

I could not agree more with Ambassador
Holbrooke that we need the consent of the host country
when we deploy United Nations peace operations. He
cited Indonesia in the case of East Timor and the visit
of a mission to West Timor. But I wish only to tell
Ambassador Holbrooke that the difference is that in the
case of Palestine Israel is clearly the occupying
Power — the only occupying Power in this modern era.
Palestine is an occupied territory; that is a fact.

We look forward to the statement which the
representative of South Africa will make later on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
The grave situation in occupied East Jerusalem
and the rest of the occupied Palestinian territory must
be addressed immediately by the international
community, especially this Council. The spiral of
violence that was triggered a few days ago must be
stopped once and for all. The unleashing of the
disproportionate response by the Israeli security forces
on Gaza City and on the Palestinian people clearly
signals the intent of the Israeli Government to wage a
kind of war against Palestinian civilians.
Malaysia will continue to work with the other
members of this Council to take immediate, concrete
measures, including the immediate establishment of a
United Nations observer force to ensure the safety and
lives of innocent Palestinian civilians. We believe that
a United Nations presence on the ground would be the
best, speediest and most effective mechanism to help
de-escalate the violence in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Clearly, the present efforts to stop the
violence, including those on the bilateral track, have
not produced effective results so far.
This Council must carry out its solemn duty and
act to protect civilians. We have repeatedly stated this
fact in our previous resolutions and statements on the
question of Palestine and the protection of civilians in
armed conflict, and we must play our part to the fullest.
Last Friday we mandated the Secretary-General
to explore the proposal to deploy a United Nations
observer force to the region. But the Council cannot
rest on its laurels; it must also give its full support to
the establishment of the observer force. We must

16

Of course, for practical reasons, we would need
the cooperation of the Israeli Government to ensure the
effective performance of a United Nations observer
force on the ground. To this end, we call on Israel to
give its full cooperation to the establishment of a
United Nations observer force, if Israel is really serious
in its intention to stop the violence and to restore calm
and peace. After all, it would also be for the good of
the people of Israel.
A just and lasting peace can be achieved only
with the complete withdrawal of Israel’s armed forces
and illegal settlers from all Arab and Palestinian lands
occupied since 1967, including the city of Al-Quds
Al-Sharif and the occupied Syrian Golan. The people
of Palestine have the inalienable right to establish an
independent and sovereign State of their own, with
Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its undisputed capital. To this
end, Malaysia calls on Israel to comply with Security
Council resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 1322
(2000), and all other relevant resolutions.
For more than 50 years the question of the plight
of the Palestinian people has been on the international
agenda. The failure of the international community to
redress the injustices committed against the Palestinian
people will only prolong the instability and violence in
the region. The Council must act now to stop the
violence and to allow the peoples in region to live in an
atmosphere of peace, harmony and progress.
Let us not forget that this Council has the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. We must live up to our obligations.
The Council’s credibility is at stake. To date about 250
people have been killed, including women and
children, mostly Palestinians, as a result of the

S/PV.4231

disproportionate and excessive use of force by Israeli
security forces. Malaysia deeply mourns these tragic
deaths and offers its deepest condolences to the
bereaved families.
How many more deaths and injuries of innocent
civilians, women and children, and how much more
violence do we need to witness before the Council can
act? Let us not repeat the mistakes that were made in
the past in the case of the tragedies in Rwanda and
Srebrenica because of the paralysis of this Council.
Mr. Heinbecker (Canada): Thank you, Sir, for
providing this opportunity for the Security Council to
discuss the very dangerous situation that prevails in the
Middle East.
The Government of Canada is deeply concerned
about the escalation in fighting between Israelis and
Palestinians. We call on both sides to do their part to
end the violence which has caused so many injuries
and so much death.
The cycle of action and reaction — which has
been so appallingly in evidence again today and in the
past few days in Israel and the West Bank and Gaza,
and which has exposed civilians, including children, to
such terrible risk and harm — must be stopped. We
offer our condolences to the families of the victims.
Each side has an obligation to protect civilians.
This imperative cuts both ways: civilians must not be
made targets, nor must civilians engage in hostilities
and provoke, or expose themselves to, a forceful
response.
I wish to be perfectly clear: we condemn all the
violence. We hold both sides responsible for ending it.
The Palestinian Authority must do everything in its
power to prevent terrorist attacks from occurring.
According to the draft resolution on terrorism adopted
today by the Sixth Committee of the General
Assembly, “all acts, methods and practices of
terrorism” are “criminal and unjustifiable, wherever
and by whomsoever committed”. Canada condemns all
such terrorist attacks, and we invite all parties wanting
peace also to condemn such attacks.
For its part, the Government of Israel must do
everything in its power to restrain its forces, to use
proportionate force and to refrain from escalation.
Canada believes that the best chance for a
de-escalation of the situation lies in the prompt

implementation of the understandings reached at Sharm
el-Sheikh. In that context, Canada expects that the factfinding committee, as agreed to by Prime Minister
Barak and Chairman Arafat at Sharm el-Sheikh, to be
launched promptly and to carry out its crucial work in a
timely fashion. We welcome the meetings planned for
the next days and urge that the committee’s work be
facilitated.
Canada also supports the Council mandate given
to the Secretary-General to explore options with the
parties, including an observer presence, possibly
building on the work of the fact-finding committee. It
is in the interests of peace that the Secretary-General
be given the full opportunity to explore these options
and to pursue his contacts with the parties and others.
Canada would support any international effort,
agreed to by both parties, that would help in easing
tensions. Now is the time for the international
community to come together in support of peace. If
ever there were a time for diplomacy and dialogue, it is
now.
The President: I will now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of the Netherlands.
My delegation associates itself with the statement
of the European Union quoted earlier by the Permanent
Representative of France. The Netherlands expresses
its deep concern and intense sorrow about the latest
escalation of violence which we are discussing today.
We consider every life lost a tragedy. That is why we
want to see an immediate end to the violence on both
sides.
There can be no more palpable evidence of the
senselessness of the cycle of violence gripping the
region than the horrific bomb attack on innocent
children in a school bus and the collective punishment
for this act meted out against the Palestinian civilian
population. We call upon both parties to show courage,
not by fighting but by daring to break this vicious
cycle.
The international community should not fuel the
conflict by inflammatory statements or actions, but
should help both sides achieve a just peace that brings
real benefits to both peoples.
I acknowledge with appreciation all the
compliments addressed to the Dutch presidency for
having convened this meeting, but the Netherlands
delegation insists that activities of this Council must

17

S/PV.4231

not be allowed to interfere with the work done in the
context of Sharm el-Sheikh, both by the SecretaryGeneral and by the fact-finding commission.
I now resume my function as President of the
Council.
The next speaker is the representative of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Dorda (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to extend to you, Sir, my thanks
for having responded to the request that I addressed to
you on behalf of the Arab Group to convene this
meeting. And on behalf of the Arab Group let me say
that the question of Palestine — I am not calling it the
Middle East question because there is no Middle East
question; there is no geography or history of the
Middle East. This concept of course exists, but let
someone tell me where the Middle East is. The Middle
East is a creation designed to replace Palestine and to
integrate the occupying State into the region. That is
why I am here discussing the question of Palestine
rather than the question of the Middle East. The Middle
East does not exist in our minds either geographically
or historically. The question of Palestine is a question
of occupation.
Numerous people have come from various
corners of the world to occupy Palestine. The land of
Palestine is the land of all religions. It is a question of
occupation and must be addressed as such: occupation.
We all are aware of the consecutive wars that
have taken place. We all are aware of the political
consequences of those wars. And we are all aware of
the occupiers’ claims that they want peace, not war.
They said they were going to strive for the experience
of peace, because they are the prophets of peace. The
Arabs believe in peace, and the Arabs begin their
greetings with a declaration of peace, as I have done at
the beginning of my speech.
What is the result of this process, incorrectly
labelled the “peace process”? There is a process — that
is true — but there is no peace. Why? The negotiations,
beginning in Madrid, continuing in Oslo, in
Washington and Wye Plantation, in Sharm el-Sheikh
and Camp David, as well as all the other venues — all
those negotiations have remained a dead letter. From
one instrument to another, from one convention to
another, from one accord to another, there has been no

18

implementation. This includes the Palestinian
Authority; it has no authority. The events have
demonstrated this in front of the entire world — the
Palestinian Authority has no true authority over its
land. Entries and exits from Gaza and the West Bank
have been blocked and blockaded by those who
actually possess the authority — that is, the occupying
Power.
What have the Arab regimes that participated in
the peace process ended up with? Three decades have
elapsed since the inception of the process and no
results whatsoever were achieved. The land of
Palestine is still occupied. The Palestinian people are
still outside of Palestine. The land has not been
restored; refugees have not returned home; Palestinians
residing in refugee camps continue to be refugees
scattered throughout the world. What kind of peace can
be established without restitution of the land? What
sort of peace can be concluded without a return of
Palestinians to their homes, their work, their schools
and their land? Recent events have proven the social
truth — that there is a Palestinian people that does
reside in its land.
Moreover, what we are witnessing today is not
peace but imposition of submission to the conditions
dictated by the occupier. Even the Palestinian
delegation at Camp David — according to a statement
made by Mr. Zaanoun, the head of the Central
Palestinian Council here in the United Nations, at a
meeting of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) last
September — was told by the American team: either
you accept these conditions or there will be no
recognition of you as a liberation movement. You will
be treated as terrorists and we will break our relations
with you. We will break off our assistance and our
dialogue with you. What kind of peace is this when
such conditions are imposed upon the Palestinians?
How can it be considered a negotiating process or an
equitable negotiation? Can such a process succeed?
Can this kind of process lead to a truly peaceful
outcome that would restore the rights, land and
property, to the injured party?
Between the Israelis and the Arabs, there are
those who are armed; these include nuclear armaments,
surface-to-air missiles, anti-missile missiles and so
forth. Certain parties are given technology, expertise
and all kinds of financing — that is, one party, Israel.
The other party is prevented, indeed prohibited, from
even manufacturing the smallest light weapon, pistol or

S/PV.4231

rifle. Thus, if there is cooperation from other States in
the creation of defensive disarmament, pressures are
exerted on the other parties to cease cooperation with
the Arab States. What can happen given such an
equation? What is happening in the region is an attempt
to impose capitulation — not peace. And, if there is
such a peace, it cannot be a lasting one, because it is
not based on justice, law and equality.
How many resolutions have been adopted by this
Council? My brother, the representative of Palestine,
has enumerated dozens of them. Pressure has been
exerted by the United States not to implement these
resolutions. The United States has supported the
occupying Power. It is not something to be proud of
when a State proffers such support. Why have the
dozens of Security Council resolutions not been
implemented and applied?
Recently, a Security Council meeting was
convened in the wake of the deaths of three people in
West Timor, and the representatives of all States stood
up to observe a minute of silence or prayer. The Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya is opposed to the killing of any human
being, for whomever they may work. But why has no
one done anything about the murder of hundreds of
Palestinians? Where was the Council? Is there one kind
of peace for some and another kind of peace for others?
Are we talking of an international Security Council or
a United States National Security Council? We know
the answer. But who can pronounce this truth? Fear no
one but God, the Almighty, the Creator.
More than 200 martyrs have fallen in Palestine
because of the occupation, and no one in the United
Nations has lifted a finger, including the Security
Council. More than 10,000 people have been injured,
maimed and have joined the ranks of the handicapped,
as if they were not even human. Meanwhile, those who
invoke the principles of human rights say nothing when
they take the floor.
And yet, are human beings not the same all over
the world? Where are the rights of the Palestinian
people? The Economic and Social Council, despite all
the pressures brought to bear by the United States
delegation, has defended the rights of the Palestinian
people. A member of the Economic and Social Council
told me today that he was, to all intents and purposes,
taken out of the room — abducted, in a sense, to
prevent him from voting. So where are these human

rights? This is happening today, right here in the
United Nations.
There is no hope for peace for the Palestinian
people, because they live under occupation. How can
we talk about peace in the face of the violence that is
taking place in the region and in a situation in which
the occupier and the occupied are placed on an equal
footing? What is the cause, and what is the effect? Is it
the violence that is causing the occupation, or is it the
occupation that is causing the violence?
Let us look at the causes. The real cause is
occupation, and violence is the effect. To stop the
violence is to stop the occupation. What the
Palestinians want is their historical rights, which they
are free to demand. But not even 20 per cent of their
legitimate rights have been given them. Colonies of
armed settlers surround their autonomous land and they
are prevented from enjoying these rights. How can
there be peace if their lands are not restored? Refugees
cannot return home. Those Palestinians who are abroad
will not come back. So what peace are we speaking of?
The Palestinian Authority has no authority in its
own land. The children who are throwing stones were
born after 1967, in occupied Palestine. If this is the
case with this generation, what will happen to
succeeding generations? This will become a cause
embraced by all Arab peoples; the events that have
occurred in Arab capitals are proof of this.
With respect to establishing relations with Israel,
some Arab Governments have succumbed to pressure
from the Arab people and have retreated from such
relations. No people can accept capitulation. We are
advocates of peace. The former United States Secretary
of State, James Baker, said this in his book. Read it,
and it will become clear. “I ask the Israelis what their
positions are. I go to the Arabs and relay that
information. Then I go back to the Israelis.” This is not
our testimony, but that of James Baker.
If the Council is to express, as it should, the will
of the international community and if it is to maintain
international peace and security, we would ask only
one thing of it: that it be just and that it shoulder its
responsibilities under the Charter of the United Nations
and its own resolutions, as set forth in the relevant
international instruments.
We are not asking for the impossible. We are
asking for justice, for our rights, for law.

19

S/PV.4231

On behalf of the Arab Group, we ask the
following: first, that an international observer force be
sent to protect the Palestinian people in the occupied
territories; secondly, that a fact-finding mission be sent
to inquire into all the acts of violence perpetrated
against the Palestinian people, and that the conclusions
it reaches be submitted to the International Criminal
Court; and thirdly, that the relevant Security Council
resolutions be implemented. The Arab Group may be
obliged to revisit the question in coming days, with a
view to seeing what the Council will do.

The Non-Aligned Movement firmly believes that
it remains the permanent responsibility of the United
Nations to stay fully engaged in the Palestinian
question until a definitive solution is achieved. In this
regard, we welcome and fully support the important
role of the Secretary-General in the pursuit of peace at
the Sharm el-Sheikh summit and his efforts in the
recent dialogue with both the Israelis and Palestinians.
This serves to reaffirm the primacy of the United
Nations in global peace and security. We appeal to both
parties to respond constructively.

Mr. President, I hope that you can take this
request into account.

It is incumbent upon the United Nations to adopt
measures to protect the Palestinian people and to
ensure that actions which exacerbate their suffering not
be allowed to continue. The international community
has an obligation to this end. We call on the Council to
seriously consider the immediate deployment of a
protection force to the region.

The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of South Africa. I invite him to
take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Vermeulen (South Africa): First of all, I
offer my apologies, as Ambassador Kumalo could,
unfortunately, not be here this afternoon.
Mr. President, we would like to thank you, on
behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement, for calling this
very timely meeting. At the outset, we would like to
extend our condolences to all the bereaved families
who are suffering as a result of the violence in the
Middle East.
The Non-Aligned Movement comes before this
meeting today and wishes to repeat its call on Israel to
stop subjecting the Palestinian civilians to collective
punishment. This is in violation of the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. We reiterate our call on Israel to
act with restraint and to meticulously abide by its legal
obligations with respect to the Fourth Geneva
Convention.
Just over than a month ago, this body met in
emergency session, in accordance with its mandate as
the custodian of international peace and security, and
adopted resolution 1322 (2000). The resolution called
for the establishment of an international inquiry into
the conflict. The Non-Aligned Movement believes that
the full and expeditious implementation of Security
Council resolution 1322 (2000) would go a long way
towards proving that the Council is prepared to take
decisive action in the maintenance of international
peace and security. It is time to seriously consider
protecting the Palestinian people.

20

The question of Palestine constitutes the nucleus
of the Middle East conflict. The achievement of the
inalienable right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination and to an independent State, with East
Jerusalem as its capital, is pivotal to the achievement
of a sustained and comprehensive peace in the Middle
East.
The Movement believes that peaceful negotiation
is the only means of ensuring lasting peace, security
and stability in the region. We urge the parties to take
the required steps to ensure the cessation of hostilities,
to restore calm and to adopt measures to re-establish
mutual trust. It is only then that an atmosphere
conducive to the resumption of negotiations can be
created.
The Ministers of the Non-Aligned Movement,
meeting in September in New York during the
Millennium Assembly, reaffirmed their determination
to actively strive towards the achievement of a just and
comprehensive peace on the basis of Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
In a statement issued in Pretoria yesterday, the
South African Government strongly condemned the
attack on the Israeli civilian bus two days ago. We
equally strongly condemned the disproportionate and
excessive retaliatory attacks by the Israeli security
force that followed, disturbingly moving the crisis to a
precarious new level. We must ask ourselves the
question: How much longer can this collective
punishment by an occupying, militarily superior

S/PV.4231

force — in violation of international humanitarian
law — be endured by the Palestinian people? Closures,
blockades and restrictions imposed by Israel on the
movement of goods, persons and resources have
resulted in the economic suffocation of the Palestinian
people. The crisis has exacted too much suffering and
claimed too many innocent lives.
We firmly believe that the condition of land for
peace is essential if meaningful progress in the peace
process is to be attained. For a durable, just and
comprehensive peace, negotiation towards final status
issues has to be in accordance with the relevant United
Nations resolutions and international legitimacy.
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Cuba, Egypt and Jordan, in which
they request to be invited to participate in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Rodríguez
Parrilla (Cuba), Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) and Mr.
Al-Hussein (Jordan) took the seats reserved for
them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Egypt. I invite him to take
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Aboulgheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Two
days ago, on 20 November, Egypt recalled its
Ambassador from Tel Aviv following the unacceptable,
unprecedented and unjustified intensification of
systematic Israeli bombings of Palestinian government
buildings and installations in the Gaza Strip. Egypt did
so in the hope of sending a clear and categorical
message to Israel that Egypt, which initiated the peace
process in the Middle East, cannot remain silent and
passive in the face of this excessive, intensive and
arrogant use of military force against the Palestinian
people, its institutions and its property.
A few weeks ago, we warned the Council and the
General Assembly of the fact that the deterioration of
the situation between the Palestinians and Israelis and

Israel’s intensive and inexcusable use of deadly
retaliatory military force and violence could only lead
to more violence. Indeed, the cycle of violence is a
vicious circle. The Palestinian people feels frustration,
outrage and a sense of injustice under military
occupation.
Egypt calls on Israel to fully respect the
agreements undertaken at the Sharm el-Sheikh summit
with regard to the withdrawal of its heavy weapons
from all Palestinian regions and from areas where they
are prohibited under bilateral arrangements. Egypt
believes that such a step is a fundamental measure for
bringing peace to the situation.
Any incident in which civilians on any side are
targeted should be condemned by all parties. Egypt
certainly condemns and rejects the targeting of Israeli
civilians just as forcefully as it condemns the targeting
of Palestinian civilians. It would therefore be useful in
this respect to emphasize that one of the most
important causes of friction between the two parties,
making the situation all the more explosive and tense,
is the presence of Israeli settlers on Palestinian
territory. These are armed civilians who behave
provocatively. We have all seen their conduct and
heard their positions on our television sets. They are on
Palestinian land. Because of this illicit and illegitimate
presence, in violation of the resolutions of the Security
Council and the norms of international law, the
approximately 1 million Palestinians living in the Gaza
Strip occupy only 60 per cent of that territory — as the
representative of Palestine pointed out today in the
Economic and Social Council — because the other 40
per cent is inhabited by approximately 4,000 Israeli
settlers. The Council needs to be aware of these facts.
The situation is so grave that it threatens the
stability of the entire region. Israel continues to take
measures that inflict collective punishment on the
Palestinian people, thus running counter to all
international instruments and to all its obligations as an
occupying Power under the Fourth Geneva Convention.
Israel is subjecting the Palestinian people to an
economic blockade that is stifling it. It closes off
Palestinian territory. Israel is hampering the circulation
of food and medication, not to mention the fact that it
hampers trade. It cuts off electric power from the
whole Gaza Strip. This is a situation that the Security
Council must address. It must not lose sight of it

21

S/PV.4231

because of its grave consequences for Palestinian
civilians.
All these acts must come to an end immediately.
We hope that the fact-finding committee will
begin its work soon, now that it has been established in
consultation with the Secretary-General, under Senator
George Mitchell’s chairmanship. We hope its work will
begin very soon with a clear and specific plan of work
so that it can meet the objective for which it was
created.
In conclusion, the series of events in the occupied
Palestinian territory requires that the Council keep up
with the events. Negotiations and consultations are
now taking place among members of the Council and
with the Secretary-General as well, whose efforts we
appreciate. These consultations are aimed at agreeing
on the establishment and deployment of a United
Nations observer force, which would contribute to
ensuring the protection and security of the Palestinian
people in the face of these recurring Israeli acts of
aggression.
This is precisely the idea that had been advocated
by the Arab Summit in its declaration of 22 October
last.
Egypt, for its part, calls upon the Council to
assume its responsibilities and obligations under the
Charter and to adopt the draft resolution that we hope
will be introduced by the Non-Aligned Caucus of the
Council in the next few days.
I am profoundly concerned and disturbed to hear
the representative of Israel say today that his country is
not convinced of the usefulness of this observer or
protection force.
The President: The next speaker is the
representative of Jordan. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Al Hussein (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): It
gives me great pleasure to begin my statement by
congratulating you, Mr. President, on your assumption
of the Presidency of the Security Council for this
month. I am confident that your wisdom and wide
experience and your ability will lead to the desired
success of our work. I also wish to express my deep
appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador Martin
Andjaba of Namibia, for the skilful way in which he
guided the work of the Council during his presidency. I

22

also wish to express my thanks to you, Mr. President,
for convening this emergency session at the request of
the Arab Group and the Movement of the Non-Aligned.
The convening of this meeting at this time to
grapple with the situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories is an expression of the keen interest of the
Council and of its perception of the gravity of recent
events that pose a threat to our area. This is indeed
another link in the cycle of violence and bloodshed.
His Majesty, King Abdullah II Bin Al Hussein,
warned of such events and of their implications for the
peace process. They bear witness to the need in the
Middle East for peace and the need on the part of the
Palestinian people to rid itself of the yoke of
oppression and occupation that has lasted so long.
The Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan strongly
condemns the violence perpetrated against the
Palestinians in the occupied territories as reflected in
the occupation and the oppressive practices on the part
of the occupation forces of Israel.
Israel has escalated its acts of aggression and
bombarded, by land, sea and air, the Palestinians and
Palestinian institutions and civilian installations. There
was also an act of aggression against the office of the
Jordanian representative in Gaza. This incident is
indeed regrettable. Jordan regrets the death of civilians
on both sides.
What is taking place in the occupied territories
nourishes excesses and provocative acts. Such acts at
the hands of forces that reject peace in Israel against
the Palestinians could embroil the entire area in more
violence and tension and thus undermine the peace
process and could return the area to conflict, to
violence, hostility and enmity.
The Jordanian Government calls upon Israel
immediately to stop all acts of violence, to lift the siege
from Palestinian towns, to implement existing
agreements and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, and to respect the Fourth Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian
Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949. It views as
necessary the prompt dispatch of a fact-finding mission
and the creation and deployment, under United Nations
auspices, of an international observer force in the
occupied territories.
The King, the Government and the people of
Jordan reaffirm their support for the fraternal

S/PV.4231

Palestinian people in its endeavour to gain its
legitimate rights and to establish an independent State
of its own on its national territory, with Al-Quds AlSharif as its capital.
On behalf of my Government, I convey our
heartfelt condolences to the Palestinian leadership and
to the fraternal Palestinian people with respect to their
martyred brethren.
The President: I thank the representative of
Jordan for the kind words he addressed to me and to
my predecessor.
The next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I
invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Rodríguez Parrilla (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): I shall speak first in my capacity as Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People.
Dozens of resolutions have been adopted, clearly
reflecting the will of the majority. Recent examples
include the Council’s own resolution 1322 (2000) and
General Assembly resolution ES-10/7. The Arab
summit held in Egypt on 21 and 22 October 2000
expressed itself on this matter, and on 19 October the
Commission on Human Rights adopted its resolutions
S-5/1 on the subject.
There was no alternative but to resume the tenth
emergency special session of the General Assembly,
which adopted its resolution ES-10/7 on 20 October.
Inter alia, the Assembly condemned the excessive use
of force by the Israeli forces and called upon the
members of the Security Council to follow the situation
closely, including the implementation of resolution
1322 (2000). Furthermore, the Economic and Social
Council voted today to endorse the 9 October decision
of the Commission on Human Rights.
The Secretary-General too has played and
continues to play a very important role in the search for
a solution to the crisis. The Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People hails
his efforts and urges that they continue.
Yet the use of force has increased rather than
declining. In recent days, Israeli occupation forces
have stepped up their activities against the Palestinian
population, launching massive air, sea and land attacks.
Serious violations of the Fourth Geneva Convention

relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 August 1949, continue.
In earlier Council debates on this item, many
delegations spoke of the shocking images seen by all of
the murder of the child Mohammed Al-Durra. Since
then, many other children and other innocent civilians
have died. In the two months of violence that resulted
from the provocative visit to Al-Haram Al-Sharif on 28
September, there have been more than 270 deaths and
7,000 casualties, the vast majority of them Palestinians.
Had Israel implemented the many Security
Council and General Assembly resolutions on the
question of Palestine, we would not now be witnessing
the current critical situation in the occupied territories..
At the private meeting of the Security Council held on
10 November, the President of the Palestinian
Authority described in detail the deteriorating situation
on the ground and clearly set out the reasons why a
protection force of observers needed to be deployed
immediately.
Israeli practices and policies denying the
legitimate needs and aspirations of the Palestinian
people will never be compatible with a legitimate
peace process based on resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973). There can be no just and lasting peace in the
Middle East until the Palestinian people exercise their
legitimate right to establish an independent State with
its capital in East Jerusalem, until all the occupied
Arab territories are returned, and until Israel withdraws
from the Gaza Strip, the West Bank and the Syrian
Golan, to the lines of 4 June 1967. There will be no
lasting peace until provocations in southern Lebanon
cease, until Arab prisoners and detainees are released
from Israeli jails, and until Israeli settlements are
removed in conformity with resolution 465 (1980).
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
representative of the Republic of Cuba.
We hail the President of the Security Council for
the month of October, the representative of Namibia,
for the effective manner in which he guided the
important work of the Council during his presidency.
It is interesting to note how some Council
members — so eager to promote the notion of carrying
out “humanitarian intervention” with or without
Security Council authorization whenever they decide
that there is a worrying human rights situation to be
remedied — have lost all their enthusiasm in this case

23

S/PV.4231

and are manoeuvring to stop the Security Council and
the General Assembly from using their powers under
the Charter. There could be no better illustration of the
interests that so-called humanitarian interventions
really serve.
Everybody knows that a different standard applies
to Israel. This is a typical case of what happens when
the United States, a permanent member of the Security
Council and Israel’s ally, seeks to further its national
interests by making arbitrary use of its powers and
prerogatives. Hypocrisy and double standards reign,
protected by the obsolete and anti-democratic privilege
of the veto.
Cuba supports the position of Council members
that are also members of the Non-Aligned Movement
and of other members of the Security Council that have
been making sincere efforts to ensure that the Council
shoulder its responsibilities. Cuba calls upon the
Security Council to act without further delay, in a way
commensurate with the situation and with its lofty
responsibilities. The Council should immediately set up
an observer force to protect Palestinian civilians. It
should demand that Israel halt its acts of force and
implement the many Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions on the question of the Middle
East.
That is the only path leading to a just and lasting
peace.
The President: I call on the representative of
Israel, who has asked for the floor.
Mr. Lancry (Israel) (spoke in French): The
Palestinian Authority has made a choice that no longer
leaves any shadow of a doubt. That choice is for
violent confrontation, which nourishes and supports the
other strategic choice adopted and declared openly by
Chairman Arafat during the Islamic conference held at
Doha last week. That strategic choice is what he called
the intifada of independence.
While Prime Minister Barak committed himself at
Camp David to a bold enterprise aimed at ending the
conflict with the Palestinians, Chairman Arafat has
made a devastating choice, namely, to achieve his
political ends through fire and blood. Although on 9
September 1993 — the eve of the signing of the Oslo
Accords — the same Chairman Arafat committed
himself in a letter to Prime Minister Rabin to renounce
terrorism as a means of achieving political objectives,

24

he seems to have quickly returned to the same abject
practices he employed in the past that had lastingly
disqualified from being Israel’s interlocutor.
With calculated and refined ambiguity, an order,
instruction, command or allusion from Mr. Arafat
invariably lends itself to interpretation on different
levels. The double and triple language of Chairman
Arafat — one for the international community, another
for his people and a third for his entourage — is very
difficult to decipher. We should therefore not be
surprised to see Mr. Arafat asking, on the one hand, for
an international protection force while, on the other,
releasing terrorists from his own prisons and pitting
them against Israel while stepping away from their
actions. Chairman Arafat’s absurd dance and
convoluted language cannot continue forever to
mislead either his peace partners — the Israelis — or
the international community, which, at its most
inspired and objective, will not be misled indefinitely
by his twists and turns or his shadowy actions.
For the first time since the beginning of this
crisis, we see from the statements of several members
of the Council the semblance of reproach for the
various inadmissible and indescribable acts carried out
by Palestinians in recent days at Kfar Naum and
Hadera. We take good note of that. Whether those
statements in disapproval of Palestinian terrorist acts
are muted or amplified, we believe that the fact they
were made is important because it represents a more
just approach towards both sides. In that regard, the
statements by the representatives of Argentina and
Canada in particular seem to us exemplary in their
relevance.
We also take good note of the virtually
unanimous appeal for a return to calm and negotiations.
I must recall that before Israel put legitimate selfdefence measures into place, the Government had been
trying to implement its peace policy. As the
international community knows full well, Prime
Minister Barak adopted a very innovative peace policy
at Camp David, one conducive to putting an end to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict. Before the helicopters and
the tanks, Mr. Barak had offered an unprecedented
peace proposal that would have made the intangible
concrete and the previously untouchable tangible. Huge
obstacles related to the various issues involved in
achieving a definitive solution of the conflict were thus
beginning to be lifted at the time Chairman Arafat
chose to revert to violence and terrorism.

S/PV.4231

I want to be clear: through a negotiated solution
at Camp David Chairman Arafat could have, through
terms agreed upon by both sides to benefit both parties,
given rise to the advent of a Palestinian State next to
Israel and to the beginning of true reconciliation
between the two peoples. That solution was
conditioned on the fact that it was to be achieved
through a bilateral Israeli-Palestinian agreement, and
that solution is not very far from our reach. In large
part, although not entirely, that solution is up to
Chairman Arafat and his willingness to respect the
same commitments that made him a partner to the
dialogue with Israel.
But it was not we Israelis who froze that peace.
However, we can reach that peace only with a partner
who is committed to becoming part of the history of
coexistence, and not that of recoiling in rejection and
negation of the other. Israel has made the choice for
peace and has signed agreements with Egypt and
Jordan.
Moreover, the Interim Agreements that followed
the Oslo Accords resulted in various achievements
through which 98 per cent of Palestinians in Gaza and
the main cities and hundreds of villages of the West
Bank now live under the control of the Palestinian
Authority, rather than under occupation. The choice of
territorial compromise, of a definite solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, of coexistence and of
reconciliation is a choice that Israel wants to
implement as soon as possible. That is the goal towards
which we should turn our efforts. If this appeal were to
be heard today, we would at least make some progress
today.
The President: I call on the Permanent Observer
of Palestine, who has asked for the floor.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
Permanent Observer of Palestine has asked for the
floor once again because he wishes to express dismay
with regard to the second statement made by the
representative of Israel. During our debates at the
United Nations — including those in the Security
Council — we have always tried to avoid mentioning
persons and personal matters while discussing issues. I
would hope that we could be as objective as possible.
The Israeli party chooses again to attack the
Palestinian leader, who is the elected President of the
Palestinian people. I do not exactly know what
objective can be achieved by doing that, except to fire

more deadly bullets into the peace process or the hope
for peace. What is wrong with the leader of the
Palestinian people calling for independence? What is
wrong with the intifada and independence? That may
have been wrong for Israel, but fortunately not for the
international community. The intifada that lasted seven
years was a non-violent communal expression of the
Palestinian people, and its rejection of the occupation
and its insistence on the right to self-determination and
to establish its own State.
Defenceless civilian Palestinians have paid a high
price for the intifada, of which we are proud. We are
proud of our people. We are proud of our sacrifices.
There is nothing wrong with that. This collective and
principled position of our people is correct.
The representative of Israel wishes to continue
talking about persons. Perhaps it behooves us to recall
the record of Mr. Ehud Barak, the Israeli Prime
Minister; that man, who allowed the ill-fated visit of
Ariel Sharon on 28 September 2000; the man who
conspired with Ariel Sharon to permit this visit
although he knew its implications beforehand; the man
who follows the doctrine “timeout from the peace
process” and who has a declared position to end the
peace process, even for a short time; the general who
has “a pin-point strike doctrine”, as if the Palestinian
people were mere objects and targets against whom he
can practise his advanced military theories; the Prime
Minister who did not observe one promise with the
other negotiating party; the person who did not
implement any of the agreements concluded.
Mr. Barak did not withdraw one centimetre from
the Palestinian territories, except the ones that Mr.
Netanyahu had agreed to withdraw from. Mr. Barak
stopped the peace process with the Wye River process.
He did not advance even one centimetre in
implementing the agreements between the two parties.
Finally, he is the man who leads us now to the brink of
catastrophe. Ask Israeli commentators and Israeli
political forces about what is being said of his great
leadership.
We do not object to what has been stated today
about the events in Israel. We have always stated our
rejection of all acts committed against Israeli civilians.
We have condemned terrorist acts in all their aspects,
including State terrorism and terrorism caused by the
occupation itself. To a great extent we do not oppose
what has been said about the bus incident in Gaza

25

S/PV.4231

because children are children, regardless of their
nationality. No one wishes to inflict harm on any child,
but is it not our right to remind you that the children
who were injured on the Israeli bus were fewer that the
80 Palestinian children who were killed at the hands of
the Israeli occupation? Eighty Palestinian children have
been killed by the Israeli occupation forces. Where is
the equality here? Where is the fairness?
There are two things we do not accept. The first
thing we deem untenable is for anyone to think that the
Israeli child is more precious than the Palestinian child.
The second matter is that we refuse to absolve the
Israeli Government of its direct responsibility for these
acts because they bring settlers, including their
children, in an illegal manner that contravenes the
Security Council and the Fourth Geneva Convention,
which prevents the transference of population. They
come to occupy a territory. They collect fewer than
5,000 settlers to occupy about 40 per cent of the Gaza
Strip. Do you know how big the Gaza Strip is? 360
square kilometres of arid, fallow land devoid of any
natural resources, including water. In addition to that,
40 per cent of the other land is under Israeli
occupation, where fewer than 5,000 Israeli settlers
reside illegally. Is this a natural occupation? No. Is this
apartheid? No. This is a unique event, unprecedented in
contemporary history, which will later be called the
Israeli occupation with all its deep and painful
implications resulting from the aforementioned Israeli
practices.
They are directly responsible for these events.
The occupation is the source of these events. The
violation of international law is also the cause of these
events. Finally, I hope that people will not only
remember the Israelis who died or only the five injured
Israeli children. We condemn that. But we do not want
people to remember them only and for things to stop
there. How about the scores of Palestinian children
who were killed in cold blood by snipers, at the hands
of the occupation soldiers? You must have read several
reports. There were several films on that issue. Their
plight is indeed sad.
I did not intend to delve into all these matters, in
order to remain at a level becoming of the Council, but
the Israeli representative insists on dragging the matter
on in this way. This is unfortunate and should end. But
the end comes through a change in the mentality of the
occupier. Peace requires mutual respect and recognition
of the existence and equal rights of the other party.

26

This is what the approach should be, rather than
addressing the other party in a condescending manner,
as if to say I am the master, I am the occupier, while
the other party must understand that the Security
Council will be of no avail to it and international law
will be useless and that crying and pain will also be
useless. But he has to defer to the master because the
master is the one who will grant him something that he
should accept. But this is untenable. The beginning of
change starts with a change in mentality, by
recognizing that there is an occupation and by
accepting the other as an equal as well as by accepting
his dignity.
In conclusion, we wish to thank all the members
of the Security Council and all those others who spoke
in the Council. I wish in particular to express our
appreciation for the statement made on behalf of the
European Union. We agree with that statement. We are
ready to work with the members of the European Union
and other members, as well as with all the parties
concerned that are ready to make efforts to resolve the
situation and to reach peace in the Middle East region.
The President: There are no further speakers on
my list.
The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m.
