United Nations

A/RES/56/83

General Assembly

Distr.: General
28 January 2002

Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 162

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/56/589 and Corr.1)]

56/83.

Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter IV of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-third session, 1 which contains the draft articles
on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts,
Noting that the International Law Commission decided to recommend to the
General Assembly that it should take note of the draft articles on responsibility of
States for internationally wrongful acts in a resolution and annex the draft articles to
that resolution, and that it should consider at a later stage, in the light of the
importance of the topic, the possibility of convening an international conference of
plenipotentiaries to examine the draft articles with a view to concluding a
convention on the topic, 2
Emphasizing the continuing importance of the codification and progressive
development of international law, as referred to in Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Noting that the subject of responsibility of States for internationally wrongful
acts is of major importance in the relations of States,
1.
Welcomes the conclusion of the work of the International Law
Commission on responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts and its
adoption of the draft articles and a detailed commentary on the subject;
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for its
continuing contribution to the codification and progressive development of
international law;

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigendum
(A/56/10 and Corr.1).
2
Ibid., paras. 72 and 73.

01 47797

A/RES/56/83

3.
Takes note of the articles on responsibility of States for internationally
wrongful acts, presented by the International Law Commission, the text of which is
annexed to the present resolution, and commends them to the attention of
Governments without prejudice to the question of their future adoption or other
appropriate action;
4.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-ninth session an
item entitled “Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts”.
85th plenary meeting
12 December 2001

Annex
Responsibility of States for internationally wrongful acts
PART ONE
THE INTERNATIONALLY WRONGFUL ACT OF A STATE

Chapter I
General principles
Article 1
Responsibility of a State for its internationally wrongful acts
Every internationally wrongful act of a State entails the international
responsibility of that State.
Article 2
Elements of an internationally wrongful act of a State
There is an internationally wrongful act of a State when conduct consisting of
an action or omission:
(a)

Is attributable to the State under international law; and

(b)

Constitutes a breach of an international obligation of the State.

Article 3
Characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful
The characterization of an act of a State as internationally wrongful is
governed by international law. Such characterization is not affected by the
characterization of the same act as lawful by internal law.
Chapter II
Attribution of conduct to a State
Article 4
Conduct of organs of a State
1.
The conduct of any State organ shall be considered an act of that State under
international law, whether the organ exercises legislative, executive, judicial or any
other functions, whatever position it holds in the organization of the State, and
whatever its character as an organ of the central government or of a territorial unit
of the State.

2

A/RES/56/83

2.
An organ includes any person or entity which has that status in accordance
with the internal law of the State.
Article 5
Conduct of persons or entities exercising elements of governmental authority
The conduct of a person or entity which is not an organ of the State under
article 4 but which is empowered by the law of that State to exercise elements of the
governmental authority shall be considered an act of the State under international
law, provided the person or entity is acting in that capacity in the particular instance.
Article 6
Conduct of organs placed at the disposal of a State by another State
The conduct of an organ placed at the disposal of a State by another State shall
be considered an act of the former State under international law if the organ is
acting in the exercise of elements of the governmental authority of the State at
whose disposal it is placed.
Article 7
Excess of authority or contravention of instructions
The conduct of an organ of a State or of a person or entity empowered to
exercise elements of the governmental authority shall be considered an act of the
State under international law if the organ, person or entity acts in that capacity, even
if it exceeds its authority or contravenes instructions.
Article 8
Conduct directed or controlled by a State
The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a
State under international law if the person or group of persons is in fact acting on
the instructions of, or under the direction or control of, that State in carrying out the
conduct.
Article 9
Conduct carried out in the absence or default of the official authorities
The conduct of a person or group of persons shall be considered an act of a
State under international law if the person or group of persons is in fact exercising
elements of the governmental authority in the absence or default of the official
authorities and in circumstances such as to call for the exercise of those elements of
authority.
Article 10
Conduct of an insurrectional or other movement
1.
The conduct of an insurrectional movement which becomes the new
government of a State shall be considered an act of that State under international
law.
2.
The conduct of a movement, insurrectional or other, which succeeds in
establishing a new State in part of the territory of a pre-existing State or in a
territory under its administration shall be considered an act of the new State under
international law.

3

A/RES/56/83

3.
This article is without prejudice to the attribution to a State of any conduct,
however related to that of the movement concerned, which is to be considered an act
of that State by virtue of articles 4 to 9.
Article 11
Conduct acknowledged and adopted by a State as its own
Conduct which is not attributable to a State under the preceding articles shall
nevertheless be considered an act of that State under international law if and to the
extent that the State acknowledges and adopts the conduct in question as its own.
Chapter III
Breach of an international obligation
Article 12
Existence of a breach of an international obligation
There is a breach of an international obligation by a State when an act of that
State is not in conformity with what is required of it by that obligation, regardless of
its origin or character.
Article 13
International obligation in force for a State
An act of a State does not constitute a breach of an international obligation
unless the State is bound by the obligation in question at the time the act occurs.
Article 14
Extension in time of the breach of an international obligation
1.
The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State not having a
continuing character occurs at the moment when the act is performed, even if its
effects continue.
2.
The breach of an international obligation by an act of a State having a
continuing character extends over the entire period during which the act continues
and remains not in conformity with the international obligation.
3.
The breach of an international obligation requiring a State to prevent a given
event occurs when the event occurs and extends over the entire period during which
the event continues and remains not in conformity with that obligation.
Article 15
Breach consisting of a composite act
1.
The breach of an international obligation by a State through a series of actions
or omissions defined in aggregate as wrongful occurs when the action or omission
occurs which, taken with the other actions or omissions, is sufficient to constitute
the wrongful act.
2.
In such a case, the breach extends over the entire period starting with the first
of the actions or omissions of the series and lasts for as long as these actions or
omissions are repeated and remain not in conformity with the international
obligation.

4

A/RES/56/83

Chapter IV
Responsibility of a State in connection with the act of another State
Article 16
Aid or assistance in the commission of an internationally wrongful act
A State which aids or assists another State in the commission of an
internationally wrongful act by the latter is internationally responsible for doing so
if:
(a) That State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the
internationally wrongful act; and
(b)

The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State.

Article 17
Direction and control exercised over the commission of an internationally
wrongful act
A State which directs and controls another State in the commission of an
internationally wrongful act by the latter is internationally responsible for that act if:
(a) That State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the
internationally wrongful act; and
(b)

The act would be internationally wrongful if committed by that State.

Article 18
Coercion of another State
A State which coerces another State to commit an act is internationally
responsible for that act if:
(a) The act would, but for the coercion, be an internationally wrongful act of
the coerced State; and
(b)

The coercing State does so with knowledge of the circumstances of the

act.
Article 19
Effect of this chapter
This chapter is without prejudice to the international responsibility, under
other provisions of these articles, of the State which commits the act in question, or
of any other State.
Chapter V
Circumstances precluding wrongfulness
Article 20
Consent
Valid consent by a State to the commission of a given act by another State
precludes the wrongfulness of that act in relation to the former State to the extent
that the act remains within the limits of that consent.

5

A/RES/56/83

Article 21
Self-defence
The wrongfulness of an act of a State is precluded if the act constitutes a
lawful measure of self-defence taken in conformity with the Charter of the United
Nations.
Article 22
Countermeasures in respect of an internationally wrongful act
The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an international
obligation towards another State is precluded if and to the extent that the act
constitutes a countermeasure taken against the latter State in accordance with
chapter II of part three.
Article 23
Force majeure
1.
The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an international
obligation of that State is precluded if the act is due to force majeure, that is the
occurrence of an irresistible force or of an unforeseen event, beyond the control of
the State, making it materially impossible in the circumstances to perform the
obligation.
2.

Paragraph 1 does not apply if:

(a) The situation of force majeure is due, either alone or in combination with
other factors, to the conduct of the State invoking it; or
(b)

The State has assumed the risk of that situation occurring.

Article 24
Distress
1.
The wrongfulness of an act of a State not in conformity with an international
obligation of that State is precluded if the author of the act in question has no other
reasonable way, in a situation of distress, of saving the author’s life or the lives of
other persons entrusted to the author’s care.
2.

Paragraph 1 does not apply if:

(a) The situation of distress is due, either alone or in combination with other
factors, to the conduct of the State invoking it; or
(b)

The act in question is likely to create a comparable or greater peril.

Article 25
Necessity
1.
Necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for precluding the
wrongfulness of an act not in conformity with an international obligation of that
State unless the act:
(a) Is the only way for the State to safeguard an essential interest against a
grave and imminent peril; and
(b) Does not seriously impair an essential interest of the State or States
towards which the obligation exists, or of the international community as a whole.

6

A/RES/56/83

2.
In any case, necessity may not be invoked by a State as a ground for
precluding wrongfulness if:
(a) The international obligation in question excludes the possibility of
invoking necessity; or
(b)

The State has contributed to the situation of necessity.

Article 26
Compliance with peremptory norms
Nothing in this chapter precludes the wrongfulness of any act of a State which
is not in conformity with an obligation arising under a peremptory norm of general
international law.
Article 27
Consequences of invoking a circumstance precluding wrongfulness
The invocation of a circumstance precluding wrongfulness in accordance with
this chapter is without prejudice to:
(a) Compliance with the obligation in question, if and to the extent that the
circumstance precluding wrongfulness no longer exists;
(b) The question of compensation for any material loss caused by the act in
question.
PART TWO
CONTENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY OF A STATE

Chapter I
General principles
Article 28
Legal consequences of an internationally wrongful act
The international responsibility of a State which is entailed by an
internationally wrongful act in accordance with the provisions of part one involves
legal consequences as set out in this part.
Article 29
Continued duty of performance
The legal consequences of an internationally wrongful act under this part do
not affect the continued duty of the responsible State to perform the obligation
breached.
Article 30
Cessation and non-repetition
The State responsible for the internationally wrongful act is under an
obligation:
(a)

To cease that act, if it is continuing;

(b) To offer appropriate assurances and guarantees of non-repetition, if
circumstances so require.

7

A/RES/56/83

Article 31
Reparation
1.
The responsible State is under an obligation to make full reparation for the
injury caused by the internationally wrongful act.
2.
Injury includes any damage, whether material or moral, caused by the
internationally wrongful act of a State.
Article 32
Irrelevance of internal law
The responsible State may not rely on the provisions of its internal law as
justification for failure to comply with its obligations under this part.
Article 33
Scope of international obligations set out in this part
1.
The obligations of the responsible State set out in this part may be owed to
another State, to several States, or to the international community as a whole,
depending in particular on the character and content of the international obligation
and on the circumstances of the breach.
2.
This part is without prejudice to any right, arising from the international
responsibility of a State, which may accrue directly to any person or entity other
than a State.
Chapter II
Reparation for injury
Article 34
Forms of reparation
Full reparation for the injury caused by the internationally wrongful act shall
take the form of restitution, compensation and satisfaction, either singly or in
combination, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Article 35
Restitution
A State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation
to make restitution, that is, to re-establish the situation which existed before the
wrongful act was committed, provided and to the extent that restitution:
(a)

Is not materially impossible;

(b) Does not involve a burden out of all proportion to the benefit deriving
from restitution instead of compensation.
Article 36
Compensation
1.
The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation
to compensate for the damage caused thereby, insofar as such damage is not made
good by restitution.
2.
The compensation shall cover any financially assessable damage including
loss of profits insofar as it is established.

8

A/RES/56/83

Article 37
Satisfaction
1.
The State responsible for an internationally wrongful act is under an obligation
to give satisfaction for the injury caused by that act insofar as it cannot be made
good by restitution or compensation.
2.
Satisfaction may consist in an acknowledgement of the breach, an expression
of regret, a formal apology or another appropriate modality.
3.
Satisfaction shall not be out of proportion to the injury and may not take a
form humiliating to the responsible State.
Article 38
Interest
1.
Interest on any principal sum due under this chapter shall be payable when
necessary in order to ensure full reparation. The interest rate and mode of
calculation shall be set so as to achieve that result.
2.
Interest runs from the date when the principal sum should have been paid until
the date the obligation to pay is fulfilled.
Article 39
Contribution to the injury
In the determination of reparation, account shall be taken of the contribution to
the injury by wilful or negligent action or omission of the injured State or any
person or entity in relation to whom reparation is sought.
Chapter III
Serious breaches of obligations under peremptory norms of general
international law
Article 40
Application of this chapter
1.
This chapter applies to the international responsibility which is entailed by a
serious breach by a State of an obligation arising under a peremptory norm of
general international law.
2.
A breach of such an obligation is serious if it involves a gross or systematic
failure by the responsible State to fulfil the obligation.
Article 41
Particular consequences of a serious breach of an obligation under this chapter
1.
States shall cooperate to bring to an end through lawful means any serious
breach within the meaning of article 40.
2.
No State shall recognize as lawful a situation created by a serious breach
within the meaning of article 40, nor render aid or assistance in maintaining that
situation.
3.
This article is without prejudice to the other consequences referred to in this
part and to such further consequences that a breach to which this chapter applies
may entail under international law.

9

A/RES/56/83

PART THREE
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE INTERNATIONAL RESPONSIBILITY OF A STATE

Chapter I
Invocation of the responsibility of a State
Article 42
Invocation of responsibility by an injured State
A State is entitled as an injured State to invoke the responsibility of another
State if the obligation breached is owed to:
(a)

That State individually; or

(b) A group of States including that State, or the international community as
a whole, and the breach of the obligation:
(i)

Specially affects that State; or

(ii) Is of such a character as radically to change the position of all the other
States to which the obligation is owed with respect to the further performance
of the obligation.
Article 43
Notice of claim by an injured State
1.
An injured State which invokes the responsibility of another State shall give
notice of its claim to that State.
2.

The injured State may specify in particular:

(a) The conduct that the responsible State should take in order to cease the
wrongful act, if it is continuing;
(b) What form reparation should take in accordance with the provisions of
part two.
Article 44
Admissibility of claims
The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if:
(a) The claim is not brought in accordance with any applicable rule relating
to the nationality of claims;
(b) The claim is one to which the rule of exhaustion of local remedies
applies and any available and effective local remedy has not been exhausted.
Article 45
Loss of the right to invoke responsibility
The responsibility of a State may not be invoked if:
(a)

The injured State has validly waived the claim;

(b) The injured State is to be considered as having, by reason of its conduct,
validly acquiesced in the lapse of the claim.

10

A/RES/56/83

Article 46
Plurality of injured States
Where several States are injured by the same internationally wrongful act, each
injured State may separately invoke the responsibility of the State which has
committed the internationally wrongful act.
Article 47
Plurality of responsible States
1.
Where several States are responsible for the same internationally wrongful act,
the responsibility of each State may be invoked in relation to that act.
2.

Paragraph 1:

(a) Does not permit any injured State to recover, by way of compensation,
more than the damage it has suffered;
(b)
States.

Is without prejudice to any right of recourse against the other responsible

Article 48
Invocation of responsibility by a State other than an injured State
1.
Any State other than an injured State is entitled to invoke the responsibility of
another State in accordance with paragraph 2 if:
(a) The obligation breached is owed to a group of States including that State,
and is established for the protection of a collective interest of the group; or
(b)
whole.

The obligation breached is owed to the international community as a

2.
Any State entitled to invoke responsibility under paragraph 1 may claim from
the responsible State:
(a) Cessation of the internationally wrongful act, and assurances and
guarantees of non-repetition in accordance with article 30; and
(b) Performance of the obligation of reparation in accordance with the
preceding articles, in the interest of the injured State or of the beneficiaries of the
obligation breached.
3.
The requirements for the invocation of responsibility by an injured State under
articles 43, 44 and 45 apply to an invocation of responsibility by a State entitled to
do so under paragraph 1.
Chapter II
Countermeasures
Article 49
Object and limits of countermeasures
1.
An injured State may only take countermeasures against a State which is
responsible for an internationally wrongful act in order to induce that State to
comply with its obligations under part two.
2.
Countermeasures are limited to the non-performance for the time being of
international obligations of the State taking the measures towards the responsible
State.
11

A/RES/56/83

3.
Countermeasures shall, as far as possible, be taken in such a way as to permit
the resumption of performance of the obligations in question.
Article 50
Obligations not affected by countermeasures
1.

Countermeasures shall not affect:

(a) The obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force as embodied in
the Charter of the United Nations;

2.

(b)

Obligations for the protection of fundamental human rights;

(c)

Obligations of a humanitarian character prohibiting reprisals;

(d)

Other obligations under peremptory norms of general international law.

A State taking countermeasures is not relieved from fulfilling its obligations:

(a) Under any dispute settlement procedure applicable between it and the
responsible State;
(b) To respect the inviolability of diplomatic or consular agents, premises,
archives and documents.
Article 51
Proportionality
Countermeasures must be commensurate with the injury suffered, taking into
account the gravity of the internationally wrongful act and the rights in question.
Article 52
Conditions relating to resort to countermeasures
1.

Before taking countermeasures, an injured State shall:

(a) Call upon the responsible State, in accordance with article 43, to fulfil its
obligations under part two;
(b) Notify the responsible State of any decision to take countermeasures and
offer to negotiate with that State.
2.
Notwithstanding paragraph 1 (b), the injured State may take such urgent
countermeasures as are necessary to preserve its rights.
3.
Countermeasures may not be taken, and if already taken must be suspended
without undue delay if:
(a)

The internationally wrongful act has ceased; and

(b) The dispute is pending before a court or tribunal which has the authority
to make decisions binding on the parties.
4.
Paragraph 3 does not apply if the responsible State fails to implement the
dispute settlement procedures in good faith.
Article 53
Termination of countermeasures
Countermeasures shall be terminated as soon as the responsible State has
complied with its obligations under part two in relation to the internationally
wrongful act.
12

A/RES/56/83

Article 54
Measures taken by States other than an injured State
This chapter does not prejudice the right of any State, entitled under article 48,
paragraph 1, to invoke the responsibility of another State, to take lawful measures
against that State to ensure cessation of the breach and reparation in the interest of
the injured State or of the beneficiaries of the obligation breached.
PART FOUR
GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 55
Lex specialis
These articles do not apply where and to the extent that the conditions for the
existence of an internationally wrongful act or the content or implementation of the
international responsibility of a State are governed by special rules of international
law.
Article 56
Questions of State responsibility not regulated by these articles
The applicable rules of international law continue to govern questions
concerning the responsibility of a State for an internationally wrongful act to the
extent that they are not regulated by these articles.
Article 57
Responsibility of an international organization
These articles are without prejudice to any question of the responsibility under
international law of an international organization, or of any State for the conduct of
an international organization.
Article 58
Individual responsibility
These articles are without prejudice to any question of the individual
responsibility under international law of any person acting on behalf of a State.
Article 59
Charter of the United Nations
These articles are without prejudice to the Charter of the United Nations.

13
