A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/157
26 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 148
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/52/649)]
52/157. Report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law on the
work of its thirtieth session

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2205 (XXI) of 17 December 1966, by which it created the United Nations
Commission on International Trade Law with a mandate to further the progressive harmonization and
unification of the law of international trade and in that respect to bear in mind the interests of all peoples,
in particular those of developing countries, in the extensive development of international trade,
Reaffirming its conviction that the progressive harmonization and unification of international trade law,
in reducing or removing legal obstacles to the flow of international trade, especially those affecting the
developing countries, would contribute significantly to universal economic cooperation among all States on
a basis of equality, equity and common interest and to the elimination of discrimination in international trade
and thereby to the well-being of all peoples,
Stressing the value of participation by States at all levels of economic development and from different
legal systems in the process of harmonizing and unifying international trade law,
Having considered the report of the Commission on the work of its thirtieth session,1

1

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-second Session, Supplement No. 17 (A/52/17).

98-76237

/...

A/RES/52/157
Page 2

Mindful of the valuable contribution to be rendered by the Commission within the framework of the
United Nations Decade of International Law, in particular as regards the dissemination of international trade
law,
Concerned that activities undertaken by other bodies of the United Nations system in the field of
international trade law without coordination with the Commission might lead to undesirable duplication of
efforts and would not be in keeping with the aim of promoting efficiency, consistency and coherence in the
unification and harmonization of international trade law, as stated in its resolution 37/106 of 16 December
1982,
Stressing the importance of the further development of the Case Law on United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law Texts in promoting the uniform application of the legal texts of the Commission
and its value for government officials, practitioners and academics,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the United Nations Commission on International Trade
Law on the work of its thirtieth session;1
2. Notes with satisfaction the completion and adoption by the Commission of the Model Law on
Cross-Border Insolvency;2
3. Commends the Commission for the progress made in its work on receivables financing, digital
signatures and certification authorities, privately financed infrastructure projects and the legislative
implementation of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of Foreign Arbitral Awards;3
4. Appeals to Governments that have not yet done so to reply to the questionnaire circulated by the
Secretariat in relation to the legal regime governing the recognition and enforcement of foreign arbitral
awards;
5. Invites States to nominate persons to work with the private foundation established to encourage
assistance to the Commission from the private sector;
6. Reaffirms the mandate of the Commission, as the core legal body within the United Nations system
in the field of international trade law, to coordinate legal activities in this field and, in this connection:
(a) Calls upon all bodies of the United Nations system and invites other international organizations to
bear in mind the mandate of the Commission and the need to avoid duplication of effort and to promote
efficiency, consistency and coherence in the unification and harmonization of international trade law;
(b) Recommends that the Commission, through its secretariat, continue to maintain close cooperation
with the other international organs and organizations, including regional organizations, active in the field of
international trade law;
7. Also reaffirms the importance, in particular for developing countries, of the work of the Commission
concerned with training and technical assistance in the field of international trade law, such as assistance in
the preparation of national legislation based on legal texts of the Commission;
8. Expresses the desirability for increased efforts by the Commission, in sponsoring seminars and
symposia, to provide such training and technical assistance, and in this connection:

2

Ibid., annex I; see also resolution 52/158.

3

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 330, No. 4739.

98-76237

/...

A/RES/52/157
Page 3

(a) Expresses its appreciation to the Commission for organizing seminars and briefing missions in
Barbados, Egypt, the Lao People's Democratic Republic, Malaysia, South Africa, Thailand and Viet Nam;
(b) Expresses its appreciation to the Governments whose contributions enabled the seminars and
briefing missions to take place, and appeals to Governments, the relevant United Nations organs,
organizations, institutions and individuals to make voluntary contributions to the United Nations Commission
on International Trade Law Trust Fund for Symposia and, where appropriate, to the financing of special
projects, and otherwise to assist the secretariat of the Commission in financing and organizing seminars and
symposia, in particular in developing countries, and in the award of fellowships to candidates from
developing countries to enable them to participate in such seminars and symposia;
9. Appeals to the United Nations Development Programme and other bodies responsible for
development assistance, such as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as well as to Governments in their bilateral aid programmes, to
support the training and technical assistance programme of the Commission and to cooperate and coordinate
their activities with those of the Commission;
10. Appeals to Governments, the relevant United Nations organs, organizations, institutions and
individuals, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the sessions of the Commission and
its working groups, to make voluntary contributions to the trust fund for travel assistance to developing
countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
11. Decides, in order to ensure full participation by all Member States in the sessions of the
Commission and its working groups, to continue, in the competent Main Committee during the fifty-second
session of the General Assembly, its consideration of granting travel assistance to the least developed
countries that are members of the Commission, at their request and in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the effective implementation of the programme of the
Commission;
13. Stresses the importance of bringing into effect the conventions emanating from the work of the
Commission for the global unification and harmonization of international trade law, and to this end urges
States that have not yet done so to consider signing, ratifying or acceding to those conventions.
72nd plenary meeting
15 December 1997

/...
