UNITED NATIONS

OFFICIAL
THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

th
MEETING:

NEW

23 MAY

1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2439)
of the agenda

The situation

. . . . 1. . . . 8, . , . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . , . .

1
I

..,........................,.,....,..,,....,,..

in Namibia:

Letter dated I2 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security

of Mauritius to the
Council (S/15760);

Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . .

1

S/P-V. 2439

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2439th MEETING
Held
President: Mr. M. KAMANDA

in New York on Monday,

23 May 1983, at 3.30 pm.

wa KAMANDA

At the invitation of the President,Mr, Maudave (Mauritius) took a pIace at the Council table; Mr. Sahnoun(Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Joseph(Australia),
Mr. Wasiuddin(Bangladesh),Mr. Adjibade (Benin), Mr.
Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. KhaIil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. Coumbassa(Guinea), Mr.
Rao (India), Mr. Djalal (Indonesia),Sir Egerton Richardson (Jamaica), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Traore
(Mali), Mr. Fafowora (Nigeria), Mr. &ores Typaldos
(Panama), Mr. Marinescu (Romania),Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles),Mr. Sailu (Sierra Leone),
Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa), Mr. Fonseku (Sri
Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. Slim
(Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) and
Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the placesreservedfor them at
the side of the Council Chamber.

(Zaire).

Present; The representatives of the foliowing States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption

agenda (S/Agenda/2439)

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative
of Mauritius to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius ta the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the membersof the Council that I
have received letters from the representativesof Algeria,
Angola, Australia, Bangladesh,Benin, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, the Gambia, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica,
Kuwait, Mali, Mauritius, Nigeria, Panama, Romania,
Senegal,Seychelles,Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Yugoslavia
and Zambia, in which they request to be invited to participate in the discussionof the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usualpractice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representativesto participate in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule
37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the membersof the Council that I
have received a letter dated 19May from the Presidentof
the United Nations Council for Namibia, which reads as
follows:
“On behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, I have the honour, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, to
request an invitation to the delegation of the United
Nations Council For Namibia, headedby me, to participate in the Security Council’s consideration of the
item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’ which begins
on 23 May 1983,The other membersof the delegation
to theseforthcoming meetingsof the Security Council
are: Mr. Ignac Golob (Yugoslavia), Mr. Tuluy Tang
(Turkey), Mr. Madjid Bouguerra (Algeria) and Miss
Elaine V. Jacob (Guyana).”
3. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representativesof other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordancewith past practice,
therefore, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure
to the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia and the delegation of the Council,
At the invitation of the President,Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Councilfor Namibia) and the other
membersof the delegationtook placesat the Council table.
4, The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the membersof the Council that I

have received a letter dated 18 May from the Acting
Chairman of the Special Committee against Apartheid,
which reads as follows:

the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of
Security
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
concerning the question of Namibia dated 19 May.

“I have the honour to request the Council to permit
Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun, representative of Algeria, to
participate, on behalf of the Chairman of the Special
Committee against Apartheid, under the provisions of
rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of procedure,
in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The
situation in Namibia’.”

10, The members of the CoUliCil
have
dS0
received
photocopiesof a letter dated 20 May from the representative of Mauritius to the Presidentof the COLlIld.
The text
of the letter will be distributed as document S/15781.
11, The first speakeris the Minister for Foreign Affairs
of India, Mr. Narasimha Roa, whom I welcome, who
wishesto make a statement in his capacity as ~Cpreselltative of the Chairman of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

50. On previous occasions the Security Council has
extended invitations to representatives of other United
Nations bodies in connection with the consideration of
matters on its agenda. In accordance with past practice,
therefore, I propose that the Council extend an invitation
pursuant to rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Mohamed Sahnoun, representative of the Chairman
of the Special Committee against Apartheid.

12. Mr. RAO (India): My delegation has already had
occasion earlier this month, to extend l0 YOU, Sir, its
sincerefelicitations on your assumptionof the high office
of Presidentof the Council for the month of May. Permit
me to avail myself of this opportunity to COIIV~Y to YOU
and, through you, to the other membersof the Council
the greetings and good wishesof the Prime Minister of
India, Mrs. Indira Gandhi, in her capacity ilS Chairman
of the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries. Allow me
also to convey to you my personal congratulations on
your assumptionof the presidency of the Council. We
are happy to see in the Chair the representative of a
fellow non-aligned country with which India has traditionally enjoyed close and cordial relations. It is only
appropriate that we should be meeting here today under
the stewardshipof a distinguishedson of Africa to consider the question of Namibia. We are confident that,
with your rich diplomatic experienceand skill, the Council will be able to addressitself in a meaningfill and dccisive manner to the item on its agenda. I should like to
avail myself of this opportunity to assure you of the
wholehearted co-operation of my delegation.

It was so decided.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 20 May from the representatives of Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe [S/1.5779], which
reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned, members of the Security
Council, have the honour to request that, during its
meetings devoted to consideration of the item entitled
‘The situation in Namibia’, the Security Council extend
an invitation, under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure, to Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization.”
7. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
decides to extend an invitation to MT. Nujoma in accordance with rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure.

13. I have come before the Council along with several
of my colleagues from non-aligned countries, on the
strength of a mandate from the Heads of State or
Government of Non-Aligned Countries who met at their
Seventh Conference at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March.
At that Conference, the Headsof State or Government:

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma took a
place at the Council table,
8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
Council is meeting today in response to requests by the
representative of Mauritius, in a letter dated 12 May, and
by the representative of India, in a letter dated 13 May
addressed to the President of the Council,

“called upon the United Nations Security Council to
meet, assoon as possible,in order to consider further
action on the implementationof its plan for Namibia’s
independencethereby assumingits primary responsibility for implementation of Security Council resolution 435 (19781.” [See S/15675 and Corr.1 and 2,
para. 49.1

9. The members of the Council have before them the
following documents: S/15757, which contains the text of
a letter dated 9 May from the President of the United
Nations Council for Namibia to the Secretary-General,
transmitting the text of the Paris Declaration on Namibia
and the Report and Programme of Action on Namibia
adopted by the International Conference in Support of
the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence,
held in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983;’ S/15675 and
Corr.1 and 2, which contains the text of a letter dated 30
March from the representativeof India to the SecretaryGeneral and S/15776, which contains a further report of

14. The presencehere today of a large number of Ministersfor Foreign Affairs from non-aligned countries is a
reflection of the fact that the Movement of Non-Aligned
Gmmies has traditionally considered the question of
Namibia as an issueof paramount COIXXTII
and made
Common
CauSe
With
the people of Namibia in their
struggle for freedom and dignity,
2

15. The New Delhi Conference devoted considerable
attention to this question of critical importance and reaffirmed the fundamental principles highlighted in successive meetings and conferences of the Movement, which
are as follows: one, the people of Namibia have the inalienable right to self-determination, freedom and nationa
independence in a united Namibia, including Walvis Bay,
the Penguin and other offshore islands; two, Namibia is
the direct responsibility of the United Nations; three, the
South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO) is the
sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people;
four, the continued illegal occupation of Namibia by the
racist South African rCgime and its refusal to comply with
resolutions of the United Nations, as well as its attempts
to devise and impose fraudulent consititutional and political schemes from time to time to perpetuate its hold on
that Territory, should be condemned vigorously and
unequivocally by the international
community; five,
South Africa’s exploitation of the natural resources of
Namibia, directly by itself as well as through foreign interests under the protection of the occupying Administration, is illegal and constitutes a serious violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and an obstacle to the
political independence of Namibia; six, the activities of
SWAPO, in particular the People’s Liberation Army of
Namibia, including armed struggle, against the illegal
Administration and the forces of occupation are fully justified as a legitimate means to achieve freedom and
national independence; seven, the countries of the NonAligned Movement pledge to render all possible material,
financial, military, political, humanitarian, diplomatic
and moral assistance to SWAP0 in its struggle to secure
the total liberation of Namibia; eight, Council resolution
435 (1978) endorsing the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia constitutes the only basis for the
peaceful settlement of the Namibian question, and any
linkage or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola
must be categorically rejected.

nomic resources of Namibia continue to be plundered.
South Africa has also used the Territory to launch acts of
aggression, intimidation, destabilization and depredation
against independent African States in the region, thus
creating a serious threat to regional and international
peace and security. Pretoria has similarly carried out reprisal attacks against front-line States on one pretext or
another; the air raid against Mozambique reported today
is the latest. Apart from the enormous human and material losses to the front-line States as a result of these
attacks, hundreds of thousands of people have been
made refugees in the many countries which were already
bearing the burden of refugees fleeing from Namibia.
18. Can the international community afford to allow
South Africa to continue to flout all norms of civilized
conduct in this fashion? For how much longer must the
Namibian people endure untold sufferings? What else
must be allowed to happen, and at what price to the
Namibian patriots, for the United Nations to bring the
full weight of its legal, moral and political authority to
bear on the racist, illegal rCgime of South Africa in order
to obtain full independence for Namibia, for which the
United Nations has assumed unique responsibility?
19. It is now more than four years since the Council
adopted resolution 435 (1978) endorsing the United
Nations plan for Namibia independence. These years
have seen the hopes of the world community wax and
wane, expectations being raised now and again only to be
betrayed on every occasion. The Pretoria rtgime has
raised one issue after another, invariably on flimsy
grounds, with a view to delaying a settlement. The latest
in the series of pretexts has been the attempted linkage or
parallelism by which the issue of Namibian independence
has been sought to be entangled with an entirely irrelevant and extraneous question. We deeply regret that certain countries have, together with Pretoria, projected this
linkage and have thus only abetted South Africa in its
persistent designs aimed at further delaying the independence of Namibia. We note with satisfaction that some
members of the contact group of five Western countries
have dissociated themselves from this linkage. But others
have not done so, and it is indeed on the support and
assistance of these countries that the racist Government
of South Africa relies and without which it could not
possibly continue LObe so intransigent. The feelings and
views of the overwhelming majority of the international
community on this and other related aspects of the Namibian question have again been clearly expressed in the
Paris Declaration on Namibia adopted by acclamation at
the International Conference in Support of the Struggle
of the Namibian People for Independence, held from 25
to 29 April in Paris.’

16. I have just given a complete recapitulation of the
position of the Non-Aligned Movement on what has
become a sad chapter in the annals of the United Nations,
which otherwise has reason to be proud of its record in
the quest for decolonization. The same principles have
indeed been endorsed year after year by the United
Nations itself. In spite of this, and in spite of the fact that
for almost 17 long years now Namibia has been a direct
trust of the United Nations, the Territory continues to
remain under the illegitimate occupation of a repressive
and racist regime which has continued to treat the will of
the international community with utter contempt.
17. All this while the people of Namibia have suffered
the tyranny of bondage and deprivation. They have been
denied any role in their Government, barred from exercising their basic human rights, forced virtually at gunPoint to join the so-called South West Africa Territory
Force to fight their own people and herded into a tiny
fraction of their land through the extension within
Namibia of the infamous bantustan system, R.uthless and
systematic attempts are being made by South Africa to
undermine, discredit and destroy SWAPO. The eco-

20. Two years ago, when the talks organizcd by the
Secretary-General for the implementation of Security
Council resolution 435 (1978) had broken down and
when doubt was being cast on the very relevance of resolution 435 (1978), the Council was convened in similar
extraordinary circumstances, and I had occasion to
address the Council [2269th meetilzg]. Although the
Council was then unable to take an immediate decision,
3

25, The Indian people and the Government of India
have always held dear the Namibian cause; this is of a
piece with India’s abiding commitment to the universal
principles of human freedom and dignity. We have
actively participated in earlier deliberations in the Council as well as in other forums on the Namibian question.
On every such occasionwe have fervently supported the
inalienable right of the Namibian people to independence. We have decried South Africa’s continued illegal
occupation of the Territory, its unscrupulous plunder of
Namibia’s resourcesand the repressionof its people, and
South Africa’s belligerent acts, which threaten the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the front-line Statesand
other independent African countries of the region. India
was among the first countries to addressthe question of
Namibia at the United Nations in 1946. Also in 1946,
India imposed comprehensive voluntary sanctions
against South Africa. We have been happy and proud to
extend moral and material assistanceto the people of
Namibia through SWAPO. In the United Nations Council for Namibia, we have striven to protect and preserve
the interestsof Namibia and to promote by all meansits
early accessionto independence.

the debate on that occasion helped categorically to reaffirm the continuing validity of resolution 435 (1978). The
front-line States and SWAP0
have laboured long and
arduously
since then, through intensive consultations
undertaken
with the contact group, to remove all the
doubts and obstacles that had come in the way of implementation of resolution
435 (1978). As we are now
informed by the Secretary-General
in his report, this
phase of the work of the contact group has concluded.
According to that report, “the only outstanding issues are
the choice of the electoral system and the settlement of
some final problems relating to the United Nations Transition Assistance Group and its composition”
[S/15776,
para. 18-J.
21. SWAP0
has given a positive response, but South
Africa has been dragging its feet and has delayed giving a
reply. This then remains the only impediment, posed by
South Africa, to putting into operation the United
Nations plan approved in resolution 435 (1978).
22. I should like to avai1 myself of this opportunity to
express a special word of appreciation for the strenuous
efforts exerted by the Secretary-General towards making
Namibian independence a reality. We are all aware of his
deep personal commitment to this question and the intensive consultations he has carried out, particularly over the
last year, with all the parties concerned and in various
places, with a view to ensuring the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978). As the Secretary-General himself
has stated in his report, he regards the problem of
Namibia as his special responsibility in view of the unique
relationship between the United Nations and the people
of Namibia. We pay tribute to him for his dedication and
his assiduousespousalof the Namibian cause.We deemit
appropriate that the Council should strengthen his hands
in this endeavour.

26. The Council has a solemn responsibility towards
the people of Namibia. It must now discharge that
responsibility resolutely and expeditiously. It must brook
no further prevarication or dilatory tactics. It must not
permit itself to be paralysed into inaction and sully its
prestige as the most powerful organ of the United
Nations and as the guardian of international peace and
security. The situation in southern Africa and in Namibia
is explosive and is becoming a seriousthreat to regional
and world peace. If Namibian independence does not
become a reality soon, the consequences could be
disastrous.
27. In conclusion, I have the honour to read out the
following messagefrom Mrs. Indira Gandhi, Prime Minister of India and Chairman of the Movement of NonAligned Countries:

23, As I said earlier, considerable time has elapsedsince
the adoption of resolution 435 (1978). It is high time that
the Council devoted its attention to the imperative necessity of implementing that resolution without further
delay. By doing so, not only would it be addressingitself
to its primary responsibility, but it would also demonstrate the will to implement its own decisionsas is incumbent upon it in terms of the Charter. My delegation is
convinced that the Council must now stipulate a definite
time-frame for the implementation of resolution 435
(1978) and remain actively seized of the question until
that process is completed. If South Africa continues to
defy the Council’s decisions, the Council should be prepared to consider appropriate action under Chapter VII
of the Charter.

“For 17 years Namibia has been the direct trust of
the United Nations. Throughout this period, South
Africa has continued to occupy Namibia in brazen
defiance of the will of the world community and has
inflicted indignities on the Namibian people, Lately
these acts of aggressionhave been increasing,
“The Security Council has a solemn responsibility
for the people of Namibia, whose right to independence can no longer be delayed. The Council must
make South Africa comply with the United Nations
plan, by imposing mandatory sanctions, if necessary.
India hopes that this special meeting of the Security
Council will support and give hope to the brave freedom fighters of SWAPO.”

24. Decisive action on the part of the Council will, in
turn, demand a display of the necessarypolitical will and
co-operation on the part of all its members, particularly
those States, both within the Council and outside it,
which might especially be in a position to facilitate the
process.We hope that all concerned will finally be able to
rise above considerations of narrow self-interest and lelp
in the fulfilment of their common commitment, namely,
the independence of Namibia.

28. Sir John THOMSON (United Kingdom): I should
like to begin by assuring you, Sir, that Mr, Umba di
Lutete has set the highest standards of presidency, but I
know that all your colleagues will share my pleasure in
4

sitting again under your Presidency. It is, if I may say so,
an encouragement to all of US to see how you have risen
from the Council.

have constantly been aware of the deep feelings aroused
by the unlawful occupation of Namibia and of its effect
on the security and stability of the region. There has been
no ambivalence in our support for a peaceful solution. It
was, indeed, dedication to such a solution which brought
together five like-minded members of the Security Council in 1977 and 1978 in a unique exercise in creative diglomacy. This led to the formulation of the settlement
proposal and to Council resolution 435 (1978).

29. I should like to say also that it is a privilege and a
pleasure for me to find myself a partner of the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of India in opening this debate. India
is a country for which I have the highest regard and affection. The Movement of Non-Aligned Countries is very
fortunate to have India in the position of chairmanship
and leadership. I would only say that it is typical of
India’s position in the world and of the efficiency with
which the Indian Government runs things that India in
the space of less than a year is host to the Asian Games, to
the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries and to the meeting of Heads of
Government of the Commonwealth.
I think this is a tribute to the achievements and &leadership of India,

33. I welcome the participation in this debate of many
Ministers for Foreign Affairs coming from a wide variety
of countries-from
the front-line States, the Organization of African Unity (OAU) and the Movement of NonAligned Countries. Their presence makes it all the more
important that we should use this occasion to underline
our unanimity on the question of Namibia. On behalf of
the United Kingdom, may I also weIcome Mr. Nujoma,
President of SWAPO, to New York, some 12 years, I
believe, since he first took part in a Council debate.

30. My next remarks are more gloomy. This debate is
opening against a sombre background, Once again the
process of negotiation and of dialogue has been punctuated by horrifying acts of violence. The events of the past
four days are a bad augury for our efforts in this debate to
promote a peaceful settlement in Namibia, As I made
clear in the Council on 15 December last year [2407th
meeting], my Government has always deplored the use of
violence from any quarter in the search for solutions to
the problems of southern Africa. Today in London the
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs, Mr. Francis Pym, issued the following statement:

34. The report we have received from the Secretary
General [S/Z5776], written with his customary frankness
and lucidity, provides useful background to our deliberations. My Government fully agrees with him on the
importance of a settlement; the progress which has been
made to lay a sound foundation for one; and the urgent
need to strengthen efforts to bring about the early independence of Namibia.
35. I should like not only to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report but also to express appreciation of
the personal concern he hai shown for Namibia. Since
taking office, he has publicly assigned a very high priority to this subject, As he mentions in his report, he has
kept in close and frequent contact with the parties. He
has visited the front-line States and he has taken advantage of international gatherings and bilateral meetings to
discuss Namibia with a very large number of the world’s
leaders.

‘LI was shocked to hear of the incidents this morning
involving attacks by South African forces on targets in
Mozambique. I deeply regret the human suffering
these will have caused, and I deplore this violation of
Mozambique’s sovereignty. I have repeatedly made
clear my view that the problems of southern Africa
cannot be solved by violence. I condemn these actions,
just as I condemn the violence in Pretoria on Friday,
when a car bomb caused loss of life and injury. There
is a desperate need to break the vicious circle where
violence begets violence and to seek peaceful solutions
to the region’s problems,”

36. Under the Secretary-General’s supervision, the Secretariat has worked impressively to develop the preparations for impIementation and for the emplacement of the
United Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)
to their present advanced level. Much credit for this must
go to the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Namibia, Mr. Martti Ahtisaari, Members of the contact group have co-operated closely with the Secretariat
in this preparatory work. The.group has held many discussions with the Secretary-General and his officials over
the past year, The United Kingdom, like other members
of the group, has told the Secretary-General
that it
stands ready to make a substantial contribution to the
large and costly exercise of implementing the settlement
proposal.

31. The horryfying toll in civilian casualties from the
Pretoria car bomb and the openly acknowledged violation of Mozambican sovereignty further underline the
pressing need for a successful outcome to current negotiations, which we are now discussing. In the nine months
I have been here, it has become plain to me that the
Namibian question is one of the most urgent and important questions facing the United Nations, It is a problem
for which the United Nations has direct responsibility.
And it is a problem which, I am convinced, can be solved
peacefulIy and through negotiation. The achievement of
such a solution will be good for all of us and for the
United Nations.

37. The Secretary-General and his staff have shown
their awareness of the importance of demonstrating that
the United Nations can act swiftly, impartially and effectively to implement the settlement plan. This will be vital
to secure the confidence of the parties, although, of

32. My Government, together with our partners in the
contact group, has consistently recognized the urgent
need for a negotiated settlement. Through our close
friendship with a wide range of African countries, we
5

course, it is not sufficient
implementation.

set out so clearly. However, it may be helpful ifI expand
on certain aspectsof the negotiations in which the contact
group has been concerned.

in and of itself to achieve

38. It is two years since the Council last debated the
question of Namibia [2267th to 22771h meetings.]
Members of the Council and of the United Nations as a
whole are concerned, as we are, at the slow rate of progress towards implementation, It is natural that the Council should now wish to review the situation, I welcome the
opportunity to make a statement on the progress achieved
by the group of which the United Kingdom is a member
in partnership with the front-line States and with other
United Nations Members and the Secretariat.

44, The events of the past two years must be seen
against the background of the failure of the preimplementation meeting held at Geneva from 7th to 14th
January 1981. Geneva was the low point in the long
history of these negotiations. The drive for a peaceful
settlement appeared to have reached an impasse. This
was particularly disappointing for the United Kingdom,
which just over a year earlier had signed the Lancaster
House Agreement to end the conflict in what was then
Southern Rhodesia, In his concluding statement at Lancaster House the British Secretary of State for Foreign
and Commonwealth Affairs expressedthe hope that the
successfuloutcome to those talks would have a favourable impact on the Namibian negotiations.

39. I begin by reiterating the principle to which the contact group adheres of a peaceful, just and internationally
acceptable settlement. I trust that all who participate in
this debate will equally state their adherence to this principle. Furthermore,
I trust that they will agree that every
possible effort should be made to avoid bloodshed and
escalation of the conflict, that they will bear in mind the
Council’s particular responsibility for the settIementplan
and that they will help to protect the role and standing of
the Council.

45. On 19 January 1981,Lord Carrington described the
failure to reach agreement at Geneva as an especially
regrettable setback after the great efforts of the United
Nations, the Western contact group of five and the frontline States to meet the reasonable concerns of South
Africa and the internal parties. He expressedthe British
Government’s support for the closing appeal of the
Chairman of the conference to those concernedto reconsider their position. The appeal to the Government of
South Africa to review the implications of the meeting
and to reconsider its position was subsequentlyrenewed
by the previous Secretary-General in the further report
he submitted to the Council on 19 January 1981
[S/14333].

40. As all membersof the Council are aware, the very
nature of the Council’s work and its ability to take constructive stepsto solve the problems brought before it are
under separate consideration. We have recently had
Council debates on various issueswhich have failed to
produce a positive outcome. Last week, however, the
Council adopted unanimously a helpful resolutionon Nicaragua [resoluiian 530 (I983)]. It gave the Council’s support to the efforts of the Contadora Group, a Latin
American form of contact group.

46. The Geneva meeting showed with crystal cIarity,
that while the negotiations had not formally broken
down, there was an urgent need to explore fresh ways of
giving momentum to them. This indeed was reflected by
the previous Secretary-General in the concluding
remarks of his report, In response to the SecretaryGeneral’sappeal, the contact group undertook an urgent
reassessment
of the situation at meetingsof senior officials and Ministers for Foreign Affairs in the spring of
1981I The membersof the group decidedto continue and
to redouble thei; efforts to bring about a settlement.
They reaffirmed their conviction that only a settlement
under the aegisof the United Nations would be acceptable to the international community and that resolution
435 (1978) remained a solid basis for the transition to
independenceof Namibia. In view of the obstaclesthat
had arisen to the implementation of resolution 435
(1978), the contact group decided to develop proposals
that would give greater confidence to all parties regarding the future of an independent Namibia,

41. This week we have the opportunity, through a constructive debate and resolution, to provide additional
impetus to the march towards a Namibian settlement. I
hope that: the Council, together with those non-members
who give us the benefit of their wisdom, will seize this
opportunity and give support to the contact group on
Namibia.
42. Just as we have the chance to help, so also it lies
within the power of the Council to hinder a settlement.
This is something we have to bear in mind. I cannot
believe that there is anyone here who seeksto undermine
a peaceful solution. Anyone who did would do ill to the
people of Namibia and of the other countries affected by
the dispute that so urgently need the settlementoutlined
in resolution 435 (1978). But even with the best of intentions, we can all make mistakes. Here is a matter on
which we must be practical, not precipitate; prudent
rather than prejudicial. We all want the sameoutcome.
We must take care to seethat the path we follow will lead
to it.

47. The contact group therefore undertook a further
round of international consultations during 1981. As in
the past, it sought to work in partnership with the frontline States and to keep the Secretariat informed of its
activities. Senior representatives of the contact group
held a seriesof meetingsin Africa with their counterparts
from the front-line States and SWAPS. Parallel consul-

43. In the first part of his report, the Secretary-General
has provided the Council with a concisefactual summary
of developments over the past two years. I should not
take up the time of the Council by repeating what he has
6

tations were conducted with the South African Government. In these consultations the contact group directly
addressed the problems which had resulted in the
impasse at Geneva. It was able to secure broad agreement on a constitutional framework which would provide confidence in Namibia’s political future.

to be guaranteed full freedom of speech, assembly, movement and the press. All political parties are to have a full
and fair opportunity to organize and to participate in the
electoral process, and the electoral system will seek to
ensure fair representation in the Constituent Assembly of
different political parties which gain substantial support
in the election. Namibia is to be a unitary, sovereign and
democratic State, whose Constitution will be the
supreme law and may be amended only by a designated
process. The executive and legislative branches of the
Government are to be constituted by periodic and
genuine elections held by secret vote. There is to be a
declaration of fundamental rights, which will be consistent with the provisions of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights. Criminal offences cannot be created with
retrospective effect. Provision is to be made for the balanced structuring of the public service, the police service
and the defence services and for equal accessby all to
recruitment for these services. Provision is also to be
made for the establishment of elected councils for local
or regional administration.

48. Having achieved this broad agreement, the contact
group gave the first priority to refining a set of constitutional principles which would be acceptable to all. By the
spring of 1982, work on these principles was almost eomplete. Against the background of solid and encouraging
progress, the Foreign Ministers of the countries members
of the contact group met in Luxembourg on 17 May 1982.
They decided that negotiations on all matters should be
accelerated in order to take advantage of the more favourable climate for a settlement which had emerged. They set
in hand a further contact group mission, which visited
certain African countries in June 1982. As a result of this
mission and of a subsequent meeting of the front-line
States, it was agreed that informal consultations should
be held in New York.

53. In accepting these principles, the parties have committed themselves to a future for Namibia in which all
the people of the Territory may have confidence, Likewise, the “question of impartiality”, which was the major
stumbling-block at Geneva, has in essencebeen resolved.
This is described in paragraph 12 of the SecretaryGeneral’s report.

49. Thus, through the diplomatic partnership of the two
informal groups of interlocutors, by the middle of 1982
we had succeeded in recovering the ground lost at Geneva. In July and August of 1982 the informal consultations took place here in New York. Final agreement was
reached on the text of principles concerning the Constituent Assembly and the Constitution for an independent
Namibia. As the Secretary-General has reported, these
were transmitted to him on 12 July 1982 [S/1.52871.

54. Substantial progress has also been made on the
composition and deployment of the military component
of UNTAG.
Other essential preparations for the
emplacement of UNTAG in Namibia have been taken to
an advanced level by the Secretariat. These, too, are
recorded in the Secretary-General’s report, in paragraph
10.

50. Substantial progress was made in the consultations
on other outstanding issues. These, too, are covered in the
Secretary-General’s report and I need not therefore repeat
the details, Throughout this period, parallel consultations
were being conducted with the South African Government. The contact group also engaged in detailed planning with officials of the Secretariat. By 24 September
1982, at the outset of the thirty-seventh session of the
General Assembly, representatives of the contact group
and of the front-line States and SWAP0 were in a position jointly to report to the Secretary-General on the progress they had made.

55. In paragraph 18 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral states that as far as the United Nations is concerned the only outstanding issues are the choice of the
electoral system and the settlement of some final problems relating to UNTAG and its composition. He also
says that, in his talks with the representatives of South
Africa, he has stressed the urgency of proceeding with the
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). I record my
Government’s agreement on both points. These are
indeed the only outstanding problems under resolution
435 (1978). The United Kingdom would like to see a
climate created in which implementation can take place
as soon as possible and with the certainty of success.

51. At this stage I should perhaps summarize the situation which has been reached as a result of the activity I
have described. The cornerstone of our approach is, as
ever, the contact group’s proposal of 10 April 1978 for a
settlement [S/12636], which was drafted in accordance
with resolution 385 (1976) and was adopted by the Council in resolution 435 (1978). Resolution 435 (1978) has
been accepted by all parties and stands as the basis for an
internationally recognized settlement.

56. We appreciate the constructive and flexible attitude
of the parties, in particular that of our African partners,
which has made possible substantial progress towards
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978). We reiterate
our commitment to that goal and to the achievement of a
settlement which would strengthen peace and security
and foster economic development in the region. We
share the concern that factors relating to the regional
situation in southern Africa-which are, however, outside the scope of the contact group’s mandate-have not

52. The principles concerning the Constituent Assembly and the Constitution for an independent Namibia
have, as I have already noted, been agreed and published. These lay down unambiguously the eligibility of
every Namibian to participate in elections without discrimination or fear of intimidation, to vote in secret and
7

yet permitted
plan.

implementation

of the United Nations

62. In paragraph 20 of his report, the SecretaryGeneral concludes that much progress has been made in
laying a sound foundation for the just and peaceful settle:
ment of the Namibia problem and calls urgently on all
concerned to strengthen and concert their efforts within
the framework of the United Nations. He urges us all to
demonstrate the necessary political will to bring about
the early independence of Namibia in accordance with
the United Nations plan. As the first member of the contact group to speak, I am happy to accept the SecretaryGeneral’s call. I am sure that the other members of the
group who follow me will do likewise.
*.
63. The joint efforts of the front-line States and the
contact group have brought us tantalizingly close to SUCcess. I should like to play a tribute to the tenacity,
patience and skill that members of both groups have
shown in the pursuit of a peaceful settlement. I cannot
believe that anyone who is genuinely concerned for the
people of southern Africa would argue that the progress
we have made should be abandoned. There is, as I have
said, a practical difficulty which is not of our making but,
as I have demonstrated, progress has been made. At Geneva, we were near the bottom of the valley. We have
come up a long way since, even if we have not yet quite
reached the peak. There are grounds for encouragement
in the solid achievements since the last debate of the
Council on this item. We have successfully negotiated
boulders, gulleys and glaciers. If we maintain this course
we shall succeed. We have self-interest as well as justice
on our side. Continued occupation of Namibia-in
defiance of the international community and at great cost
in political, human and economic terms-cannot
serve
the best interests of South Africa.

57. We must find a way to make the final leap forward.
The people of Namibia have waited too long for their
freedom and independence. We are very conscious too of
the hardship which the people of Angola have undergone
since 1976 and are still facing. We have much sympathy
for them in their protracted suffering. It is time the
people of Angola were able to live their lives in peace,
free from foreign occupation, from external interference
and from acts of violence from any quarter. The problems of the region cannot be solved by violence. There
must be a solution in Namibia which assures the security
of all States in the region, and the security requirements
of Angola and of the Angolan Government must be fully
met in any settlement.
58. In this context, we are deeply concerned at the continuing presence on Angolan territory of elements of the
armed forces of South Africa. We know that the parties
are in direct contact about these problems, and we very
much hope that these talks will lead to a successful outcome. The United Nations plan for Namibia cannot, of
course, be implemented without the withdrawal of these
South Africa forces. A Namibia settlement requires their
withdrawal.
59. This is, of course, a sovereign matter for the Angolan
Government, and we must all respect its decisions. This
being so, we are reluctant to cut across the actions of the
Angolan Government. We do not wish to tell it how to
conduct its own affairs-and this I am sureis also the view
of our friends in the front-line States; yet at the same time
we hope that a satisfactory conclusion to these talks will
be reached quickly. Then we can focus on the business of
the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

64. There are soft options we could have taken. After
Geneva we could all too easily have abandoned the
search for a peaceful settlement and thus evaded the
brickbats which are from time to time hurled at the
searchers. There are moments when membership of the
contact group feels like the walnut tree in Aesop’s fables.
People passing the tree would fling sticks and stones at its
branches in order to bring down the fruit, and the tree
suffered severely. “It is hard,” cried the tree, “that the
very persons who enjoy my fruit should thus reward me
with insults and blows.” May I remind our friends that,
while the walnut is usually the last tree in the forest to
burst into leaf, that is because its strength is going into
the making of fruit.

60. We have struck a road-block, but we are determined
to remove it. We are maintaining our efforts with all
urgency and believe that, with the continuing support of
the international community, they can be brought to fruition. Our concern is to try to solve the practical problem,
and together with our partners we are continuing to work
to this end.
61. While the independence of Namibia is our main
goal, we must not forget its economic development, This is
an important objective which the contact group has borne
in mind. We are very concerned about the effects of the
extended conflict and also about the drought which has
afflicted Namibia for so many years. At the time of independence Namibia will face a difficult economic transition. As in the case of Zimbabwe, we hope to assist the
new nation in its efforts to overcome these problems. We
have long experience and useful technical skills, developed through economic co-operation with many other
countries, which, we believe could help to promote Namibia’s longer-term economic and social development. We
would naturally be happy to work with other Governments and international organisations in such programmes.

65. Our task as negotiators has not been easy. We do
not accept South Africa’s occupation of Namibia as lawful. We have said so again and again, just as we have
denounced the system of apartheid. But South Africa is
in possession, and not surprisingly has various apprehensions. We know the settlement terms are equitable and
just and will be administered impartially. It is important
to convince not only the South Africans of this but also
all sections of opinion within Namibia. We are demonstrating scrupulous fairness in negotiating with th’em a
peaceful solution.
8

have each of us an opportunity in this debate to assist by
making constructive contributions and by formulating a
draft resolution which will reinforce, not undermine, the
negotiating process.

66. The situation in Namibia, it is true, is radically different from that of pre-independence Rhodesia. The one
is not a blueprint for the other. Yet there are two lessons
that we learned from Rhodesia which I believe are applicable to Namibia. The first is that it was possible, by being
both determined and fair, to persuade through negotiation those who exercised power unlawfully in Southern
Rhodesia to submit voluntarily to an election under universal suffrage. It has thus been demonstrated that this is
an attainable objective, not an impracticable notion.
Secondly, the Lancaster House settlement could not have
been implemented without the co-operation and assistance of South Africa. Let us not only criticize where criticism is merited but also give credit where credit is due.
South Africa should not have helped to sustain the administration of Ian Smith in Southern Rhodesia., but had the
South African Government not accepted the Lancaster
House settlement, had it done no more than withdraw
infrastructural support during the period of implementation and transition, it would have been exceedingly difficult, if not impossible, to put the settlement into effect. It
is to the credit of the South African Government that it
helped to implement that settlement. To implement the
Namibian settlement, the United Nations will similarly
require the co-operation and physical assistance of the
South African Government.

70. The Government of the United Kingdom therefore
hopes that the message will go out from this Council
meeting that there is urgent, legitimate and well-founded
pressure from all sides for implementation of the United
Nations plan. We trust that the Council will stress that an
immediate peaceful settlement is unquestionably in the
best interests of all the people of Namibia and of the
countries bordering Namibia, including South Africa.
71. The international community is right to say that
there is an urgent need to reach a conclusion. That is
what we say too. The difference is that we have taken on
the practical responsibility for bringing it about. If we
should ever conclude that we cannot manage it, we shall
give the task up to others. Meanwhile, we intend to persevere. And we intend to succeed.
72. The PRESIDENT
(itrterpretarion from French): I
call next on the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, Mr. Paul Lusaka.
73. Mr. LUSAKA: Mr. President, on behalf of the
United Nations Council for Namibia I should like,
through you, to thank the Security Council for acceding
to our request to participate in this important debate on
Namibia. I should like, at the start of an important debate
on an important African and world issue, to congratulate
you, Sir, on your presidency of the Council during this
month of May. We have been highly impressed by the
manner in which your delegation has so far conducted the
business of the Council. With your wealth of experience
and skill we are confident that you will guide the deliberations on Namibia to a successful conclusion.

67. The alternative to the course we have pursued would
be to leave the war to intensify rather than to strive for
peace. This would indeed be the counsel of despair, and
we must ask ourselves whose interests it would servecertainly not those of the people of Namibia. The Council
cannot and must not sacrifice the Namibians and abandon them to the disruption and fear and instability that
have characterized their lives for too many years. It would
be wholly irresponsible of us to set aside the search for a
settlement.
68. The problem of South West Africa was first raised at
the United Nations in 1946. It has been before the United
Nations almost throughout the United Nations existence.
It takes its place in a range of intractable, dangerous and
long-standing issues before the United Nations. Grappling with them is one of the primary purposes of the
Organization. We at the United Nations are in a position
to see Namibia in the perspective of other problems relating to the unlawful occupation of territory and to the
deprivation of the right t.o self-determination, some dating back for many years, others having arisen more
recently. Most of those problems affect the security and
stability of the surrounding regions. Most entail casualties, in some cases on a tragic scale, and disruption of the
lives of the inhabitants.

74. The United Nations Council for Namibia, as we all
know, is the legal Administering Authority for Namibia
until independence. As such, the lack of progress towards
implementation
of United Nations resolutions on
Namibia, especially Security Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978), causes us great concern. We have
come to the Council with the hope that together we can
find ways of expediting the implementation of the United
Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
7.5. This body unanimously adopted resolution 385
(1976) on 30 January 1976. In paragraph 7 of that resolution, the Council declared that:
“in order that the people of Namibia may be enabled
freely to determine their own future, it is imperative
that free elections under the supervision and control
of the United Nations be held for the whole of
Namibia as one political entity.”

69. In the case of Namibia, however, there are some
significant differences. The basis for a negotiated settlement exists and is widely accepted. The right to selfdetermination is recognized by all. The responsibility of
the United Nations is clearly established. We have a viable
plan for implementation
of that responsibility. And we
have two complementary groups of United Nations
Members committed to work for implementation. We

76. On 29 September 1978, the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978), by which it approved the report of the
9

dence, and expresses its strong support for the efforts
of the United Nations Council for Namibia in the fulfilment of the mandate entrusted to it.“’

Secretary-General [S/12827] on the implementation of the
proposals for a settlement of the Namibian situation
[S/1263fl and also established, under the authority of the
Security Council, a United Nations Transition Assistance
Group in order to assist the Secretary-General to “ensure
the early independence of Namibia through free elections
under the supervision and control of the United Nations”.

81. The United Nations Council for Namibia is committed to the early attainment of the independence of
Namibia, and unequivocally believes that resolution 435
(1978) remains the only basis for a peaceful settlement of
the United
the Namibian
question. Furthermore,
Nations Council for Namibia firmly rejects the continued
attempts by a member of the contact group, namely, the
United States, and the South African regime to obstruct
the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) and to
extablish any linkage or parallelism between the independence of Namibia and extraneous and irrelevant issues,
in particular the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from
Angola. It is the view of the United Nations Council for
Namibia that the persistence of the attempts at establishing this linkage not only retards the decolonization process in Namibia but also constitutes unwarranted
and
gross interference in the internal affairs of the People’s
Republic of Angola,

77. Nearly five years after the adoption of resolution 435
{1978), the United Nations plan has still not been implemented. South Africa has even become more entrenched
in Namibia today than it was in 1978. It has introduced
more troops into Namibia to consolidate its illegal occupation of the Territory and also to carry out its acts of
aggression against both the people of Namibia and the
independent African States in the region.
78. We are told that talks have been held during those
five years with South Africa in order to implement the
United Nations plan. At every stage of those talks, South
Africa and its aIIies have introduced new elements aimed
at delaying the implementation of the United Nations
plan. At the present moment, we are told that the implementation of that plan must be linked to the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. This is an issue without
any relevance to the question of the implementation of the
plan and the independence of Namibia.

82. SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of
the peopie of Namibia, together with the front-line States
and Nigeria, have made all the concessions that are
necessary and appropriate to enable the United Nations
to proceed with the implementation of its plan on
Namibia. In August 1982, they were under the impression that progress had been made in the consultations
that had taken place in New York between them on the
one hand and the contact group on the other. At that
time it seemed that the only issue holding up the implementation of the United Nations plan was the electoral
issue, namely, what system was to be used in the Namibian elections, which remained unresolved owing to the
delaying tactics of South Africa.

79. The time has come for the Security Council to reflect
on what has happened during the past five years since the
adoption of its resolution 435 (1978) and why it has happened, so that corrective measures can be taken. During the
five years, talks on the implementation of the United
Nations plan have been undertaken outside the United
Nations framework. They have been undertaken by a group
of States, sometimes known as the Western contact group,
which are close allies of South Africa. Since the talks have
been undertaken outside the United Nations framework,
issues that are extraneous to the implementation of the plan
have been introduced. Furthermore, some members of the
contact group seem to have decided to use the talks on the
independence of Namibia as a vehicle for the attainment of
their global interests, linking the independence of Namibia
to some outdated cold-war rhetoric. Thus the peopIe of
Namibia have been held hostage to the global self-interests
of some States.

83. To complicate matters further, a new element had
been introduced in the consultations as far back as June
1981. The United States, a member of the contact group,
and South Africa began openly and officially to link the
negotiations for the independence of Namibia with the
withdrawal of Cuba.n forces from Angola. By then it had
become clear that, whenever SWAP0 and the front-line
States made concessions in those consultations,
new
issues, especially extraneous elements, would be introduced to impede the implementation of the United
Nations plan.

80. We in the United Nations Council for Namibia
believe that the moment is here and now to bring all talks
concerning the independence of Namibia back fully to the
United Nations. The Security Council, as well as the General Assembly, has, in resolution after resolution, reaffirmed the legal and primary responsibility of the United
Nations over Namibia. In the Paris Declaration on
Namibia, the recently concluded International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People
for Independence, held in Paris from 25 to 29 April 1983,
emphasized that:

84. This tactic has led the process of consultations on
the implementation of the United Nations plan to come
to a complete halt, thus creating a very dangerous
impasse. Hence, the situation in Namibia in particular
and in southern Africa in general has become very critical and requires an urgent solution before it gets out of
hand. This assessment of the dangers inherent in the present impasse was clearly articulated by the SecretaryGeneral when earlier this year he visited a number of
African States, including the front-line States.

“in accordance with General Assembly resolutions
2145 (XXI) of 2’7 October 1966 and 2248 (S-V) of 19
May 1967, Namibia is the direct responsibility of the
United Nations Council for Namibia, the legal Administering Authority for the Territory until its indepen-

85. By its resolution 439 (1978), the Security Council
demanded that South Africa co-operate with the Council

10

and the Secretary-General in the implementation of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978). It warned South Africa
that its failure to do SO would compel the Council to meet
forthwith to initiate appropriate action under the Charter
of the United Nations, including Chapter VII thereof, so
as to ensure South Africa’s compliance with the relevant
Council resolutions. Who among us, I ask, can deny that
South Africa has refused to co-operate with the Council
in the implementation
of the United Nations plall on
Namibia? Who among us, I further ask, can deny that the
constant military attacks on Angola by South Africa are
unprovoked acts of aggression against a Member State of
the United Nations?

paragraph 14 of his report that the settlement of the
Namibian question must be based on Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) and has pointed out “the necessity
to proceed expeditiously towards the implementation of
that resolution,” In paragraph 8, he has further made it
clear that, with regard to the issue that seemed to hold up
the final agreement on the United Nations plan, namely,
the electoral system, he has been assured that:

86. The time has therefore come for the Council to consider appropriate action under the Charter of the United
Nations to ensure South Africa’s co-operation with the
United Nations. Those States which have prevented the
Council from taking effective measures to bring this
about must admit that they themselves have failed to
induce South Africa to co-operate with the United
Nations on Namibia. Are we, therefore, asking too much
of them when we appeal to them to join with all of us and
let the Security Council reassert its authority on the qucstion of Namibia?

91. The Secretary-General has very clearly stated in
paragraph 11, that the question of the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from Angola is definitely outside the scope
of resolution 435 (1978) and “had not been raised or
envisaged in previous negotiations on that question”.

“all the parties were agreed that this issue must be
settled in accordance with the terms of Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and that the issue must not
cause delay in the implementation of that resolution”,

92. Furthermore, in paragraph 13, he has referred to
the reported planned establishment of a council for constitutional development within Namibia in the following
terms: “I have emphasized to the Government of South
Africa the need to respect the relevant provisions of resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) regarding internal elections, which are not recognized by the United Nations.”

87. The people of Namibia have suffered enough. They
have been brutally treated, tortured and massacred by a
regime without conscience, a regime that prides itself on
operating outside international norms of behaviour.

93. We are here before the Council to declare that the
United States policy of linkage is a policy that has to do
with national interest and East-West confrontation, We
are not here for confrontation, The question of Namibia
should not be seen through an East-West prism.

88. The road to this meeting of the Security Council has
taken us from the Seventh Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New
Delhi in March 1983, and the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Jndependence, held in Paris in April 1983. Those two historic
conferences have confirmed us in our belief that we must
present ourselves before the Security Council.

94. Angola is an independent State, and we are fully
confident that Namibia will also emerge as an independent State. Let us from this point on de-link linkage.
From the statement made this afternoon, it appears to us
that the United Kingdom has just de-linked itself from
linkage. Let us regard linkage as it should be regarded: a
price that is placed by South Africa and some of its
western allies on Namibia’s independence.

89. We are now before the Council in connection with
specific goals, which together we hope to achieve. We are
before the Council to bring the talks on Namibia back
within the United Nations framework. That is the only
framework that has been established by resolution 435
(1978). It is the only framework within which we can call
on the Secretary-General to use his good offices and
pursue his mission of peace energetically in the interest of
Namibia and the rest of southern Africa. It is the only
framework within which there is no recognition of linkage
and no consideration of other extraneous factors. It is the
only framework within which the situation in Namibia
would be under constant review by the Council, to which
the Secretary-General would be requested to report as
soon as possible on the implementation of resolution 435
(1978).

95. Namibia is the primary responsibility of the United
Nations, and the Security Council is duty-bound to
assume its full responsibility for the speedy implementation of its own resolution-resolution
435 (1978). Let the
Council decide by what means it wishes to pursue its
objective of the speedy implementation of resolution 435
(1978). Within the same framework, the SecretaryGeneral should, in our view, be in a position to pursue
the same objective by whatever means of consultations
and contacts he may see fit. Our central objective is the
reassertion of the United Nations central role in the
Namibian question.
96, We believe that, as long as South Africa’s illegal
occupation of Namibia continues, the destablization policy programme of South Africa directed against ah independent African States in southern Africa will continue.
The rampaging illegal occupation regime in the Territory
of Namibia will persistently see fit, for its own purposes,
to commit acts of aggression against all other neighbour-

90. On behalf of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, 1 should like to express our gratitude to the
Secretary-General for his recent report on the question of
Namibia [S/15776]. Our gratitude stems from our appreciation of the lucidity and clarity of purpose shown in
this document. The Secretary-General has emphasized in
I1

ing countries. This, in our view, is the crux of the peace
and security issue in southern Africa. This illegal occupation of Namibia by the Pretoria rtgime must be condemned and ended soon. Pretoria’s intransigence must be
made to stop. In this regard, we wonder why, in August
1982, we were made to understand that the only issue
standing in the way of the implementation of the United
Nations plan was the electoral system to be used in the
Namibian elections. Is this still the only pending issue, I
ask, or are there other issues that are holding up the progress of Namibia towards its rightful independence? Let
those who have the answers come forward in this debate
to state their case without equivocation and without
caveats.
97. The OAU, the Non-Aligned Movement and all
peace-loving countries have joined SWAP0 in declaring
their readiness to proceed at once with the implementation of the United Nations plan for Namibia. Let us see
whether South Africa and its friends can match this readiness. Namibia’s march towards independence cannot be
further delayed, The Security Council is duty-bound to
ensure that such delays are prevented. Only by rededicating itself to the effective implementation of its resolution
435 (197X) can the Council live up to its responsibilities
under the Charter as far as the maintenance of peace and
security in southern Africa is concerned. Only through the
early attainment of independence by Namibia can this
goal be achieved.
98. The United Nations Council for Namibia is in full
agreement with the assessment made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report to which reference has already been
made. The Secretary-General reached several apt conclusions with which we in the United Nations Council for
Namibia fully concur. Here I should like to quote from
paragraph 16 of that report, where the Secretary-General
says: “It is evident that the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is having a destructive impact not only on
Namibia itself but also on the prospect of a peaceful and
prosperous future for the region as a whole,”
99. In view of this, there is no doubt in our minds that
the time for action is now.
100. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization.
101. Mr. NUJOMA: First of all, Mr. President, I should
like to take this opportunity to thank you and, through
you, the other members of the Council for allowing me to
participate in these deliberations.
102. I take this opportunity also to congratulate you,
Sir, upon your assumption of the presidency of the Council for the month of May. I am indeed pleased to see a
distinguished son of Africa, a seasoned diplomat, a man
of many high qualities and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Republic of Zaire presiding over these deliberations at this crucial stage in the struggle of the Namibian people for liberation and genuine independence, We

feel sure that, under your able leadership, the Council
will be able to discharge its important duties successfully.
103. The SWAP0 delegation is greatly inspired by the
presence of so many Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
other high officials who have kindly agreed to come to
the United Nations in order to participate in this debate.
We are grateful to the member States of both the OAU
and the Non-Aligned Movement for having designated
several Ministers for Foreign Affairs to present a collective demand before this body for the speedy independence of Namibia, in accordance with the resolutions
and decisions of the United Nations and particularly on
the basis of Security Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435
(1978) and 439 (197X). It is indeed heartening to note
that, in addition to those Ministers, there are also other
Ministers for Foreign Affairs and high officials from
Africa, Asia, Latin America and Europe present for the
same purpose.
104. To us, the very fact of such high-level participation
and the seriousness with which all the preparations leading to this important series of meetings have been conducted at all stages have underscored the existence of a
clear global consensus on the imperative need for the
independence of Namibia as a matter of urgency and
without any pre-conditions or prevarication. Equally, the
demand has been that the Council should assume its
primary responsibility in the implementation of its resolution 435 (197X), unfettered by extraneous impediments.
105. Eleven and a half years ago [1588th meeting], the
Council accorded me a rare privilege as the first freedom
fighter to address this body. Today I can hardly suppress
the impulse to recall that historic occasion-but
with
mixed feelings. On the other hand, I recall-indeed
with
a renewed sense of satisfaction-the
congenial and
serious atmosphere which prevailed during the meeting
of 5 October 1971. Naturally, my colleagues and I in the
SWAP0 delegation were genuinely moved and greatly
encouraged by the repeated expressions of support for
and solidarity with our struggle by nearly all the speakers
throughout the debate, and we left New York reinforced
in our conviction that a clear global consensus had
already been reached on the imperative need for the
speedy decolonization of Namibia. We also felt reassured
in the knowledge that, for its part, the international community would redouble its efforts towards taking the
effective and practical measures against racist South
Africa provided for in the Charter and the relevant resolutions and decisions of the United Nations on Namibia,
thus ending once and for all racist domination, colonial
oppression and foreign exploitation in Namibia. That
was the positive side of the situation, which offered a
basis for optimism.
106. On the other hand, I must register here with deep
regret and indignation the fact that our beloved country,
Namibia, remains still occupied by a massive South African colonial army of about 100,000 troops, which, in
active collaboration with certain major capitalist Powers,
has turned Namibia into a garrison State, subjecting the
12

Namibian masses daily to untold sufferings in the form of
cold-blooded murder and abductions-with victims being
held incommunicado for indefinite periods-constant torture, incarceration in concentration camps and other fascistic detention centres, massacres of innocent villagers,
forcible removal of communities for political or military
purposes, destruction of property, including livestock,
rapes and various other notorious acts of intimidation
and manipulation.
This massive military build-up and
reign of terror have led to a critical situation whereby
today there is one racist soldier for every 12 Namibians.
107. In the characteristic fashion of a fascist rc5gime, the
occupation rCgime has been responsible for the continuous disappearance of Namibian patriots. For example,
Johannes Kakuva, Johannes Nakawa and Matias Ashipembe, to cite but a few, have disappeared without trace
since 1979 in Kaokoveld and Ovamboland. Another
repugnant case is that of the massacre of the Ampolo
family at Oshikuku, which involved the deliberate murder
of the entire family, consisting of 10 members, in March
1982. Yet another case which vividly shows the kind of
atrocities committed daily against our people is that of
Kasire Thomas. As frequently happens with many Namibians who are held in racist prisons, he was handed over
to a white farmer to be used as a cheap labourer. While at
the farm he was subjected to constant intimidation,
accused of being a so-called terrorist and murdered in a
brutal manner in March 1983. Furthermore, in 1983,
Asser Likuwa was cold-bloodedly murdered while working on his land by a South African military convoy for
being a member of SWAPO.

empty promises about elusive progress which has no
basis in truth.
112. The series of meetings held by the Council in 197 1
coincided with the fifth anniversary of the termination of
racist South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia and the
assumption by the United Nations of direct legal authority
over our country [ GeneralAssembly resohltion 2145 (XXr) of
27 October 1966J Moreover, I wish to assure the Council
that I have no desire to give a historical account of that
decision of the General Assembly in 1966 nor, for that
matter, of its legal implications. Suffice it to observe that,
true to type, certain Western permanent members of the
Council somehow managed to find alleged problems with
the termination of the Mandate and sought to scuttle all
efforts to give full and practical effect to General Assembly
resolution 2145 (XXI).
113. It will be recalled that it was precisely for the purof clarifying this situation that the Council decided,
in its resolution 284 (1970), to submit a question to the
International Court of Justice, with the request for an
advisory opinion, namely:

pose

“What are the legal consequences for States of the
continued presence of South Africa in Namibia, notwithstanding Security Council resolution 276 ( 1970)?“4
114. I should like to recall briefly what I said when my
turn came to make a contribution to the debate in 1971. I
said:
“This session of the Council has been convened to
discuss ways and means of enforcing previous decisions of the General Assembly, as well as those of the
Security Council, in the light of the advisory opinion
of the International Court of Justice rendered on 21
June 1971, The International Court gave an unequivocal ruling when it stated in paragraph 133 of the
opinion:

108. These atrocities are being carried out under the
cover of the existing state of emergency, martial law and
other illegal Draconian laws being enacted by the SOcalled Administrator-General,
who has given the army
and police a free hand to shoot to kill.
109. It is unnecessary to say that while these brutalities,
generalized State terrorism and repression continue
unabated against our people, perpetrated by the apartheid
junta, Namibia’s natural resources are being plundered in
the most criminal way by the ruthless transnational corporations of the principal Powers members of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATQ), whose selfish
interest in profits and other strategic concerns are placed
above the just rights and legitimate interests of the Namibian people.

‘the continued presence of South Africa in
Namibia being illegal, South Africa is under obligation to withdraw its administration from Namibia
immediately and thus put an end to its occupation
of the Territory’.
“Discussing this opinion, The New York Timesstated:
‘With this historic 13 to 2 verdict, the Court has
cleared away the legal and political fog that for
years obscured the status of the former German
colony.‘” [1588th meeting,paras. 90 and 91.1

110. The situation is the more outrageous and objectionable in that all this is being done in flagrant violation of
international law, of the Charter of the United Nations
and of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the Natural
Resources of Namibia,3 enacted by the United Nations
Council for Namibia on 27 September 1974 and, last but
not least, it is being done to the detriment of the Namibians themselves.

I stated further:
“The United Nations is confronting the most determined and most serious onslaught on its principles
since the Organization was set up. Therefore the Security Council, as an organ which has been assigned the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, should and must not fail to
take authoritative and decisive action.” [Ibid., para.

111. This then is the negative side of the Namibian
question-and
what it demands, as a matter of utmost
urgency, is positive action now, not mere exhortations or

92-j.

13

draw its illegal colonial administration from Namibia
remains a source of deep concern warranting immediate
and concerted retribution. The apartheid system and its
destructive regional manifestations have incurred worldwide condemnation and this anachronistic and repressive
system has been declared a crime against humanity.
Indeed, international conventions and declarations have
been adopted for the suppression and punishment of the
crime of apartheid. Similarly, apartheid South Africa’s
record of international terrorism has been brought up in
numerous publications and is being used as a basis for a
world-wide campaign to mobilize positive and concrete
action against that neo-Nazi, pariah State in order to
compel it to accept the political demands of the African
people inside the country, to end illegality and colonial
occupation in Namibia and to desist from its aggression
against independent African States.

My statement continued:
“Who can doubt that a case has arisen for the Security Council to take action as provided for in Articles
40 and 41? The only people who doubt this are the
major Western Powers. They do so, not because the
situation in Namibia does not threaten international
peace and security, but because they want their agents
in South Africa to continue providing them with
cheap labour, which results in enormous profits for
their investors. How long will these people who profess to be the champions of equality, democracy and
free speech pursue their insatiable greed for material
things and ignore the value of human life? How can
the situation in Namibia be described as peaceful
when South Africa is arming itself to the teeth with
the most advanced weapons of destruction? How does
one explain the fact that the South African army is
today fighting in Angola, Mozambique, Namibia and
Zimbabwe? How does one explain the constant
threats made against independent African States? . . .
Lastly, what is to become of international law if the
countries represented here can ignore with impunity
any interpretation of law that is not in their favour?”
[Ibid., para. 94.)

118. Throughout Africa people know that racist South
Africa is their public enemy No. 1: it has arrogated to
itself the right to attack militarily any African State and
occupy its territory. The rCgime continues the intensification of the apartheid reign of terror, perpetrates constant
acts of aggression and destabilization against independent African States, under one pretext or another, and is
carrying on its vicious programme of massive military
build-up in occupied Namibia, while, in keeping with its
much-discredited double-barrelled approach, pursuing a
public show of so-called new constitutional dispensation,
just as it continues to pay lip-service to consultations
regarding Namibia’s independence. Could one do otherwise than declare the situation in our region to be one
constituting a serious threat to international peace and
security?

L-hat is what I had to say.
115. I thought I should make these pertinent observations in order to underscore two points. First, it follows
from some of what I have just quoted that the situation in
and around Namibia today remains the same as the one I
described before the Council in 1971, except that, I must
painfully state, the human suffering and destruction of
valuable property have increased to alarming proportions, owing to apartheid South Africa’s continued colonial oppression, racist domination and regional aggression,
as well as other acts of destabilization throughout the
region.

119. What also exposes the peculiar mentality of the
white supremacists of the Nationalist Party is the fact
that they have in a sinister fashion perfected the Afrikaner politics of self-pity-the so-called laager mentality.
That means that they consider themselves, as always, the
object of hatred and of an alleged total onslaught-all
of
which are mere figments of their rotten imagination. Naturally, there is total and world-wide opposition to apartheid; there is a strong outcry for democracy in South
Africa based on the principle of one man, one vote; and
there is also an uncompromising demand for early independence for Namibia as much as for peace and cooperation in the region.

116. Secondly, I wanted to refute, denounce and reject
certain notorious notions that are being propagated by
the aggressive and militarist circles of imperialism in
favour of racist South Africa. It is being argued that the
racist usurpers have what are referred to as legitimate
security concerns in the region. In the process, some irrelevant and outrageous arguments have been advanced
which purport to exonerate the racist Pretoria junta from
its repeated criminality and its banditry against the African masses, who are demanding the restoration of their
right to freedom and national emancipation. Likewise,
racist South Africa’s case, which is completely indefensible, is being presented, as regards Namibia, in a manner
that makes the victims appear to be aggressors or villains
and the real aggressors and foreign intruders and illegal
occupiers of our country to be victims of an alleged total
onslaught.

120. However, the struggle is not inspired by racial considerations or by a desire to rob certain sections of the
population of their property or to deny individuals their
fair share in society. Therefore, these allegations are outrageous and unfounded.
121. During the past two years-which have been years
of trials and tribulations for us-we have learned with
dismay that the United States is advocating the greater
acceptance of South Africa within the global framework
of Western security. These are the same people who have
publicly embraced that racist State as a friendly ally. The
net result of this policy is that Namibia’s independence

117. The international community has become accustomed to racist South Africa’s arrogant and defiant
behaviour. Its record of stubborn refusal to implement
United Nations resolutions and decisions and to with14

has been further delayed and the suffering of our people
prolonged as they are being held to ransom for the sake of
the global ambitions of the United States. How selfish and
how hypocritical that is!

125. Those black Namibians who, through
either economic necessity or other forms of pressure,
have
been
incorporated intO the south African military
ma&ine
of
occuPation are deployed in one of the tribal&-based,
paramilitary units known as Home Guards, or in the
so-called South West Af rlca
’ Territory Force. These units
have become notorious for atrocities and killings
carried
out by the South African army against
the civilian POPUIatiOn
in Namibia. In other words, the units are increasingly being used to terrorize the local population.
These
tribally-baSed institutions are meant as seeds and fertile

122. Allow me at this juncture to make a few observations about the internal situation in Namibia, in order to
show that the illegal occupiers there have no intention
whatsoever of permitting Namibia’s accession to independence for a very long time to come.

ground for Civil War for an independent

123. Despite the fact that South Africa has been forced
to concede the idea of Namibia’s independence, the apartheid rulers have not abandoned their traditional ambition
to keep Namibia as either a direct colony or a neo-colony
of the white settler State in South Africa; and, with Pretoria’s failure in recent years to create a credible political
force which would be favourably disposed to serving
South Africa’s neo-colonial interest and ambition in
Namibia, the apartheid rCgime has been left with no other
choice but to rely on its military machine in order to
continue its illegal occupation of our country. In this connection, Namibia has been turned into a vast besieged
garrison. The apartheid rtgime has deployed more than
100,000 troops throughout the country. It has established
75 major military bases and numerous camps, which are
deployed throughout the length and breadth of the northern areas of our land. These bases are continually being
expanded as well as extensively fortified and equipped
with a vast array of arms and ammunition, an everincreasing number of tanks and armoured personnel carriers and other military vehicles and war-planes. Moreover,
there is a general arming of all whites in Namibia; and
every white male in Namibia between the ages of 16 and
30 is required by law to perform two years of national
service in the South African army of occupation. This is
followed by 240 days’ service in the so-called Citizen
Force, or Commandos. In addition, many of them are
called upon for operational duty for indefinite periods.
Recently the South African military establishment in
Namibia also began to call upon white women for service
in the Commando and Citizen Forces. Furthermore,
many young black Namibians have been impressed into
the militarization process through a variety of devices
applied by the South African army of occupation. This
started with the extension of compulsory military service
to black Namibians in January 1981, using coercion and
huge financial bribes.

Namibia.

126. That is the extent and nature of South Africa’s
repugnant attempts to place the Namibian population
under Pretoria’s brutal and oppressive
military
domination and permanent control.
127. Another dimension of the militarization
process
has been the creation of so-called protected villages and
fortification of towns, especially in the areas of northern
Namibia: Koakoveld in the north-west and Okavango
in
the north-east.
128. AS was the case with the United States war in Viet
Nam and the war in Smith’s Rhodesia, the strategic aim
of the South African army in establishing the protected
villages is to try to isolate our guerrilla combatants from
the masses of the people and exert the occupation army’s
total control over the movement of our oppressed
people. Nearly every town in these regions is a South
African military base; the towns are surrounded by military communication towers and watch-towers equipped
with machine-guns dominating the skyline around them.

129. It is precisely because Pretoria has failed to create
a credible political alternative for perpetuating its domination of’ Namibia that the rCgime is relying more and
more on its military and security forces to proIong
its
occupation of our country. This increasing reliance
on
the army means also that South Africa’s top military
brass has taken over the primacy once held by the civilian colonial administrators in influencing Pretoria’s policies towards Namibia.
130. Evidence of the powerful influence being exerted on
South African policy towards Namibia by the generals
began to emerge more clearly last year when LieutenantGeneral Pieter van der Westhuizen, Chief of South African
military intelligence, General Jan Geldenhuys, Chief of the
Army, and General Charles Lloyd, Commanding
Officer
of the South African forces in Namibia, travelled
to
Washington on several occasions to discuss the Namibian
issue with their Pentagon counterparts.

124. With the introduction of compulsory military service for all black youth, there has been a growing militarization of the schools, with the students becoming one of
the prime targets for conscription. The occupation
rCgime’s Department of Education regularly sends out circulars to all schools, instructing principals to register all
boys due to reach the age of 16. This is intended to facilitate the call-up process. African teachers have increasingly been seeing their schools taken over by South
African soldiers, who have been planted there to try and
promote the idea of the South African army as a social
benefactor and, what is more and more important, to act
as informers.

131. It is believed that it was these generals, working
in
strategic partnership with the Pentagon establishment,
who conceived the so-called linkage issue. They have also
played
a crucial role in influencing the recent decision
by
the Botha rCgime to dump its Turnhalle PuPPets. The
generals felt that the Turnhalle puPPet cfowd was merely
wasting millions of rands without delivering the necessary
political goods for Pretoria. The military establishment
felt that such money should go to the army to enable it to
continue the occupation of Namibia.
15

He added:

132. In short, South Africa’s continued militarization of
Namibia has transformed large parts of our country into
a permanent war zone, and the massive military presence
in the country is the key instrument in Pretoria’s attempt
to perpetuate its control over Namibia as its last buffer
zone between the racist State and independent African
States to the north.

“It is our objective to mobilize the masses of Angola
to put a stop to this aggression and drive away these
aggressive forces which are active in our country in
collusion with organizations which have betrayed the
Angolan people and Africans as a whole by seeking
alliance with South Africa.”

133. In the face of this colonial tyranny and of the fascistic state terrorism and aggression being perpetrated by the
apartheid racists against our people, the national resistance of our people has remained firm and their patriotism
has never been found wanting. Moreover, the support
being given by the oppressed masses of Namibia to
SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the
Namibian people, is ever increasing and deepening. The
Turnhalle puppets have been totally rejected by our
people. Various bogus constitutional or political entities
have fallen under a persistent onslaught by SWAP0 and
the concerted resistance of the people themselves.

138, In other words, the Angolan people were the victims of racist aggression long before the independence of
their country. That aggression has since reached astronomical proportions.
139. The Council is fully aware of South Africa’s sinister schemes, which have so far prevented the implementation of the United Nations plan endorsed in Council
resolution 435 (1978). Since the adoption of that resolution, the Pretoria racist rCgime has created all kinds of
pretexts to frustrate the early independence of Namibia.

134. As I pointed out earlier, the apartheid rCgime has
always considered itself a regional super-Power, regarding
the whole of Africa as fair game for its expansionist ambitions and using economic blackmail and military aggression as instruments of its policy.

140. The characteristic intransigence and prevarication
of the rtgime were manifested clearly during the Geneva
pre-implementation meeting held in January 1981. Contrary to the hopes and expectations of the international
community that final arrangements would be agreed
upon, the Pretoria rCgime refused to sign a cease-fire
agreement with SWAP0 and to agree to a date for the
emplacement of UNTAG components in Namibia, thus
thwarting the implementation process.

135. In this context, racist South Africa has, for
instance, launched armed aggression, using Namibia as a
launching pad, against Angola in the form of a massive
military invasion and occupation, which have continued
since August 1981. It has also launched military attacks,
both directly and indirectly, through its local puppets,
against Mozambique, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Lesotho and
Seychelles. Angola and Mozambique have become the
main arenas of Pretoria’s destabilization campaign. There
the rtgime is making extensive use of its surrogates, the
so-called Mozambique Resistance Movement, and UNITA,
the National Union for the Total Independence of
Angola respectively. To this end, the rCgime has extensively been training, recruiting, financing, arming, transporting, deploying, commanding and rescuing foreign
mercenaries and local puppets and bandits to and from
these countries.

141. As is well known, SWAPO, for its part, reiterated
its willingness and readiness to sign a cease-fire agreement right then and there and renewed its pledge to cooperate with the Secretary-General and his staff in order
to ensure the smooth and peaceful transition of Namibia
to independence.
142. The SWAP0
delegation is grateful to the
Secretary-General for releasing his latest report in good
time before the meeting. We have found the report to be
serious, honest and straightforward in piesenting the
developments since the failed Geneva meeting and, particularly, the extraneous and irrelevant issues which have
created the present impasse.

136. In the case of UNITA, racist South Africa is using its
military bases in Namibia and occupied parts of Angolan
territory to step up its destabilization activities against
Angola. Specifically, the racists are using the air bases at
Ondangua, Grootfontein, Runtu, Mpacha, Ruacana and
Ohopoho in Namibia to carry out these dastardly acts.

143. In this connection, I wish to state that SWAP0
fully associates itself with the concluding observations of
the Secretary-General’s report especially those in the last
three paragraphs [S/15776, paras. 18-201. In our view,
these paragraphs accurately reflect the current state of
affairs and show who is responsible for the impasse.

137. What I had affirmed in 1971 before the Council
was confirmed a few years later by President Jest
Eduardo DOS Santos, the then Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Angola, when he said in February 1976 at
Addis Ababa, on the occasion of the twenty-sixth meeting of the Council of Ministers of OAU, devoted to the
problem of Angola:

144. In this connection, SWAP0 has accepted the need
to protect the white minority and its property because we
believe that a future independent Namibia has an obligation to protect all its citizens. It is in this spirit that
SWAP0 has agreed to consider the proposal containing
principles for the Constituent Assembly and the Constitution for an independent Namibia, although we have
some serious reservations about the manner in which the
text was transmitted to the Secretary-General.

“On 11 November [1975] Angola was invaded by
South African forces with the objective of imposing
another foreign rule on the Angolan people.”
16

145. On the other hand, in conformity with the mandate

sentative has just said: that they want to continue their
illegal intervention in the question of Namibia.

I have received from the Central Committee of SWAPO, I

should like to state categorically and clearly that our
movement, having reviewed the history of the negotiations and the role of the so-called contact group, led by
the United States, has concluded that that group has lost
proper contact with the letter and spirit of resolution 435
(1978) and that the whole exercise has now turned out ot
be a mere rescue operation for the white, racist, illegal
occupiers in Namibia. In particular, the Central Committee of SWAP0 has singled out the Reagan Administration, which, because of its public embrace of apartheid
South Africa, has injected into the decolonization process
of our country an extraneous issue, by linking the independence of Namibia to the withdrawal of Cuban forces
from Angola. The Central Committee categorically
rejects and vehemently condemns this unjust, arrogant,
irrational and objectionable policy of linkage. The position of SWAP0 is that the oppressed people of Namibia
are entitled to independence without any further delay,
pre-condition or prevarication.

149. Furthermore, the Council should oblige South
Africa to make a firm commitment as to its readiness to
sign a cease-fire agreement with SWAPO, as provided
for in the United Nations plan, thus paving the way for
the implementation process to start. To this end, the
Secretary-General should consider initiating immediate
contact with the parties to the conflict and report to the
Council as may be required.
150. The Namibian people have already suffered for
too long, including large-scale massacres of our people
during the German occupation on the basis of an imperial extermination order, which resulted in the substantial depopulation of the country. The Council has a
special responsibility to take the necessary steps to prevent further acts of genocide against our people.
151. Allow me before coneluding to take this opportunity, on behalf of the Central Committee of SWAPO, to
express our appreciation to the Secretary-General for his
tireless efforts aimed at securing early independence for
Namibia. Similarly, our thanks go to the United Nations
Council for Namibia, led by our brother, Mr. Paul Lusaka of Zambia, the United Nations specialized agencies
for their consistent support of SWAP0 and the cause of
the Namibian people, and all the indispensable assistance
programmes being administered by the Office of the
United Nations Commissioner for Namibia, Mr. Mishra.

14,6. It is in the light of this that SWAP0 has come to
the conclusion that the role of the five Western Powers
has ceased to be that of an honest broker in terms of the
implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978). These
Powers, and the Reagan Administration
in particular,
must be prevailed upon to desist forthwith from their
sinister attempts to hijack and misuse the Namibian negotiating process in their own economic and strategic
interests.

152. In conclusion, it is our sincere hope and expectation that, at these meetings, the Council will pay full
attention to the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the
Programme of Action on Namibia adopted by the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence.’ We are greatly
indebted to all those whose combined efforts ensured
the success of the Conference, foremost among them
Mr. Moustapha Niasse, Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal, the Secretary-General, the
President of the United Nations Council for Namibia,
the Secretary-General of the Conference, and the entire
United Nations staff.

147. We are not unmindful of the commendable position taken by the Government of France on the issue of
linkage or parallelism, as stated by its Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Claude Cheysson, at the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence. We urge the other members of
the so-called contact group to show that they have the
courage of their convictions, otherwise mooted privately, and follow the French example by publicly dissociating themselves from this notorious and unwarranted
imposition.
148. Once again we are appearing before the Council
and pleading for the adoption of effective, concrete measures against the defiant racist regime of Pretoria. In particular, we call urgently upon the Council to shoulder its
primary responsibility in the implementation
of the
United Nations plan as endorsed in Security Council resolution 435 (1978). It is our strong belief that the United
Nations legal authority over Namibia must be ensured
through the direct involvement of the Organization in all
efforts to secure genuine independence for Namibia. In
this connection, it is our considered view that the role of
the Secretary-General in all practical arrangements having to do with the implementation of the United Nations
plan should be strengthened. For it is the SecretaryGeneral, and he alone, who is charged with this responsibility in terms of resolution 435 (1978)-not the British or
any other member of the contact group; they are selfappointed, and therefore I reject what the British repre-

153. Finally, I wish that the situation were different and
that Namibia’s independence had already been achieved,
and I wish that I did not have to repeat the following
concluding words of my statement before the Council in
1971. But the reality is that these are mere wishes, and
therefore I am compelled to repeat those words once
again in the face of naked aggression on the part of the
racist regime of South Africa:
“I wish to declare, in the name of the people of
Namibia, that unless this august body acts decisively
to secure the withdrawal of South Africa from the
international Territory of Namibia, we shall have no
alternative but to continue the armed struggle with
greater intensity. We do not love bloodshed, but when
we are dealing with a Government like that of South
17

from developing? How are those obstacles perceived?
What measures are we going to take to attain our
objectives?

Africa, which believes in violence and bloodshed, we
must be prepared to meet it on its own terms. Our
struggle may be long and protracted; our struggle may
be bloody and costly in terms of human life; it is a price
we are prepared to pay for our independence.” [1588th

161, It is scarcely an exaggeration to say that the feeling
prevailing among the Namibians, among the representatives of the front-line States, among the Africans and
among the non-aligned is an explosive mixture of frustration and revolt. All those who, from near or from afar,
are following with interest the events in southern Africa
and cherish the sovereignty of nations, the selfdetermination of peoples and the promotion of human
rights feel the same bitterness. For years now the situation in Namibia has represented a challenge to the will of
the international community and to the authority of the
United Nations, which has assumed responsibility for
this Territory. The sessions of the General Assembly, the
International Court of Justice and the Security Council
have always proclaimed that the continued presence of
the Republic of South Africa in Namibia is illegal. Resolution 435 (1978), which endorses the United Nations
plan for Namibia has existed since 1978. It is important
to remember and to repeat here that the South African
Government has a commitment
to that plan. Yet,
Namibia is still not free. Today it is not only deprived of
its rights to self-determination and to sovereignty by the
occupation of its Territory but, under regulations that
still derive from the recommendations of the Odendaal
Commission, its people are refused the exercise of the
basic human rights of every human being, namely, the
free enjoyment of life, freedom of movement and freedom to live where one wishes. The Charter of the United
Nations acknowledge these rights for all peoples.

meet@g, para. 124.1

154. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
now call on the representative of Mauritius, who wishes to
make a statement as Chairman of the Group of African
States at the United Nations for May 1983.
155. Mr. MAUDAVE
(Mauritius) (interpretation from
French): As I had the occasion last Monday to offer the
customary good wishes and respects of my delegation to
the President of the Council, I shall at the outset discharge
my pleasant duty of greeting those among us whose distinguished presence in this gathering imparts special prestige
to our work.
156. I first greet the representatives and militants of the
Namibian national liberation movement, SWAPO, and
its representative, Mr. Sam Nujoma, who have come from
their area of operations to make their contribution to
these deliberations.
157. My greetings also go to those who, like you Sir,
notwithstanding the onerous ministerial and administrative duties they shoulder in their respective capitals, have
come to New York to share with us their thoughts on the
Namibian problem and on the means to be used to attain
our objectives.
158. I also thank the Chairman of the Group of NonAligned Countries at the United Nations for having, as a
result of the recommendations made at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March 1983,
and in concert with the OAU, requested this meeting of
the Council.

162. For some years now, intervention forces have
brought desolation and death to the northern plains and
the sands of the Kalahari. Beyond the ghettos of straw
and corrugated iron of the bantustans, the invasions have
plunged the peoples of Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe,
Mozambique and Lesotho into mourning. The recent
meeting of the Heads of State or Government of the
Non-Aligned Countries at New Delhi and the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris last month,
took stock of these violations while supporting the wave
of international indignation that has led to this Council
meeting today. This long process of negotiations, frequently interrupted by military interventions in the field,
has tested the patience of the international community in
general and that of the non-aligned and African States in
particular. Throughout this time, the front-line States
and SWAP0 have displayed great political wisdom and
moderation. Notwithstanding their disappointment over
the slow pace of the negotiations and their bitterness at
seeing themselves targeted by the soldier rabble, they
have never stopped exploring all possible means of reaching a peaceful settlement. Out of realism, they have gone
so far as to accept the important modifications that resolution 435 (1978) made to the original resolution 385
(1976). They have determinedly talked with the contact
group of Western countries in the hope that the pressure
that those industrial Powers could exert on South Africa
would finally result in the liberation of Namibia. They

159. Finally, I should like to express our appreciation to
the Secretary-General who submitted to us a precise,
impartial and lucid report on developments as they relate
today to Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and 439
(1978) on the Namibian issue [S/15774.
160. TWO considerations underlie this statement, which
will be as relevant and concise as possible. First, out of
deference to those who are here as front-line combatants
or as ministers or chairmen of various councils or committees on Namibia, it would be better to let them give the
Council the details of the different aspects of the problem.
Secondly, in view of the number of speakers, it would be
better for us to avoid repetition and to have all the necessary time the better to concentrate on action to be taken,
The Chairman of the Group of African States at the
United Nations therefore plays a role of catalyst here; his
function at this stage of our debates is to focus the Council’s attention on some specific points. What, for example,
is the state of mind of the major parties concerned at this
time? What are the obstacles preventing the situation
18

are disappointed and bitter. We .join them in saying that,
after 30 years of weariness and tears, this Council meeting
is doubtless the last that may still be able to keep alive this
desire for dialogue and moderation. The next time we
return to this table, will it be, at best, to take note of
another stuttrs quo or will it be, at worst, to strive to
contain the ravages of a generalized conflict? We hope
that it will be rather to lay the groundwork for a plan of
economic and social recovery for Namibia in the peace
that will finally have been achieved.

tinue to devote our fullest attention, Within this edifice
on the East River we all use the same moral language.
Our speeches are packed with references to what is just
and what is unjust, to right and to law. We act as advocates of a Rantian ethic of the rights and duties of States
and their leaders. Yet, to the categorical imperatives we
establish regarding the morality which should prevail in
international reiations, the champions of a more utilitarian approach reply, like Machiavelli, that there are also
considerations of security, national interests and trade.
Kant has shown that these notions are far more subjective than those of fundamental rights and justice. There
is, therefore, on the one hand, the idealism of the United
Nations as to what should be the ethic of international
relations and, on the other, the utilitarianism of States,
above all the powerful ones, which, while Members of
the United Nations, are in fact acting as traitors to what
they say is their overriding interest-the rules of this
common lexicon, the Charter itself.

163. That is the backdrop in the centre of which we are
now going to erect the wall of the impasse; and against
this wall we are going to set the ladder of the possibilities
offered us to climb over it.
164. There are four key elements linked to the development of the situation in southern Africa: the procrastination of Pretoria; the difficulties of implementing our
resolutions; the work of the contact group of Western
countries; and the concept of parallelism or linkage.

169. We can appeal here to the conscience of peoples
all over the world. We do not yet have the means to
translate that appeal into reality, except gropingly by
using the “blue helmets”, through committees, by dispatching emissaries and by proposing sanctions. We
must search for ways of strengthening the role of the
Organization and stopping the whittling away of its
authority. While we await international agreements
creating a universal jurisdiction and the establishment of
a world government with real powers, Namibia, for
which we are directly responsible, offers the Organization an opportunity to affirm loud and clear its international responsibilities. A political and constitutional
success in the field, this very year if possible, would do
far more than all our long speeches to increase the prestige and authority of the United Nations and the Security
Council.

165. Pretoria’s attitude vis-ci-vi.r Namibia has wavered
between arrogant paternalism in the 1950s and deadly
aggression in more recent months, The lofty aspirations
contained in Article 22 of the covenant of the League of
Nations, with euphoric references to well-being, development and the sacred trust of civilization, were flouted
from the outset, as have been all the resolutions of the
United Nations a.dopted subsequently.
166. Ever since 1946, South Africa, although a signatory
of the Charter of the United Nations a year earlier, has
chosen to disregard the provisions of Article 73 on development and of Chapter XII on the international trusteeship system. When a State deliberately chooses to violate
the Charter which it helped to draft in 1945 and which
bears its signature alongside those of 50 other members of
the international community, it commits the first of a
series of errors, which paves the way for the excesses
which follow: partition of terrnory, expropriation of fertile lands, establishment of bantustans, anti-terrorist laws,
censorship, arhitrary imprisonment, contempt for world
opinion, racism, destabilization, invasion-in a word, the
infernal concatenation of hatred and violence.
167. The events of last weekend bode ill. We regret this
escalation and appeal to all to keep the situation under
control as far as is reasonably possible. A situation which
could degenerate into a generalized conflict would entail
serious risks for security and could indeed ricochet to
affect those whom we wish to help regain their freedom
in order and with dignity,

170. Opinions are divided as to the role and efficacy of
the contact group. Certain people will say that it has
replaced the Unned Nations, whose prestige and authority it has to some extent undermined. In certain circles, it
has already been reproached with contributing to delaying the normalization of the situation in southern Africa
because there is a fundamental incompatibility between
the interest of the industrialized countries in raw materials and the promotion of human rights. Others contend
that it has shown itself much more concerned about the
mineral resources of Namibia, sardines and lobsters,
financial networks, stock market movements and repercussions on employment in its member countries than
about national independence, distributive justice, elections or internal security.

168. The Secretary-General devoted a part of his report
on the work of the Organization” last year to the difficulties the United Nations had been encountering in ensuring the implementation of and compliance with General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions. The whittling away of the authority of the United Nations and the
weakening of its role in peace-keeping and protecting
international security are issues to which we must con-

171. The representative of the IJnited Kingdom has just
spoken to us of the more positive aspects of the contact
group’s mission. The thesis of an indirect approach has
the advantage of offering the possibility of effective
action where it is obvious that the high moral tone of
resolutions adopted here in New York is ineffective in
Pretoria. As part of the progressive pressure that must be
brought to bear to demolish the wall of arrogance and
19

oppression, the participation of groups remains important for two reasons: to replace and to complement. These
groups, first and foremost, have a more significant role to
play through their financial networks, their scientific and
technical organizations, their control of the communication systems and the media, the extent and the interdependence of their trade and their supply of strategic
equipment. They can immediately and by intelligent use
of their means of persuasion make the content of our
resolutions felt by the recalcitrants. In certains cases, to
reach into people’s pocketbooks is to reach more easily
their reasoning powers, if not their hearts.

It is when you give of yourself that you truly give.“*
175. Let us now move to the concept of parallelism, or
linkage. No sooner had the contact group devised a
three-stage plan, accepted with their customary moderation and sense of reality by SWAP0 and the front-line
States; no sooner had everything seemed in readiness
for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and for
Namibia’s swift accession to independence, than other
demands and considerations were introduced that had
nothing to do with the problem in question. As the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia has
rightly reminded us, it is not acceptable for the Namibian
people to serve as hostage to oblige certain neighbouring
countries to revise their foreign policy or to reassess the
security agreements which they had freely entered into
with neighbouring countries. After all, it is not Angola
that is invading South Africa. It has neither the means
nor the desire for it. It is far more interested in its economic recovery and in the establishment of secure
borders than in arousing the ire of its swashbuckling
neighbours. Africa, the non-aligned countries and rightminded people the world over are indignant that a commitment to the withdrawal of support forces has been
made a pre-condition for the independence of Namibia.
To be sure, we all feel it desirable for a country’s security
to be insured without recourse to foreign forces. Nevertheless, it is up to each country to decide for itself and in
full sovereignty the means it deems useful to reinforce
and to guarantee its security. To my knowledge, the contact group has never expressed the need for the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola before neighbouring Namibia was assured of its accession to independence. We must all be guided by the very clear-cut
criteria stipulated in resolution 435 (1978), because the
incoherence that grows out of the introduction of considerations other than those of human rights into the settlement of the Namibian question destroys the moral fibre
of the principles the Security Council itself has
proclaimed.

172. An objective analysis of the development of the
multinationals and private or State banks over the last 10
years suggests the outline of a more socially aware reorientation in the business sector, To be sure, business, money,
a positive balance-sheet, remain the major objectives, but
these companies have already got into the habit of taking
into account considerations other than those of profit so
far as their internal strategies are concerned-not because
of altruism but because of prudence. In the long run, as
Stanley Hoffmann has written in Duties beyond Borders:
“doing business with gross violators of human rights may
lead to upheavals which entail far greater losses than the
short-term ones”6 invoked by the defenders of unbridled
commercialism. The States of the contact group can, if
they really wish to do so, continue to help us by using
their influence in a positive manner. Better that than
eventually having to resort to sanctions, whose implementation would be difficult and whose consequences
might be even more disastrous for the deprived people
whom we wish to save.
173. In South Africa and Namibia, State enterprises
belonging to the contact group, Stanley Hoffmann continues, “do not have to choose only between participating
in and profiting from apartheid, and disinvesting. They
can try to promote employment, housing and health policies that undermine apartheid.” At the opening of the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of one of the member countries of the contact
group put it as follows:

176. This concept of linkage stems from a Manichean
view of international relations and offers to a State guilty
of violations in Namibia, of invasions of Angola and of
destabilization elsewhere in Africa the possibility of resisting the pressures we wish to bring to bear upon it.
Rather than an explicit linkage, which has only slim
chances of successand which can only delay the outcome
desired by all the members of the Council who wrote and
adopted resolution 435 (1978), I propose a more subtle
blackmail which would put it as follows: “We are going
to step up progressively all manner of pressure upon you.
Our public opinion and the world conscience oppose
racism and the illegal occupation of Namibian territory.
We will relax this pressure only when you do something
for human rights.”

“Not a single military product, not a single spare part,
has been or will be delivered to the country of apartheid; no facilities will be accorded by the Government
to those who wish to continue to maintain relations
with that country; thus, our trade plummeted by 18 per
cent between 1981 and 1982.”
Is this not an example to be followed, and is it not food
for thought for the other four members of the contact
group?
174. KahIil Gibran, a charismatic and visionary poet of
the beginning of the century, sums up in verse what has
been said about the responsibility of nations:
“You give but
possessions.

little

177. The Charter, let us recall, is a basic document,
since it was adopted by all nations and mentions the
promotion
of universal respect for human rights

when you give of your
* Quoted in English by the speaker.
20

amongst its essential purposes and principles. Human
rights as a policy, which in essence is controversial, poses
the problem of adjusting national priorities to internationally sanctioned moral imperatives, The choice between a
crusade for freedom and democracy and the protection of
material interests or security requires of nations not a
Promethean posture of agony, but rather the transcendence of a Sisyphus rolling his boulder. There is no way
to isolate oneself from the effects of massive human
rights violations committed elsewhere. Transcendence
brings us closer to the Kantian ideal of the moral political man in the city, or of the rational political analysts
such as we here, whose duty it is gradually to turn the
infernal cycle of revolt and oppressive measures into an
upward spiral towards the establishment of a new order,
less inhuman and less unjust. In the case of Namibia,
before us today, as in the case of other acts of aggression
throughout the world, I should like to quote Sandy
Vogelgesang who, in a book entitled American DreamGlobal Nightmare,
wrote the following: “There is
nothing new about man’s inhumanity to man. , . . What
is new is the known scale of violations.“7

181. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The next speaker is Mr. Moustapha Niasse, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Senegal and Chairman of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence. I welcome him and invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
182. Mr. NIASSE
(Senegal) (interpretation from
French): Allow me, first of all, on behalf of President
Diouf, Head’of State of Senegal, on behalf of our delegation and on my own behalf to congratulate you, Sir, most
warmly on your assumption of the presidency of the
Council for the month of May 1983. Because of the longstanding links of friendship and close co-operation existing between our two Heads of State and between your
country, Zaire, and mine, Senegal, my delegation is
delighted to see you presiding over the Council, which is
once again discussing the question of Namibia, a problem that is of the greatest concern not only to Africa
because it is directly involved but also to the international community as a whole. My delegation is convinced
that, thanks to your talents as a seasoned diplomat and
your broad experience of international affairs, the discussions in the Council will be crowned with success.

178. In southern Africa, the risk of a vicious circle of
repression and violence is evident. Worse yet, this situation is liable to spread and sooner or later to engulf the
whole continent.

183. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity
to pay a well-deserved tribute to the outgoing President,
Mrs. Jeane J. Kirkpatrick, representative of the United
States of America, for the praiseworthy manner in which
she led the Council debates during the past month of
April.

179. I shall sum up this statement by stressing that we
must go on with the collective action that we are engaged
in here, so that we might set up a democratically elected
government within an independent and sovereign
Namibia, free from all interference in its domestic affairs.
This collective action, placed under the lofty authority of
the United Nations, which bears direct and primary
responsibility, does not rule out complementarypressures
that could be brought to bear by other authorities. In
paragraph 18 of his report, the Secretary-General voices
the opinion that, asfar as the United Nations is concerned,
the only outstanding issues are the choice of the electoral
system and the settlement of some final problems relating
to UNTAG and its composition. To remove the concept
of linkage would considerably reduce the obstacles in the
path of implementation of resolution 435 (1978).

184. Finally, I should like to thank you and the other
members of the Council most sincerely for the honour
bestowed upon us by inviting the delegation of Senegal to
take part in the discussion on this important item on the
agenda of the current series of meetings. In so doing, the
Council is again making it possible for Senegal to make its
contribution to the quest for a solution to the Namibian
problem, the continuation of which remains agrave threat
to international peace and security.
185. Africa is grateful to you for the diligence with which
you convened the Council to consider once again the
Namibian problem, and that you did so following the
explicit recommendations of the Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries
and of the International Conference in Support of the
Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence.

180. I have earlier quoted Kahlil Gibran. May I, in
conclusion, once again borrow from one of his poems to
illustrate the futility of oppression which would silence in
Namibia or elsewhere the song of liberty:
“You delight in laying down laws,

186. As members know, I had the great honour and
privilege of presiding-on behalf of my country and with
the trust placed in me by my colleagues-over the Paris
Conference on Namibia, organized pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 37/233 C of 20 December 1982.

Yet you delight more in breaking them.
...
You can muffle the drum, and you can loosen the
strings of the lyre,

187. I do not intend to go into the background of the
Namibian problem, the details of which are known to all,
nor do I wish to dwell on the situation in Namibia itself.
That situation which, owing to the strengthening of the
oppressive and repressive apartheiddgime, has been characterized by serious and disquieting developments has

but who shall command the skylark not to sing?“*
* Quoted

in English

by the speaker.

21

been debated in depth on other occasions, especially at
Harare, at the meeting of Heads of State of the front-line
States in February 1983, at New Delhi in March, in Paris
in April, and at Dar-es-Salaam during the current month.

195. Furthermore, the Declaration emphasizes that,
pursuant to General Assembly resolutions 2145 (XXI)
and 2248 (S-V) of 27 October 1966 and 19 May 1967
respectively, Namibia is the direct responsibility of the
United Nations which, in terminating South Africa’s
Mandate in 1966, vested administrative and legal authority for the Territory in the United Nations Council for
Namibia until that country achieves independence.

188. As the Security Council knows, the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence adopted, at the end of its work,
two documents of crucial importance: the Paris Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action on
Namibia.’ Those two documents, which, iti our view, are
an important step in the struggle of the Namibian people
to regain its independence, were, we must emphasize,
adopted unanimously by the Conference which brought
together in Paris some 140 countries, most of which were
represented at the ministerial level.

196. The Declaration unequivocally condemns the persistent defiant attitude of South Africa towards the international community, as well as its systematic refusal to
comply with the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council. In this context, the
Declaration also condemns the dilatory tactics of the
South African rCgime, which is seeking through unacceptable political subterfuges to impose an internal solution
to a problem the international nature of which was once
again emphasized by the Conference.

189. In order to facilitate the debates of the Council and
enable it, in accordance with the expressed wish of the
international community assembled in Paris, to take the
necessary measures to find a final solution to the Namibian problem, I shall outline the conclusions of the Paris
Conference and the main points of the two documents to
which I have just referred.

197. The Declaration denounces South Africa’s military build-up and the consolidation of its nuclear capability, which constitutes a genuine threat to the African
continent and all mankind.
198. In this regard, the Declaration deplored the violation of and non-compliance with the arms embargo
imposed by the Security Council, especially in its resolution 418 (1977), and severely criticized the attitude of
certain countries and financial institutions which, flouting decisions of the international community, continued
to lend all kinds of assistance to the Pretoria rCgime.

190. First of all, I would point out that, over and above
its outright condemnation of the apartheid rtgime in
South Africa and its racist, illegal policy of occupation of
Namibia, the Conference focused on determining the reasons which have thus far impeded the implementation of
Security Council resolution 435 (1978) and on proposing
concrete measures in this connection.

199. The Declaration also deplored the so-called policy
of constructive engagement of certain industrialized
countries vis-d-vis South Africa whose rCgime was benefiting from their understanding, and rejected categorically
any link that might introduce an East-West dimension
into the question of Namibia.

191. Indeed, both the Paris Declaration and the Programme of Action emphasize the measures that should be
taken so as finally to enable Namibia to achieve independence, with all its territory, including, of course, Walvis
Bay, the Penguin Islands and all the other islands situated
off the Namibian coast.

200. The Conference felt, indeed, that the question is
and remains a problem of decolonization, which should
be settled on the basis of the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and General Assembly
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960, containing
the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to
Colonial Countries and Peoples.

192. The Conference was also an occasion for the international community to renew, on the one hand, its active
solidarity and its moral, political and material support for
SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the Namibian people and, on the other, to stigmatize once again
the iniquitous policy of the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa and the repeated acts of aggression by the
racist rCgime of Pretoria against the front-line States, especially the People’s Republic of Angola.

201. Those, briefly, are the major points contained in
the Declaration which the Conference recommends to
the urgent and close attention ofall Governments, organizations and peoples committed to peace and justice, in
order to produce measures that might quickly free
Namibia from the illegal occupation imposed upon it by
the racist Pretoria regime.

193. Above and beyond the internationally accepted
principles which it recalls in unequivocal terms, the Paris
Declaration is a historic document of incontestable political scope.

202. As for the Programme of Action, we need simply
point out that the Conference, pending the imposition of
comprehensive mandatory sanctions by the Security
Council, urged States unilaterally and collectively to
adopt economic measures against the South African
rCgime as called for in the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly.

194. By that Declaration, the Conference solemnly reaffirms the inalienable right of the people of Namibia to
self-determination and national independence in a united
Namibia, in accordance with its legitimate aspirations and
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations.
22

203. The Programme of Action adopted by the Conference involves certain major points that can be summed up
as follows.

sorely under the yoke of apartheid, to join the concert of
free and independent nations, in accordance with its legitimate aspirations, without delay.

204. First, the immediate imposition of comprehensive
mandatory sanctions against South Africa as provided for
in Chapter VII of the Charter.

213. Moreover, South Africa, as the Council knows,
continues its repeated attacks against the dignity and
independence of the sovereign people of Angola, with
whom we here reaffirm our brotherly solidarity.

205. Secondly, the tightening of the arms embargo
against South Africa and a total boycott of the Pretoria
regime in conformity with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly.

214. The international community asks the Council, in
a spirit of generosity and in order to restore to the Namibians their human dignity and to enable them, as is their
right, to drink at the well of liberty at long last restored
to them, to carry out effectively and faithfully the responsibilities entrusted to it by the Charter, in order to contribute to redressing a flagrant injustice against a people
whose only wrong is to aspire, like others, to freedom
and d/gnity. In so doing, the Council will spare Africa
and the entire world the danger of an intensification of
an armed conflict that could once again imperil international peace and security.

206. Thirdly, an appeal to the United Kingdom Government to prohibit the export of radar equipment to South
Africa.
207. Fourthly, strict compliance with Decree No. 1 for
the Protection of the Natural Resources of Namibia’ and
the immediate cessation of the shameless plundering of
the natural resources, including uranium, of the Territory
by industrialized countries whose companics and economic interest groups continue to operate in Namibia.

215. That is the message that I, as President of the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, and on behalf of
the Head of State of Senegal, felt it my duty to transmit
to the Council, in the hope that it will facilitate the Council’s deliberations and enable it to take the steps the
world community has the right to expect of it.

208. Fifthly, sustained and increased moral and political
support, as well as financial, military and other material
assistance, to SWAP0 and to other front-line States
members of the South African Development Coordination Conference.
209, Sixthly, the strengthening of the powers of the
United Nations Council for Namibia as the legal Administering Authority for Namibia until its independence.

216. I should like to avail myself of this opportunity to
thank most sincerely the entire international community
for being kind enough to honour my country, Senegal,
by appointing it to the presidency of that important international meeting in Paris, which marked a crucial step in
the process of negotiations aimed at finding a peaceful
solution to the question of Namibia. I should like to
reaffirm the constant readiness of my country and of its
leaders to extend as in the past, our active co-operation
in the search for a negotiated solution to the Namibian
problem.

210. Whether in the Declaration or in the Programme of
Action, which I have just summarized, the Conference
was unanimous in acknowledging that Security Council
resolution 435 (1978) was the only acceptable and valid
basis for a peaceful settlement of the Namibian question.
The Conference consequently calls for its immediate
implementation, without any modification whatsoever.
21.1, The illegal occupation of Namibia by South Africa,
in the eyes of the international community meeting in
Paris and in accordance with the Definition of Aggression
set forth in General Assembly resolution 3314. (XXIX), of
14 December 1974, is an act of aggression against the
Namibian people. Hence, the Conference believes that the
situation as it prevails in Namibia is a serious threat to
international peace and security.

217. My delegation indeed remains conv’inced, as was
stated by the Head of State of Senegal at the eighteenth
session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the OAU, held at Nairobi in June 1981, that it is
still possible to make Namibia independent through a
negotiated solution based on the proper and comprehensive implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
218. In that context, I must emphasize that the question of Namibia is an international problem that is still
before the United Nations, and that it is within this
framework that, in accordance with the wishes of the
international community and of SWAP0 itself, we
should find a solution to it. Within that same framework,
it would be particularly appropriate to strengthen the
authority of the Secretary-General and that of the United
Nations Council for Namibia.

212. In this regard, the Conference expressed its dismay
at the failure of the Security Council to implement its
own resolutions, thereby encouraging South Africa to
pursue its policy of apartheid, occupation and aggression
in southern Africa in defiance of the international community. For that reason, the Conference urges the Council,
in its wisdom, to consider the Namibian question in the
light of the conclusions of the Conference and to exercise,
within that framework, its full authority to bring about
the implementation of its resolutions 385 (1976) and 435
(1978), in order to enable Namibia, which has suffered so

219. Five years have elapsed since the adoption by the
Security Council of resolution 435 (1978). Since the
23

effort to enable SWAP0 to make the true voice of its
people heard and to help Namibia enter the concert of
free and independent nations.

desired objective, namely, the independence of Namibia,
has not been achieved, it is only right that today the Council should once again have that issue before it so that it
may undertake a new evaluation of the situation and, at
the same time, in the light of the conclusions of the Paris
Conference, formulate the most appropriate ways and
means of ensuring the implementation of resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978), which, despite the passage of time,
retain their intrinsic value and continue to be the most
acceptable basis for a negotiated settlement of the Namibian problem.

225. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French):
The last speaker is the representative of the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid, Mr. Mohamed
Sahnoun. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
226. Mr. SAHNOUN:
Mr. President, I should like to
thank you and the members of the Council for the kind
invitation extended to the Special Committee against
Apartheid, on whose behalf I have the honour to speak
now.

220. The Western countries members of the contact
group, whose efforts we encourage, have a direct and special responsibility in the Namibian issue and a vanguard
role to play in the settlement of the question of Namibia.
However, they must demonstrate greater firmness with
regard to South Africa in order to compel it to accept and
implement the terms of the United Nations settlement
plan. If we wish to avoid a widespread conflict, with all
the unpredictable consequences it might involve, that is
the only way for Namibia to regain its independence and
for southern Africa finally to enjoy a new era of peace,
security and calm in which to turn its attention to its own
development.

226. Allow me also, on behalf of the Special Committee
to say that we are confident that, under your wise and
very able leadership, the Council will be greatly aided in
the fulfilment of its important responsibilities.
228. The Council is called upon once more to deal with
the question of Namibia at a time when South Africa,
instead of relinquishing its stranglehold over the Territory of Namibia and co-operating in the implementation
of resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978), has in fact
embarked on a dangerous policy aimed at imposing its
diktat on Namibia and on several neighbouring independent African States, which it has since 1973 subjected to a
series of premeditated acts of aggression and destabilization by overt and covert means-a series of acts that are
tantamount to a devastating undeclared war on the
front-line States. Today’s aggression against Mozambique is a further example of this treacherous, inhuman
and dangerous policy.

221. I should like to pay a well-deserved tribute to the
Secretary-General for the very diligent way in which he
has tackled the Namibian problem since taking office.
The introductory report that he submitted at the beginning of this meeting reflects his concern for objectivity
and frankness, his realism and his honesty. The delegation of Senegal would like to encourage him to maintain
his contact with all the parties concerned and to pursue
his praiseworthy
efforts until the achievement of total
independence by Namibia.

229. In April, the Special Committee sent a fact-finding
mission to the front-line States, which I had the privilege
to lead. It received extensive information on the sharp
increase in the number of military operations carried out
in broad daylight by South African forces, especially in
Angola, Mozambique and Lesotho, as well as covert
activities involving border incidents, psychological warfare and the use of subversive groups and mercenaries,
assassination and abduction of individuals and destruction of bridges, roads, rail lines, oil pipelines, fuel depots
and power lines in several neighbouring countries.

222. We also congratulate Mr. Paul Lusaka, the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia, and Mr.
Brajesh Mishra, the United Nations Commissioner for
Namibia and Secretary-General of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People
for Independence, for their tireless efforts on behalf of the
independence of Namibia and the success of the Conference. If the Conference was a success, we must emphasize
that it was thanks to their dedication and their devotion
to the just cause of the oppressed peoples, including the
brotherly Namibian people.

230. Using the international Territory of Namibia as a
springboard, the South African rCgime has occupied
southern Angola. The murderous activities of its military
forces in Namibia and Angola have already claimed over
10,000 victims and sent hundreds of thousands of displaced persons streaming into neighbouring countries,
thus adding to the strains of the host countries. Between
1975 and 1981, material damage to the Angolan economy alone was estimated at over $7.5 billion.

223. Finally, I should like to welcome here the presence
among us of an African brother, a great fighter, determined and clear-minded, and a great leader, our comrade,
Sam Nujoma, whose organization, SWAPO, the sole and
authentic representative of the Namibian people, has won
the admiration and respect of the international community because of its discipline, its spirit of initiative, its
open-mindedness, its manifest willingness to co-operate
and its keen sense of responsibility-in
a word, because of
the political maturity it has shown up to the present.

231. All these criminal acts of aggression and destabilization point in one direction, that is, the determination
of the racist rCgime of Pretoria to impose a solution of its
own in Namibia as well as in the rest of the southern

224. I assure him once again of the unequivocal support
of Senegal and reiterate that my delegation will spare no
24

examine the question in the wake of the abortive Geneva
negotiations.

Africa region. This is a flagrant violation of the purposes
and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of
every norm of international law and conduct and a total
disregard for the decisions of the General Assembly and
the Council. This open challenge to the Organization cannot be left unanswered.

237. It is quite apparent now that attempts to move
negotiations away from the framework
of resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978) have not only been counterproductive but have also been used by South Africa’s
major trading partners as a means of muting criticism
and delaying or avoiding any action conducive to
genuine self-determination and independence.

232. The Special Committee has been and continues to
,be deeply concerned about the economic interests that
stand in the way of Namibian independence, those very
interests that prevent the implementation of resolution
435 (1978), in addition to the political and military
interests.

238. In fact, that is why referencks to linkage and the
so-called partiality of the Organization have cropped up
from time to time during those separate negotiations outside the framework of resolution 435 jf978).

233. It is well known that transnational corporations,
through capital investment, bank loans and trade, have
abetted the apartheid rCgime not only in South Africa but
in Namibia itself. It is no accident that, as early as 1974,
the United Nations Council for Namibia, as legal Administering Authority of the international Territory until independence, enacted Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia3 against further usurpation
by the apartheid rCgime and its allies.

239. It is high time that the Council reasserted itself in
the fulfilment of its important responsibilities. It owes it
to itself, first, to reassert that there can be no satisfactory
negotiated settlement of the question of Namibia outside
the international consensus embodied in its resolutions
385 (1976) and 435 (1978); secondly, to reject any linkage
between Namibian independence and some other
extraneous and totallv irrelevant matter; and, thirdly, to
consider the imposit’ion of selective or comprehensive
sanctions against South Africa under Chapter VII of the
Charter as a means of ensuring South Africa’s compliance with United Nations decisions on Namibia. The
Council also owes it to itself to look into ways and means
of moving away from the deadlocked positions in which
it has found itself on this question that involves the maintenance of international peace and security. The efforts
made in this connection by the Secretary-General, which
are described in his interim report, should be not only
commended but also supported and strengthened by
courageous and appropriate decisions of the Council.

234. In the same vein, General Assembly resolution
36151 of 24 December 1981 demanded that the Pretoria
rCgime and its collaborators desist from their shameless
exploitation of Namibia’s resources and called on the
international community to bring pressure to bear on
transnational corporations
to refrain from exploitative
activities. However, available information reveals that
there are as many as 88 corporations
operating in
Namibia now. The operations of these corporations are
made possible by means of licences issued by the Pretoria
rCgime, which is illegally administering Namibia. In 1981
alone, South Africa approved more than 250 mineral
prospecting licences to international mining companies.
Approximately
80 per cent of the total mining assets are
held by only three mining companies. The first is Consolidated Diamond Mines of South West Africa; the second
is Tsumeb Corporation,
controlled by American Metal
Climax and Newmont Mining Corporation of the United
States; and the third is R&sing Uranium, in which the
largest stake, nearly 47 per cent, is held by the Rio Tinto
Zinc Corporation of the United Kingdom.

240. There is no other way out of the dangerous and
explosive situation in which we find ourselves today. This
explosive situation, which has been created by South
Africa’s continuous occupation of Namibia, was stressed
by the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian People for Independence, held in
Paris, when it said: the United Nations and the international community must take energetic and concerted
action in support of the legitimate struggle of the Namibian people for self-determination, freedom and national
independence. Failure to act now will not only prolong
the injustice and oppression under which the people of
Namibia have for so long laboured but will lead to the
escalation of the present conflicLR

235. It is also well known that the apartheid rCgime has
derived military gains from its transnational corpora.tion
partners. They have enabled its State-owned Arms and
Development Corporation
to produce arms and armsrelated materiel to the extent that South Africa today
rates tenth in the world in the manufacture of conventional weapons-those
very weapons which are used by
the racist rCgime to stifle the legitimate aspirations of the
people of Namibia to freedom and independence, perpetrate the Matola. massacre, carry out a raid against
Maseru and attempt to destabilize the front-line States
and challenge the community of nations.

241. It is incumbent upon the Council effectively to
assist the struggling people of Namibia to achieve
genuine self-determination and independence and avoid
escalation of the conflict,
The meeting rose at 7.35 p.m.

236. The situation in Namibia today is certainly worse
than it was two years ago, when the Council last met to

25

Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council Resoiution 276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, 1.C.J. Reports 1971, p, 16.
5 Ofkial
Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh
Session.
Supplement No. 1.
6 Stanley Hoffmann,
Duties beyor!dBorders
(New York, Syracuse University Press, 19X1), p. 132.
’ Sandy Vogelgesang,
American Dream-Global
Nightmare
(W. W.
Norton,
New York, 1980), p, 51.
’ See Report of the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle
qf the Namibian
People for Independence,
Paris. 25-29 Aprif I983
(AKONF.
120/13), part three, para. 191.

NOTES

1See Report of the International
Conference in Support of the Strugg/e of the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(AKONF.
120/13). part three.
'Ibid.,
para. 170,
3 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-fifth
#Session,
Supplement No. 24, vol. I, annex II.
4 For the response from the International
Court of Justice, see Legal
Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South Africa in

~~~~:EitS113Ef~~~i~6~*~~~~K~~3;fimt~.
R8lzlHTt%!8
0

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

iFlr;il*lS'~lL7~~~~~~~3~~~a~~6~

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications dcs Nations Unies sent en ventc dans les librairies et les agences ddpositaircs
du monde entier. lnformez-vous
aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York ou Genhe.
KAK

I-IOJlYYMTb

ki3AAHMR

OPTAHM3AUMM

OG’bEAMHEHHLIX

!d3nallllfl

opraHH3aUllH
06aentmcmcl,~x
Hatuifi ~Oxx0
~cyrlwr~
B KHwiwbIx
II aItHTCTBaX
BO BCCX PaiiOHaX
MHpa.
t-iaBOL,liTC
Cn,?aBKk, 06 IWIaAIIRX
II Ba”,eM
Maramle
HIIU miuurre
no anpecy: OpraHrlsauAR
O6beAlW3HHblx
Hami&
npoaaxe
il3namiI1,
I-Ibm-PIoprc
Mnii XeHana.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

HAIJMfi
MarLURHax
KHWKHOM

CeKuxa

no

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas est6n en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

--

Litho !n Unit4

Nations, New York

00400

90-6020%March

1991-2,050
