A/64/PV.41

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

41

st plenary meeting
Monday, 9 November 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

In the absence of the President, Mrs. Aitimova
(Kazakhstan), Vice-President, took the Chair.

Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland and the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela.

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.

The International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies (ICNRD) has taken on an important role
in strengthening democracy. Governments, parliaments
and civil society organizations participating in the New
or Restored Democracies Movement are determined to
use the Conferences as a source of inspiration and a
forum to exchange experiences and best practices.

Agenda item 11
Support by the United Nations system of the efforts
of Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/372)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.12)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Qatar to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.12.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I am
honoured to speak under agenda item 11 to introduce
the draft resolution contained in document A/64/L.12,
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies”.
Since the draft resolution was introduced, the
following countries have joined as sponsors: Estonia,
Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lithuania, Madagascar,
Mali, Malta, Morocco, the Netherlands, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, the Republic of
Korea, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Turkey, Ukraine, the United Arab

Based on its commitment to implement
systematically the recommendations and follow-up to
the Conferences, the State of Qatar hosted the Sixth
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in November 2006. Qatar has begun work
to establish an international advisory board with
members from various regional groups.
Since 2007, the Advisory Board of the Sixth
International Conference has held four important
meetings in Doha and in New York under the
chairmanship of Mr. Mohammed Bin Abdullah Bin
Mutib Al-Rumaihi, Deputy Foreign Minister of Qatar,
and has helped to ensure implementation and follow-up
to the meetings of the Movement for the years 20072009 and to assess the progress made in achieving the
goals set at the Conference.
The New or Restored Democracies Movement is
an important factor in promoting international dialogue
on the concepts, principles and basic values of
democracy and in strengthening a culture of
partnership with Governments, parliaments, the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-59928 (E)

*0959928*

A/64/PV.41

International Civil Society Forum for Democracy and
the United Nations. We have also set up a national
secretariat and chairmanship with a database of
information on democracy to provide electronic and
other information on progress being made on the
Movement’s programme of work.
Within that framework, Qatar has also set up a
structure to ensure implementation of the Movement’s
programme of work that can be used by future
Conference chairs. It has also led meetings at the
expert level to address methods of coordination and
information exchange, and another meeting that has
succeeded in developing national committees of the
democracy Movement and supplying all of its members
with reference documents.
In the context of General Assembly resolution
62/7, adopted in November 2007, the first International
Day of Democracy was celebrated on 15 September
2008. Qatar, as Chair of the Sixth International
Conference, is working to ensure systematic
implementation of the recommendations made at the
Conference and to ensure conditions favourable to the
future of the New or Restored Democracies Movement
through various mechanisms set up for that purpose.
Qatar has encouraged meetings among member
States to exchange points of view on that topic because
we consider it important to take action outside the
framework of the Conferences. Thus, Qatar has also
organized meetings of States members of the New or
Restored Democracies Movement on the margins of
United Nations sessions.
Qatar held a ministerial meeting of the New or
Restored Democracies Movement on the sidelines of
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly under
the chairmanship of Mr. Khaled bin Mohamed
Al-Attiyah, Minister of State for International
Cooperation, to consider ways to strengthen the
Movement as an institutional movement akin to other
political and regional groups at the United Nations.
Participants at the meeting addressed initiatives to
ensure the Movement’s future sustainability as an
institution, agreed to ensure a more effective and
efficient follow-up to the recommendations of the
International Conferences of New or Restored
Democracies, and engaged in discussions on the
institutionalization of the Movement.
The draft resolution before the Assembly today
(A/64/L.12) welcomes the work carried out by the

2

follow-up mechanisms of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies and the
efforts of the Chair to make the Conference and the
follow-up thereto more effective and efficient, and in
this regard takes note of the outcomes of the four
meetings of the Advisory Board of the Sixth
International
Conference,
particularly
the
implementation of the programme of work of the
Conference for 2007-2009 and the convening of the
ministerial meeting of the New or Restored
Democracies Movement on the sidelines of the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly.
In addition, the draft resolution renews its call to
follow up on the work of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies by
inviting interested parties to inform the SecretaryGeneral of measures taken to that end.
Qatar attaches great importance to the Conference
and urges effective and efficient follow-up of its
recommendations. The draft resolution notes the
achievement of the International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies, under the chairmanship of
Qatar, of the establishment of the International Day of
Democracy on 15 September. In addition, it reaffirms
the central role of parliaments and the active
involvement of civil society organizations and media
and their interaction with Governments at all levels in
promoting democracy.
The draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to take necessary measures for the observance
of the International Day of Democracy and urges him
to examine options for strengthening the support
provided by the United Nations system for the efforts
of Member States to consolidate democracy and good
governance, including the provision of support to the
President of the Sixth International Conference.
Qatar has achieved many successes during its
chairmanship of the Conference, which is to expire
shortly, and the sponsors of the draft resolution
welcome the decision of the Government of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to host the Seventh
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies in 2010.
The draft resolution invites the SecretaryGeneral, Member States, the relevant specialized
agencies and bodies of the United Nations system and
other intergovernmental organizations to collaborate in
the holding of the Seventh International Conference.

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

We take this opportunity to congratulate the
Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on its decision to host the Seventh International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies and
affirm the need for follow-up efforts to systematically
implement the recommendations of previous
Conferences.
The Government of Qatar has held two informal
consultation meetings with Member States on the draft
resolution before us today. I take this opportunity to
thank Member States that participated in the
discussions. Qatar, as Chairman of the Sixth
International Conference, thanks all Member States
that sponsored the draft resolution and hopes to gather
the greatest number of sponsors. We urge adoption of
the draft resolution by consensus.
Mrs. Dunlop (Brazil): Before Brazil became
independent in 1822, many political movements fought
for our independence. In 1789, one of these movements
adopted a Latin motto taken from Virgil’s first
Eclogue: “Libertas quae sera tamen”, which means
“freedom albeit late”. When Brazil became a Republic
in 1889, the motto was engraved on the flag of one of
the states of our federation. Two hundred years later,
Brazil is very proud to be a consolidated democracy.
Not only in our country, but all over the world, these
ideals of freedom and democracy have inspired many
visionaries.
As Brazilians, we fully understand the
importance of democracy and fundamental freedoms
and are fully committed to their implementation.
Hence, we strongly support all the efforts made by the
United Nations, regional organizations and Member
States to strengthen programmes devoted to the
promotion and consolidation of democracy, taking into
account innovative approaches and best practices.
I wish to thank the Secretary-General for his
report on support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies (A/64/372). We appreciate
his continued efforts and the assistance provided by all
United Nations bodies to new or restored democracies
in their commitment to the rule of law and to the
universal core values and principles of the United
Nations.
We have welcomed the designation of
15 September as the International Day of Democracy,
as we firmly believe that the marking of this day will

09-59928

serve as a reminder of the importance of democracy.
Moreover, we value the report of the Secretary-General
and his recommendations aimed at improving the role
of the United Nations in democracy assistance.
We would also like to recognize and commend
the leadership of the State of Qatar as Chair of the
Sixth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies. We appreciate all the progress achieved
in the past few years, particularly the process of the
institutionalization of the Movement. The commitment
of the Qatari Government was pivotal to promoting the
goals of the International Conference.
Brazil is honoured to be a sponsor of resolution
62/7 and of draft resolution A/64/L.12, which has been
introduced today.
Last but not least, I would also like to
congratulate our South American neighbour, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for taking the lead
of the Seventh Conference. We sincerely wish great
success for its chairmanship.
As President Lula once reminded us, Brazil is a
democracy that is proud of its multi-ethnic population,
which draws on rich and varied cultural heritages but
shares a strong sense of national identity. We live in
peace at home and with neighbouring countries, and
this is something we will not surrender. Indeed, with
over 100 million voters, all our representatives are
elected by secret ballot at all levels of Government.
The press and media work freely. Moreover, in the
most recent presidential election, the undisputed results
were announced just a few hours after the polls closed,
as Brazil has developed an electronic secret voting
system that allows their prompt release.
Our Parliamentarians therefore follow elected
mandates. Our judges undergo public examinations to
be appointed. The Brazilian Constitution of
1988 recognizes all fundamental freedoms, such as the
freedom of speech and the freedom of assembly.
We fully support the General Assembly in its role
to encourage Governments to strengthen national
programmes to promote and consolidate democracy,
including through increased bilateral, regional and
international cooperation. More importantly, in view of
the special meaning of democracy and freedom to
Brazilians, we will continue to uphold all efforts of the
United Nations system towards the development of
democratic governance and the building and promotion

3

A/64/PV.41

of inclusive national dialogue and reconciliation in
countries where they may be necessary.
Ms. Ochir (Mongolia): My delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General on support by the
United Nations system of the efforts of Governments to
promote and consolidate new or restored democracies
(A/64/372). As seen in the report, Member States have
made good progress in promoting and consolidating
democracy, in collaboration with regional and
intergovernmental organizations. As democracy
represents a key principle and core value of the United
Nations, underpinning much of its work, the support by
the United Nations system is vital to new or restored
democracies.
Since 1994, when the General Assembly adopted
its first resolution in support of new or restored
democracies (resolution 49/30), United Nations support
and assistance in the area of democracy promotion
have increased in both scope and content. They range
from electoral assistance, supporting constitutionmaking
processes,
strengthening
democratic
governance institutions and the rule of law, promoting
human rights and anti-corruption initiatives, improving
gender responsiveness and women’s empowerment,
enhancing civic engagement in democratic processes,
and providing good offices in overcoming political
crises and preventing their escalation.
My delegation commends here the establishment
last year of a standby team of mediation experts within
the Mediation Support Unit of the Department of
Political Affairs on a wide variety of issues, including
power- and wealth-sharing, constitution-making and
natural resource management. That team could serve
the needs of Member States as a powerhouse of highcalibre expertise in relevant areas, to be deployed
promptly at the request of Member States.
Mongolia has been enjoying solid and fruitful
cooperation in consolidating its democratic gains with
the entities of the United Nations system, in particular
the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
and its Oslo Governance Centre, the Department of
Political Affairs and the United Nations Democracy
Fund, as well as with the Inter-Parliamentary Union
and the International Institute for Democracy and
Electoral Assistance (International IDEA).
This year marks the twentieth anniversary of the
onset of Mongolia’s democratic revolution. For us,
these have been demanding yet rewarding years of

4

learning and doing marked by the building of solid
institutions of democracy and by a relentless effort to
simultaneously reform the nation’s political and
economic systems. We believe that the democratic
system of Government is the best model to ensure a
framework of liberties in which to seek lasting
solutions to the political, economic and social
problems that our society faces. It is therefore our
belief that democratic consolidation must come
through pursuing sustained economic reform aimed at
ensuring better living standards for the people. The
goal of human development is high on the agenda of
the Government of Mongolia and was reaffirmed yet
again by our Prime Minister in his inaugural address on
29 October.
Our steadfast drive towards the consolidation of
democracy at home has been duly recognized by the
international community. Mongolia successfully hosted
the Fifth International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies (ICNRD) in 2003 and chaired that
international movement until November 2006. We are
proud to serve currently as an Advisory Board member
of ICNRD. Mongolia is also a member of the
Convening Group of another international movement
for democracy, the Community of Democracies, and
was humbled by the Community’s decision to have
Mongolia serve as Chair from 2011.
We are also grateful to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for selecting us to serve on the Advisory
Board of the United Nations Democracy Fund. As one
of the main sponsors of resolution 62/7, Mongolia
celebrated the International Day of Democracy on
15 September this year with days on which Parliament
opened its doors to the public and with a special
thematic debate with youth organizations on
democracy and political tolerance issues and future
directions of democracy in Mongolia. We also kicked
off a three-month nation-wide campaign on democracy
education.
Since Manila, ICNRD has grown into a truly
global movement. We welcome the emphasis placed by
Qatar, as Chair, on ensuring a systematic follow-up on
and implementation of the decisions of the Sixth
Conference, reflected in the relevant programme of
work. The productive outcomes of the four meetings of
the ICNRD Advisory Board have proven the usefulness
of that mechanism. We also commend the efforts of the
Chair in setting up a national secretariat, a website and
the ICNRD democracy databank to facilitate the

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

exchange of experience and expertise among States on
their democratization efforts.
As we discuss the multifaceted support provided
by the United Nations family organizations and other
relevant stakeholders to the efforts exerted by the new
and restored democracies, let me share some ideas in
relation to the recommendations and observations
outlined in the Secretary-General’s report.
First, on ensuring continued momentum and
support for the International Day of Democracy, based
on the widespread support expressed globally over the
past two years for celebrating this important occasion,
it might be advisable to designate a specific theme each
year so that the United Nations system organizations
and Member States can harness their efforts in a more
systematic manner. In 2010, when we will focus on the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs), the international community may choose to
celebrate the International Day of Democracy by
highlighting the deliverables of democracy, specifically
in poverty reduction and the attainment of other MDGs.
Secondly,
my
delegation
welcomes
the
recommendation of the Secretary-General to encourage
complementarity between the ICNRD and the
Community of Democracies. During its chairmanship
of the ICNRD from 2003 to November 2006, Mongolia
attempted to bring the two global democracy
movements closer together, inter alia, by introducing
the relevant recommendations in both ICNRD and
Community
ministerial
outcome
documents,
conducting consultations and developing a non-paper
to that effect.
Today, in our view, momentum is gathering in
favour of exploring avenues of possible cooperation
between the two global movements for democracy,
ICNRD and the Community of Democracies. As we
know, the Community’s new Chair, Lithuania, has
made synergy with ICNRD one of its priorities. The
Secretary-General in his report has also suggested
providing assistance in this regard. Therefore, we
believe that circumstances are conducive to further
discussions on possible cooperation between ICNRD
and the Community of Democracies.
We also believe that international efforts to
promote democracy will further benefit if the ICNRD
enjoys robust collaboration and coordination at the
multilateral level with other actors, for example the
European Union, the Organization for Security and

09-59928

Cooperation in Europe, the Council of Europe, the
Inter-Parliamentary Union, the African Union, the
Organization of American States, International IDEA,
the Asia-Pacific Democracy Partnership and others.
Thirdly, as to ensuring effective follow-up
between ICNRD Conferences, the practices and
experiences amassed in the past, especially since the
Fifth Conference, should be sustained further. As the
Secretary-General’s report mentions, the Fifth
Conference follow-up was effective in implementing
the Ulaanbaatar Conference decisions through a
number of pioneering initiatives as a substantive
follow-up to the Fifth Conference, which included the
development of nationally owned democratic
governance indicators, the country information note
and a national plan of action to consolidate democracy
in Mongolia. Those follow-up experiences were shared
with other countries and democracy experts at the
International Follow-Up Conference on New or
Restored Democracies held in Ulaanbaatar in June
2006, as well as at the Sixth Conference in Doha.
Fourthly, my delegation believes that the
institutionalization of ICNRD is essential to ensuring
effective
and
systematic
follow-up
to
the
recommendations adopted at each Conference and to
revitalizing the movement in the twenty-first century.
In order to build sustainable institutional mechanisms
to advance the political standing of ICNRD in the
world and provide better services to its members, we
need a lean and effective secretariat in New York,
coupled with a trust fund to support ICNRD activities.
We applaud the Secretary-General’s readiness to
support the Movement’s institutionalization in this
regard.
Fifthly, with the increased role of the United
Nations in fostering democracy and good governance,
strengthening United Nations democracy assistance
and addressing its coherence and coordination have
become important issues in our discussion. In this
regard, we welcome the Secretary-General’s recent
issuance of a guidance note on democracy.
In his address to the General Assembly in
September (see A/64/PV.8), the President of Mongolia
underlined democracy as inherently woven into the
MDGs, noting that Mongolia was the first country to
adopt MDG 9 on strengthening human rights, fostering
democratic governance and zero tolerance for
corruption. That pioneering initiative, supported by the

5

A/64/PV.41

United Nations Democracy Fund and UNDP, could be
a useful tool in ensuring that democracy assistance is
more effectively integrated into the work of the United
Nations, thus bringing more coherence and
coordination to the Organization’s efforts.
Here, I would like to reiterate once again the
suggestion made by my delegation at the sixty-third
session to the effect that it would be advisable to have
a study on the inter-agency coordination and coherence
of democracy promotion efforts undertaken by the
United Nations system. Such a study should, in our
view, present concrete proposals and recommendations
on streamlining and bringing more coherence into the
actions of different United Nations stakeholders in
democracy promotion.
My delegation also believes that the General
Assembly
could
take
up
the
issues
and
recommendations raised in the Secretary-General’s
report, especially those related to the coherence and
coordination of United Nations democracy assistance
through a thematic debate. That would not only engage
us in a thorough discussion on the United Nations role
in democracy promotion, but also effectively
contribute towards the implementation of draft
resolution A/64/L.12, to be adopted shortly, on support
of the United Nations system to the efforts of new and
restored democracies.
In conclusion, on behalf of my Government I
would like to congratulate Qatar on having
successfully chaired the Movement for the past three
years, and to welcome Venezuela as a host of the
Seventh ICNRD.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We are grateful that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been proposed
by numerous countries, by way of draft resolution
A/64/L.12, to be adopted today, for the chairmanship
of the International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies for the period 2009-2011. We
congratulate the State of Qatar and its Permanent
Representative,
Ambassador
Nassir
Abdulaziz
Al-Nasser, on the advances accomplished during
Qatar’s chairmanship of the Movement. Among them,
we highlight the designation by the United Nations of
15 September as the International Day of Democracy,
the successful organization of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies in 2006
in Qatar, and the ministerial meeting held during the

6

general debate of the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly.
We also welcome the Secretary-General’s report
entitled “Support by the United Nations system of the
efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies” (A/64/372).
The innovative public policy programmes being
implemented in Venezuela have laid the foundation for
our efforts to build democracy with social justice.
These programmes, which are aimed mostly at the
disadvantaged, the poor and those who have always
been excluded, have revitalized and rekindled
Venezuelan democracy.
The Venezuelan Government promotes social
programmes that are intended to address the root
causes of the economic, political, social and cultural
problems facing society. Significant achievements have
been made to that end in Venezuela. According to
UNESCO, illiteracy has been eliminated in my country
thanks to the concerted efforts of our Government and
the unparalleled cooperation extended by the sister
Republic of Cuba. According to the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, our
country has achieved resounding success in
overcoming inequality on our continent.
Venezuela has already achieved the Millennium
Development Goal on reducing extreme poverty.
Latinobarómetro, an organization that conducts public
opinion surveys in Latin America, has identified our
country as one of the most democratic countries of the
region. That organization also ranks Venezuela first in
terms of economic and social indicators, such as
equality of opportunities, social security, income
distribution and employment opportunities.
The 2008 reports of the Economic Commission
for Latin America and the Caribbean and the United
Nations Development Programme confirm the
understanding of the men and women of Venezuela that
our country’s strengthened democracy enjoys broad
popular support. Today, all political and social sectors
enjoy democratic freedoms and civil and political
rights that would have been unimaginable in the past.
Over the past 11 years, for example, under the
Government of President Hugo Chávez Frias,
12 national electoral processes have taken place,
including three presidential elections and five popular
referendums, among which was one presidential recall

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

referendum. We can therefore say that Venezuela holds
a world record for elections.
The President took the Chair.
In the spirit of the Doha Declaration of the Sixth
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies, held in Doha in 2006, the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela reaffirms the richness and
diversity of political systems around the world and
emphasizes the importance of democratic reforms
being carried out in accordance with the national,
regional, religious and cultural particularities of each
country.
Recalling the Doha Declaration, Venezuela
reiterates its belief that it is the will of the sovereign
people that is responsible for establishing the
democratic institutions of a nation and that, as a result,
there is no single model of democracy or single set of
democratic institutions. There is a rich diversity of
democracies around the world.
Venezuela reaffirms the importance of having the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies creatively coordinate the activities of the
Governments, parliaments, civil society and social and
popular movements of the world to strengthen and
bolster democracies around the world. Venezuela again
thanks Member States for their support for our
assumption of the chairmanship of the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies, and is
firmly committed to promoting this movement with the
help of all Member States.
Mr. Waghmare (India): At the outset, I would
like to congratulate the delegation of Qatar on having
introduced the draft resolution (A/64/L.12) on the
importance of support by the United Nations system of
the efforts of Governments to promote and consolidate
new or restored democracies. We are happy to
co-sponsor the draft.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
thank Qatar for its successful stewardship of the Chair
of the International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies (ICNRD) over the past three years, and
would like to assure Venezuela of our support during
its forthcoming chairmanship of this process.
The ICNRD process has come a long way since
its inception, with only 13 countries, in Manila more
than 21 years ago. Today, the process enjoys the
participation of more than 100 countries in its

09-59928

activities, and its membership is open to all United
Nations Member States. This underscores the
importance of the principles and purposes of the
Conference and the success of this initiative. We are
also happy to note that this process has helped
countries to share their experiences of democracy and
to identify means to promote pluralistic and
participatory democracy. We look forward to the
institutionalization of ICNRD activities.
India is the world’s largest democracy, and we
have been proud to uphold the highest traditions of
democracy since our independence more than 60 years
ago. We draw particular satisfaction from the manner
in which we conduct our elections. In the past few
years, we have begun using electronic voting
machines. This has allowed our election commission to
declare results within hours of the start of the counting
process, even though, on average, our constituencies
are comprised of over a million voters. A few months
back, we elected the fifteenth Lok Sabha, the lower
house of Parliament, in a mammoth process that
involved more than 700 million voters exercising their
franchise to elect 543 members of Parliament.
We are also proud of yet another democratic
process at the grass-roots level in India. We have had
an institutionalized system of local self-governance in
rural India since 1993 through the system of
panchayati raj. A unique feature of this grass-roots
empowerment is the component of gender
empowerment, which involves one third of the elected
seats being reserved for women. As a result, we have
over a million elected women representatives in the
country.
Our experience has also shown that democracy is
a powerful tool for successfully involving people in
meeting the challenges of development. It allows the
people to participate actively in and to influence
Government actions in the direction of their
aspirations. It also ensures a voice for the most
vulnerable and weakest sections of society. Our
experience also corroborates that implementation of
proactive development policies and economic reforms,
when coupled with a liberal democratic polity, leads to
the overall stability and growth of the country.
As a developing country itself, India is in a
unique position to understand the problems that other
developing countries face while embracing democracy.
We have been sharing our experience, institutional

7

A/64/PV.41

capabilities and training infrastructure with nations that
share our democratic values and beliefs and would like
to benefit from the experience of other democracies.
In this context, we are happy to be one of the
major contributors to the United Nations Democracy
Fund and to serve on its Advisory Board. We have also
been offering our expertise bilaterally and through
other multilateral forums, promoting democratic ideals
and the rule of law. We have also been active
supporters of activities of the United Nations
Development Programme in the field of good
governance.
India is strongly committed to the underlying
values and principles inspiring the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies. We
would continue to support the Conference and to
provide necessary assistance to further consolidate,
strengthen and support it.
Mr. Menan (Togo) (spoke in French):
Mr. President, it is always a great pleasure for the
Togolese delegation to see you presiding over the work
of the current session of the General Assembly with
such skill, pragmatism and wisdom.
The Togolese delegation is pleased to participate
in the debate on the agenda item before us.
The report of the Secretary-General on support by
the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies (A/64/372) notes the numerous
activities undertaken bilaterally and multilaterally
within the framework of the implementation of
resolution 62/7. My delegation welcomes these
developments, which demonstrate the vitality of the
movement and the commitment of the international
community, in particular the United Nations, to seeing
it through. My delegation particularly welcomes the
celebration of the International Day of Democracy on
15 September 2008, a felicitous initiative adopted at
the Sixth Conference of New or Restored Democracies,
held in Doha, Qatar, in November 2006.
The United Nations is built on principles that
offer special guarantees and protection to the dignity
and value of each human being, and establish
conditions conducive to the promotion of sustainable
peace and development. The remarks we have heard so
far confirm, on the one hand, the existence of a
growing consensus on the fundamental values that

8

sustain democracy, and on the other, the need for each
nation to proceed with prudence and circumspection as
it adapts to the nature and rhythm of the consolidation
of its own democratic process. There is no one model,
and different democratic practices must respect the
specific characteristics of each people and each culture.
Thus, the United Nations cannot but encourage,
sustain and reinforce democracy wherever it is worthy
of promotion through various forms of assistance. All
countries need such assistance, because it is not always
clear that democratic principles are observed in their
entirety throughout the world. It is also true that the
democratic process is a long-term process and
eminently perfectable.
For its part, Togo has always enjoyed such
assistance from the United Nations. Even before we
achieved national sovereignty, this assistance
contributed to the organization of consultations that
helped to determine our future, and after independence
we continued to benefit from assistance whenever we
sought it. As a democracy under construction, Togo is
firmly committed on the path towards a system of
Government based on democratic principles that will,
no doubt, lead to the further consolidation of a country
that is free, united and prosperous.
In my statement in the general debate on
29 September (see A/64/PV.13), I dwelled at length on
the Togolese Government policy of undertaking bold
and universally hailed institutional and constitutional
reforms aimed at the promotion of democracy, the
strengthening of the rule of law and the protection of
human rights. Indeed, the strengthening of the
institutional framework of democracy cannot be
reduced to its basic functioning or continuity through
such mechanisms as periodic elections or the
multiparty system. It requires Governments to invest
more heavily in the freedom of speech, which is
essential for democracy and guarantees the rule of law
and successful, sustainable development. Thus, the
interdependence of these two necessities — democracy
and development — has brought Governments and the
entire political class of Togo to agree on essential rules
that will govern elections and the economic
governance of the country.
On this matter, in a speech given on 28 July 2007
in Atakpamé, a city situated in the centre of our
country, the Togolese Head of State, His Excellency
Mr. Faure Gnassingbé, solemnly proclaimed to the

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

people of Togo and the international community that he
was firmly committed to doing all in his power to
ensure that elections in Togo never again lead to
sanguinary violence. The successful legislative
elections of October 2007, which were certified by
international observers as honest, credible, transparent
and non-violent, were the most tangible result of the
resolve of the Togolese Government.
In the first quarter of the coming year, my
country will hold presidential elections in which all
citizens who meet the conditions set by the
Constitution and the electoral code will be free to vote.
To that end, in order to promote dialogue among the
political actors of our country and at the instigation of
President Blaise Compaore of Burkina Faso, the
facilitator of the inter-Togolese dialogue, the electoral
code was modified by consensus to relax conditions for
voter eligibility.
Further, members have been named to our
independent national electoral commission tasked with
holding and supervising the elections. This mechanism,
so critical to the organization in 2010 of credible
presidential elections that meet international standards,
has elected its bureau and already started its work. As
our Head of State emphasized in his speech before the
diplomatic corps at the beginning of the year, the
Togolese Government plans to spare no effort in
ensuring the success of the upcoming presidential
election, which will consolidate the gains already
obtained by the Togolese democracy.
We all know that the road to democracy is fraught
with pitfalls and that the most difficult task is to
persuade the citizenry that democracy imposes
responsibilities on everyone and that, above all, it is
always a work in progress. Democracy is an evolving
process that is vulnerable to social imbalances and that
we must tirelessly sustain with our efforts, innovation
and imagination. That is undoubtedly what makes it
superior to other forms of Government. It is the only
political system capable of correcting its own
dysfunctions. That is why my delegation would like
once again to thank Togo’s partners, the United Nations
and the European Union, for participating actively with
our national electoral commission in the preparation of
our elections and for assisting the Government
financially and materially to that end. It is encouraging
that, today, young democracies are growing stronger
across Africa, Asia and Latin America. For its part,
Togo will collaborate fully with a view to meeting the

09-59928

targets set by the International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies (ICNRD). We invite all member
States of the ICNRD Movement to take into account
the proposals put forward during the ministerial
meeting held in New York on 29 September 2009 in
order to breathe new life into the Movement.
It is the profound belief of Togo that the
transformation of the International Conference of New
or Restored Democracies into an organized
institutional group, akin to other political groups and
regional entities, will contribute to the revitalization of
its actions and to enabling the promotion of democracy
within its member States.
I cannot conclude my remarks without paying
tribute to all the countries and people of good will that
are at the forefront of this initiative, in particular the
State of Qatar and its leaders, which have held the
presidency of the Movement for several years and have
spared no effort to further strengthen it.
Our greatest wish is that these various initiatives
will enable the International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies, in the context of bilateral and
multilateral cooperation, to fully realize its objectives
and thus to preserve peace and security for the benefit
of our populations.
Mr. Mohamed (Maldives): These solemn words
of Mahatma Gandhi resonate in the island communities
of the Maldivian archipelago: “The spirit of democracy
cannot be imposed from without. It has to come from
within.”
Just a year ago, Maldivians stood in long queues
to cast their ballots in the first ever multiparty
democratic election in the history of the country. The
election saw a record voter turnout and was won by
President Mohamed Nasheed, now the leader of the
first legitimate and democratic Government of our
island nation. In September this year, President
Nasheed stood at this very podium and repeated his
pledge for a Government by the people for the people.
The election was the culmination of a four-year period
of intensive democratic and human rights reform in the
Maldives that saw the introduction of a new
constitution that separated the three powers of
Government, strengthened human rights safeguards,
ushered in multiparty politics, promoted free media
and created a range of independent oversight bodies
and institutions.

9

A/64/PV.41

The Maldivian election was watched by nations
across the globe and by observers from the
Commonwealth and the European Union, as well as an
Expert Assessment Team from the United Nations. The
emerging electoral and democratic processes have also
received the continued support and assistance of our
partners. In short, the Maldives has worked laboriously
to ensure that the winds of freedom and liberty prevail
for its people.
The Maldives understands that the election of
2008 is not the final destination of this journey. One
democratic election is not enough to declare that a
country is democratic. With a modern new constitution
in place, the Maldives is mindful of the urgent need to
consolidate the infant democratic institutions, as
modern history is evidence that there is a trend for new
democracies to revert to authoritarian rule. Indeed, the
2002 Human Development Report found that one
elected government is overturned by military force
almost every year. Our people need the reassurance
that the spirit of democracy is here to stay.
Democracy is intertwined with political stability
and economic prosperity. Thus, in financial terms,
sustaining democracy is expensive. The Maldives, for
instance, is experiencing the crunch of the ongoing
global financial crisis and severe austerity measures
have, therefore, already been introduced to save the
country from economic collapse. Legal lacunae exist in
important areas, which would strengthen the rule of
law and guarantee human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Enhanced mechanisms are required to
combat corruption and ensure accountability and good
governance.
Unfortunately, new democracies are inherently
unstable in their infant stages. We are concerned lest
the new democracy succumb to the extremist seeds that
are being cultivated in deep pockets of our society. If
unchecked, those elements pose a grave threat to the
smooth functioning of our fledgling democratic
system.
In the midst of the economic hardship and
emerging social issues, the Government is anxious for
assistance and support from the international
community to guarantee that we can provide the better
life that our people have worked for. The Maldives has
always had faith in the goodwill of our international
partners. Since the inception of the United Nations
Democracy Fund, the Maldives has been an ardent

10

supporter of it. Reinvigorated funds are necessary to
develop the capacity of civil society groups, especially
in emerging democracies such as the Maldives.
Advanced civil society activities provide the requisite
check against the reversal of democracy.
The United Nations Human Rights Council
should also be given due support for its ability to
address emerging issues. The Maldives believes that
the Council strives to perform well and contributes
extensively to strengthening human rights worldwide.
The special procedures mechanisms have also proven
successful for new democracies, such as the Maldives,
as they provide an external audit of specific aspects of
democracy consolidation. Therefore, the Maldives
issued a standing invitation to the United Nations
special procedures mechanisms in 2006 and as of today
we have hosted four mandate holders.
I wish to express appreciation for the invaluable
work carried out by the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights in assisting the
Government to tackle democracy spoilers. In the case
of the Maldives, the Office continues to stand shoulder
to shoulder with the Government in facilitating the
nurturing of the democratic culture in the Maldives.
Though the United Nations has not established a
specific treaty on democracy, international law
enshrines democratic principles through existing
conventions, especially the International Bill of Rights.
Norms such as equality, non-discrimination and
fundamental rights and liberties, including the right to
vote and political participation, are entrenched norms
that prescribe democratic standards for all people
across the globe. Hence, as responsible members of the
international community, we need to work together
coherently to ensure that the rights and freedoms we
have agreed upon at the global level are fully translated
into reality for our people.
Before I conclude, I should like to state that the
Maldives has been an ardent supporter of the
International Conference for New or Restored
Democracies. The Conference provides a crucial forum
for countries to share experiences and participate in
active dialogue on ways to strengthen fragile
democracies. It is for this reason that the Maldives is
proud to sponsor the draft resolution before us today.
An active legislature, a free judiciary, free and
fair elections and a vibrant civil society are the
bulwarks of democracy. All around the world we are

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

experiencing a renewed embracement of democratic
change. And thus, at the end of the day, it is a vital test
for the international community to ensure that the
winds of democracy continue to blow across our lands.
Mr. Gatan (Philippines): At the outset, I should
like to convey my delegation’s congratulations and
gratitude for the very able leadership demonstrated by
the delegation of the State of Qatar, in its capacity as
Chair of the sixth International Conference of New or
Restored Democracies (ICNRD), in steering the
members of the Conference in their efforts to promote
and consolidate their new or restored democracies.
The Philippines has sponsored draft resolution
A/64/L.12, introduced by the delegation of the State of
Qatar, as it has sponsored past resolutions on the
International Conference of New or Restored
Democracies, in keeping with its commitment to the
principles and goals of the Conference, which was born
in Manila in 1988.
The Philippines convened the first International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies after its
bloodless revolution of 1986, which ended years of
martial rule in our country.
My delegation has continued to actively
participate in the work of the Conference and will
continue to do so, in view of the necessity of continued
cooperation, not only among countries in similar
situations but also with the United Nations system.
That is required in order for those countries to share
their experiences and assist each other in ensuring the
durability of their democracies so that they can be
counted upon as constructive members of the
international community and more ably provide the
needed assistance and services to their respective
constituencies.
The Philippines commends the delegation of the
State of Qatar for organizing the first ICNRD
Ministerial Meeting in September on the margins of the
general debate of the sixty-fourth session of the
General Assembly. That high-level meeting was
historic, as it produced positive outcomes, including
the decision to hold the first ICNRD summit and the
creation of an ICNRD secretariat in New York so as to
be able to more effectively assist the ICNRD Chair and
the member countries. We also commend the
delegation of the State of Qatar for organizing several
initiatives that help to institutionalize the ICNRD and
to ensure its sustainability in the future.

09-59928

Before I conclude, the Philippines wishes to
congratulate the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela,
which will assume the chairmanship of the ICNRD
next year. In that regard, the Philippines wishes to
reaffirm its full support to the delegation of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as the Seventh
Conference Chair.
Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): My
delegation is very grateful to you, Mr. President, for
convening this plenary meeting of the General
Assembly, devoted, inter alia, to the consideration of
the report of the Secretary-General on the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies (A/64/372).
It is almost a decade since Benin had the honour
to host on its soil the Fourth International Conference
of New or Restored Democracies (ICNRD). The
Cotonou event, coming at the dawn of the twenty-first
century, was a decisive turning point in confirming the
role of the Conference as a forum for thought and
dialogue among the Member States of the United
Nations on the promotion of democracy.
The strategic approach adopted was firmly based
on the embrace of the principles and values of pluralist
democracy by developing countries, but also on the
pathways to follow and the means of implementation to
adopt in order to ensure that that political system took
root in the new or restored democracies and to promote
a democratic culture in the world, as a way to
strengthen international peace and security and boost
development.
Since then, other countries have taken up the
torch and the successive International Conferences of
New or Restored Democracies have rapidly evolved
into a movement of effective solidarity among the
countries concerned and the development partners,
under the auspices of the United Nations. The very
informative report of the Secretary-General describes
the progress made in that context, in particular since
the Sixth Conference, held in Doha at the end of
October and the beginning of November 2006.
The emphasis there was placed firmly on
institutionalizing the movement with the establishment
of an Advisory Board, a high-level annual meeting and
a core secretariat to support the Chairman in executing
his duties. Here, we welcome the commitment of the
Government of Qatar, which has worked tirelessly to
give substance to those decisions. One notable

11

A/64/PV.41

achievement in that area was the General Assembly’s
declaration of an International Day of Democracy
(resolution 62/7), which has already been celebrated
twice. In addition to regularly convening intersessional
bodies, Qatar has striven to clarify the modalities for
institutionalization, so that the next Conference will be
in a position to take decisions on specific proposals.
In that context, my delegation would like here to
reiterate its support for actions in that direction and its
agreement with the establishment of a permanent
structure to coordinate implementation of the
recommendations of the Conferences, so as to provide
robust strengthening of action to strengthen democracy
in our countries. Benin has no difficulty in supporting
the principle of establishing a secretariat to assist the
Chairman here in New York; creating a special Trust
Fund to finance the work of that secretariat, using the
model of the Group of 77 and China; and of
establishing a clearly identified tripartite structure
responsible for coordinating implementation of the
ICNRD’s recommendations nationally, acting as an
interface with the secretariat on the basis of guidelines
drawn up under the leadership of the Chairman of the
Sixth Conference.
Implementing those specific steps would ensure
the ICNRD’s greater visibility and the mobilization of
greater resources, so as to strengthen the follow-up of
the recommendations and, above all, to encourage
exchange of experiences and the spread of good
practices at the level of member States.
The Secretary-General’s report underscores the
multifaceted action of the United Nations in support of
the new or restored democracies. The United Nations
has been very flexible in supporting the developments
in the new democracies, providing a framework for
efforts to restore democracy in countries where it has
temporarily overturned or fundamentally challenged,
paying particular attention to the crucial issue of
unconstitutional changes of Government.
The international community under the United
Nations has to a great extent been mobilized through
agreed activities and offering good offices, in order to
ensure the resumption of dialogue among the parties
involved in national political processes, thus
facilitating the emergence of a national consensus for a
return to order. Some recent slippage has shown the
need to strengthen the rapid reaction capability of the
United Nations in situations of danger, so as to deal

12

with developments before countries become involved
in violence.
The Secretary-General rightly posed the question
in his report of how to tackle political crises and avoid
them deteriorating, as one of the main problems facing
the United Nations. We should give greater attention to
that aspect of United Nations action, which brings us
back to the issue of conflict prevention. We should note
that United Nations activities in political crises have
been more effective in subregions where the
Organization’s offices are set up to respond quickly, for
example, through regional offices that can ensure a
regular presence and can liaise closely with regional
and subregional organizations.
Overall, cooperation with international and
regional organizations has quite often proved to be
very useful, not only in dealing with crisis situations,
but, above and beyond those situations, as an excellent
means of providing specific assistance by using input
from all parties and, thus, enhancing effectiveness. As I
said, this has been demonstrated not only in crisis
management, but also in ongoing support to efforts at
promoting human rights, strengthening democratic
institutions, empowering women and promoting
participation by young people.
So all of this does indeed justify the
recommendations made by the Secretary-General in his
report. Benin fully agrees with them, particularly on
the issue of ensuring the complementarity between the
ICNRD and the community of democracies in order to
strengthen cooperation for democracy. We agree this
would require some kind of coordinating mechanism
and strategic partnerships, so that we can break free
from restrictive labels and ensure broader ownership of
democratic processes.
First of all, we have to mobilize effective support
for local processes leading to democratization and the
consolidation of democracy. We must ensure the strict
coherence and coordination of assistance for new or
restored democracies from the United Nations and its
partners.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 57/32 of
19 November 2002, I give the floor to the observer of
the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Mrs. Filip (Inter-Parliamentary Union): It gives
me great pleasure to address the General Assembly on

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

the occasion of the debate on the report “Support by
the United Nations system of the efforts of
Governments to promote and consolidate new or
restored democracies”, as contained in document
A/64/372.

welcome the development of enhanced modalities for
more regular dialogue, exchange and joint action to
enable those partners to come together and interact as
equals.
We
have
formulated
a
series
of
recommendations in that regard.

Please allow me to begin by commending the
efforts of the State of Qatar. Over the past three years,
the State of Qatar has ensured a substantive follow-up
to the recommendations of the successful International
Conference on New or Restored Democracies (ICNRD)
in Doha in 2006. Let me also express our appreciation
for the Secretary-General’s report.

As we know, we are still witness to public
disillusionment with democracy and, as the SecretaryGeneral’s report recognizes, the perception among
some that democracy has failed to improve people’s
lives. Concerned by that reality and in an effort to
further explore and measure public attitudes towards
democracy, the IPU commissioned a global survey this
year on the critical theme of political tolerance. The
overall finding was that, while there is overwhelming
support for political tolerance in all regions of the
world, in actual practice, there is a widespread
perception of a serious lack of political tolerance.

The Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) is proud to
be part of the ICNRD process. As convener of the
parliamentary component of the ICNRD, the IPU looks
forward to working with the host of the next
Conference, Venezuela, to ensure a strong parliamentary
input.
We are supportive of the initiatives considered for
the future sustainability and institutionalization of the
ICNRD movement. Indeed, there is a clear need to plan
for and carry out work in between the conferences.
From this perspective, a small secretariat based in New
York and with a mission to engage with and bring
together all the ICNRD partners on a regular basis
could be very effective.
On the occasion of the Sixth International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies in Doha,
each of the stakeholders meetings issued a plan of
action by Governments, parliaments and civil society
to further promote democracy nationally and
internationally. All those who have signed onto those
commitments should also be held to account, and there
is value, we believe, in an annual review of progress in
meeting commitments, not just by the ICNRD Chair,
but by all members. A small ICNRD secretariat could
provide valuable assistance in this regard.
The tripartite configuration, that is, Governments,
parliaments and civil society of the ICNRD movement,
has undeniably allowed for an integrated and allencompassing approach to the promotion of democracy
worldwide. We would like to see further progress
towards a more systematic articulation among the three
components during the seventh ICNRD.
Indeed, the movement draws strength from the
constructive engagement of its partners and its
inclusive approach. As we move ahead, we would

09-59928

The results of that survey uncovered some
problematic areas that will need to be addressed with
greater focus. The freedom of political expression, the
role of the opposition, protecting the parliamentary
mandate and promoting greater representation of
minority and indigenous groups in political life will all
be mainstreamed into the IPU agenda of work for the
months and years to come. We trust that this will have
an impact at the level of national parliaments, but also
on the other partners active on the democracy front.
IPU is also convinced of the huge
transformational role that new information and
communications technology (ICT) has for the further
development and promotion of democracy worldwide.
We are therefore forging a robust partnership with the
United Nations in that area through the Global Centre
for ICT in Parliament. Just last week, the United
Nations and the IPU joined in convening the third
World e-Parliament Conference, hosted by the United
States House of Representatives on Capitol Hill in
Washington, D.C.
Certainly,
modern
information
and
communications technology can help not only to
connect parliaments and citizens, but also to strengthen
democracy by rendering public institutions more open,
transparent, accountable and effective, while
improving the delivery of key public services. Last
week’s Conference led to a series of recommendations
that will guide our work ahead.
IPU remains committed to its efforts to build
capacity within parliaments through advisory services,

13

A/64/PV.41

technical assistance and capacity-building seminars,
workshops and training programmes. It is also
determined to continue efforts towards promoting the
political participation of women, defending and
promoting human rights and contributing to the setting
of internationally accepted standards in the field of
democracy.
IPU also remains committed to ensuring
continued momentum and support for the International
Day of Democracy. As the Secretary-General’s report
points out, the response of Member States and,
particularly, of parliaments, to the invitation to
celebrate the first International Day of Democracy was
truly impressive.
Parliaments around the world are using the
International Day of Democracy, 15 September, to
engage citizens, and particularly young people, in
dialogue on the achievements of and challenges to
democracy in their respective countries. IPU will
continue to work with and encourage action by
parliaments aimed at ensuring democratic practices,
principles and precepts.
Moreover, IPU is committed to its partnership
with the United Nations, notably, through the
Peacebuilding Commission, to build strong parliaments
in post-conflict societies. Parliaments in countries such
as Sierra Leone, Burundi and the Central African
Republic need to show strong leadership in their efforts
to achieve national healing and post-conflict
reconstruction. We have a common responsibility to
support them in those endeavours, as that will help
people reap the dividends of peace and will mitigate
the public mistrust of governing institutions. Indeed,
democracy should be seen to deliver to the people.
In light of the above, we look forward to our
continuing partnership with the United Nations system
and with Member States in our joint efforts to further
promote and consolidate new and restored democracies.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with General Assembly resolution 58/83 of 9 December
2003, I now give the floor to the observer for the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance.
Mr. Tommasoli (International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance): I should like to
commend the State of Qatar for its leadership of the
Sixth International Conference of New or Restored

14

Democracies (ICNRD) and for fostering progress on its
agenda in the period from 2007 to 2009. As indicated
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/64/372), the
International Institute for Democracy and Electoral
Assistance (IDEA) has a strong tradition of
collaborating with and supporting the International
Conference of New or Restored Democracies. We
contributed to policy debates in Doha, Ulaanbaatar and
Cotonou, based on the Institute’s democracy-building
experience and knowledge, and we stand committed to
continuing to do so at the next Conference, to be
hosted by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
This year, we recall multiple anniversaries of
democracy’s achievements: 30 years since the
beginning of the third wave of democratizations in
Latin America, 20 years since the fall of the Berlin
Wall, 15 years since the end of apartheid in South
Africa, and 10 years since the first elections of the
reform era in Indonesia.
At the same time, we should also remain wary of
the shortcomings, insufficient depth and persistent
fragility of democracy in many countries. Transition
processes have often stalled at the stage of electoral
democracy, stopping short of guaranteeing citizens a
broader enjoyment of civic and political rights, equal
access to justice and full freedom of expression and
association. Democratic checks and balances remain
weak in many countries, while electoral processes
themselves are often riddled with fraud. Attempts by
incumbent presidents to change their country’s
constitution in order to remain in power have
proliferated. Formal mechanisms of democracy remain
populated by political elites, which do not always act
in the interest of their citizens. Finally, both domestic
shortcomings and external constraints have often
prevented young democracies from delivering a better
quality of life to their citizens, thus failing to build the
critical amount of trust that is necessary for
entrenching democracy and guaranteeing its long-term
sustainability.
While the ideal of democracy remains a driving
force of political change across the globe, a
discrepancy persists between the high value attributed
to the idea of democracy and the mistrust of
democratic institutions, such as political parties and
legislatures, which are often seen as elitist, genderimbalanced, ineffective, unresponsive and lacking in
inclusiveness and representation.

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

The global financial crisis and the ensuing
economic recession are severe and potentially
dangerous blows to a number of young democracies,
particularly in Africa, as they further reduce their
delivery capacity in terms of development and social
protection,
and
consequently
increase
their
vulnerability to authoritarian alternatives.
The financial and economic crisis and the
changing political environment should both be seen as
opportunities and incitements to address, through broad
international, inter-institutional and interregional
partnerships, the issue of democracy assistance, with a
view to consolidating its legitimacy and credibility and
to enhancing its effectiveness.
Efforts to strengthen international democracy
assistance should benefit from the rich fund of lessons
learned and the new, more effective approaches that
these lessons allow us to distill. These lessons point
essentially to the need for context-sensitive, long-term
and process-based democracy-support policies that
help the building of democracy from within and
through real partnerships and sharing of knowledge
and experiences, not least from the global South, thus
overcoming the obsolete and often paternalistic donorbeneficiary relationship.
In this perspective, the ICNRD process has a
great potential to foster collaboration and the sharing
of experiences in the field of democracy-building.
IDEA underlines two issues: the need to ensure
effective follow-up between conferences and the
importance of sharing experience on democratization
efforts.
In terms of follow-up, there is a need to move
beyond conferences and link them to actual
democracy-building efforts on the ground. The
initiative of Qatar to establish the Advisory Board of
the Sixth Conference and to implement the three-year
2007-2009 programme of work are steps in the right
direction. Another example of follow-up action is the
implementation of self-assessments of the state of
democracy by member States, which are aimed at
identifying areas for action and entry points for policy
reforms. The experience of Mongolia, host of the Fifth
Conference, is relevant in this respect. At the request of
Mongolia, International IDEA provided technical
advice to that process, based on the state-of-democracy
assessment methodology that IDEA had developed.

09-59928

The second issue is the sharing of
democratization experiences. There is a need for the
ICNRD process to make better use of concrete
experience-sharing, including in a South-South
perspective, on the challenges and successes of
democratic reform processes. This could build on a
more systematic articulation among the governmental,
parliamentary and civil society segments of ICNRD,
based on a multi-year strategy with a clear definition of
the roles and responsibilities of all the actors involved
in the new or restored democracies process.
The celebration of the International Day of
Democracy has proved an excellent opportunity for
further fostering dialogue among national actors, thus
contributing to democracy-building on the ground.
Such an approach could facilitate strategic and
operational links between periodic high-level forums,
such as the Conference and the Community of
Democracies, and the mainstream work of agencies
engaged in democracy-building, including those within
the United Nations system. This would enhance the
policy and strategic relevance of the new or restored
democracies process by taking fully into account the
broader issues of how to pursue a revitalized
democracy-building agenda at the United Nations and
how to increase the effectiveness of the United Nations
system in this respect, as indicated in the guidance note
recently issued by the Secretary-General.
Effective experience-sharing could be based on
the following criteria: how to make best use of and
capitalize on existing knowledge bases, practitioner
networks and institutional capacity-building tools, in
particular those that are already the result of effective
partnerships among institutions engaged in the
democracy-building arena; and to define focused
agendas for the high-level segment of the process, and
make sure that action plans originated by them are
shaped in clear and measurable frameworks, with
responsibilities assigned to relevant actors, both within
and outside the United Nations, for funding,
implementation and follow-up.
In conclusion, I reiterate International IDEA’s
commitment to continuing to provide support to the
ICNRD process.
The President (spoke in Arabic): We have heard
the last speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/64/L.12.

15

A/64/PV.41

The following countries have become sponsors of
the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria, Bahrain, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Cape Verde, Congo, Costa Rica, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Guatemala, Luxembourg and the
Republic of Moldova.
May I take it that the General Assembly decides
to adopt draft resolution A/64/L.12?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/12).

A/64/L.12

was

adopted

The President (spoke in Arabic): May I take it
that it is the wish of the Assembly to end its
consideration of agenda item 11?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 49
Culture of peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/325)
Note by the Secretary-General (A/64/312)
Draft resolutions (A/64/L.5, A/64/L.13,
A/64/L.14 and A/64/L.15)
The President (spoke in Arabic): Today, the
General Assembly will consider an agenda item of
importance to the United Nations, namely, the culture
of peace. Fostering a culture of peace is the core
message of the United Nations, which calls for
rejecting violence and preventing conflicts through
dialogue and negotiations. The Preamble to the United
Nations Charter states the determination of Member
States “to practice tolerance and live together in peace
with one another as good neighbours”.
The culture of peace is based on respect for
human rights, democracy and tolerance, the promotion
of development, education for peace, the free flow of
information and the wider participation of women as an
integral element in preventing violence and conflicts.
Sadly, the many quiet ways in which the United
Nations advances the culture of peace are often
drummed out by violent conflicts that demand our
immediate attention.
At the outset of the general debate, I suggested
that we reflect on dialogue among civilizations and
multilateralism as ways of strengthening international
peace and security and of achieving development. After
years of deepening distrust among civilizations, I am

16

encouraged by renewed calls for dialogue and mutual
respect. It is my deeply held belief that civilizations are
enriched and evolve through dialogue with other
civilizations. Respect for the diversity of cultures and
religions is necessary in order to prevent conflicts and
to foster peace. In this context, I commend the many
initiatives here at the United Nations and among
Member States on interreligious dialogue and dialogue
among civilizations.
The observance of the International Decade for a
Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of
the World is nearing its completion. Before the
Assembly is the report of the Director-General of
UNESCO (see A/64/312) on the progress achieved so
far and containing further recommendations in this
regard. The global financial and economic crisis is
taking its toll on investments in education, culture and
development everywhere. We cannot let those
developments weaken our efforts to strengthen a
culture of peace. We owe it especially to the children
of the world to educate them about other cultures and
religions so they can see the common humanity that
underlie all differences.
Fostering a culture of peace and promoting
tolerance should not be limited to today’s debate, but
should guide all our debates here at the General
Assembly. I therefore propose to organize an informal
thematic debate on dialogue among civilizations,
religions and cultures at the beginning of next year. I
look forward to working with Member States to
stimulate a lively discussion and bring fresh
perspectives to this important issue.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Bangladesh to introduce draft resolution A/64/L.5.
Mr. Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for your lovely introductory
remarks on agenda item 49, “Culture of peace”.
It is my privilege to introduce, on behalf of its
sponsors, the draft resolution entitled “International
Decade for a Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for
the Children of the World, 2001-2010”, contained in
document A/64/L.5, dated 3 November 2009. Since the
draft resolution was submitted, the following
46 countries have joined the list of co-sponsors:
Angola, Azerbaijan, the Bahamas, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam, Burundi, Brazil, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, Comoros, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Eritrea, Gabon, Guatemala, Guyana,

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

Honduras,
Jamaica,
Lebanon,
Malawi,
Mali,
Mauritania, Mexico, Montenegro, Myanmar, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
Seychelles, Singapore, Solomon Islands, the Sudan,
Swaziland, Tajikistan, the United Republic of
Tanzania, Togo, Turkey, Turkmenistan, the United Arab
Emirates, Uruguay and Viet Nam.

new preambular paragraph, we welcome the
appointment of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Violence against Children. In that
connection, I would like to take this opportunity, as a
member of the Bureau of the Executive Board of
UNICEF and as next Chair of the Bureau, to assure her
of our fullest support in carrying out her activities.

Since 2001, this draft resolution has been tabled
and adopted every year by consensus. This shows the
commitment of the entire world community to making
the world safe for our future generation.

Of the two new operative paragraphs, paragraph
11 refers to an initiative of the Special Unit for SouthSouth Cooperation of the United Nations Development
Programme during the 2010 World Exposition to be
held in Shanghai. We believe that we should take
advantage of such mega-events to promote the idea of
a culture of peace. The other new operative paragraph
is paragraph 17, in which we request from the
Secretary-General a summary report on the activities
carried out in the past 10 years by UNESCO and other
United Nations entities, Member States and civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, to
promote and implement the Programme of Action on a
Culture of Peace. I believe that the report will suffice if
someone asks what we have achieved in the past
10 years.

The culture of peace is a set of values, attitudes,
modes of behaviour and ways of life that reject
violence and prevent conflicts through dialogue among
individuals, groups and nations. We firmly believe that
a world order that is informed by a culture of peace is
conducive to the attainment of our development goals,
including the Millennium Development Goals.
We
see great value in the principles of tolerance, respect
for diversity, democracy and understanding. Those
ideals were endorsed by the Member States in the
Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of
Peace (resolution 53/243) in 1999. Bangladesh was
privileged to steer the process.
As we near the end of the International Decade
for a Culture of Peace, we need to start taking stock of
what we have achieved since the beginning of the
Decade. I believe that this 10-year exercise has had
some impact on our psyche as we strive to make a
peaceful world for our future, the children.
We wish to express our profound gratitude to all
the stakeholders who have contributed and are
contributing to the promotion of a culture of peace. We
specially thank UNESCO, the lead agency which has
carried out programmes to promote the idea worldwide.
Our sincere thanks go to the non-governmental and
civil society organizations who take the idea of a
culture of peace around the world. In this pursuit,
academics and the media also have an important role to
play. We need to involve youth in the process and the
children as well. We should first listen to them and then
take measures accordingly for the betterment of their
lives.
There has been no major change in this year’s
draft resolution on the International Decade for a
Culture of Peace and Non-Violence for the Children of
the World, 2001-2010. We added one new preambular
paragraph and two new operative paragraphs. In the

09-59928

Immediately after the independence of Bangladesh
in 1971, the father of the nation, Bangabandhu Sheikh
Mujibur Rahman, pursued the policy of friendship to all,
malice to none in the conduct of the country’s
international relations. That principle has always guided
us in shaping our relations with countries all around the
globe, especially our neighbours. Our peacekeepers
have been risking their lives in various parts of the
world in difficult terrain in the pursuit of peace. They
also carry in their hearts the idea of a culture of peace
and put that idea into action. As a member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, we are discharging our
responsibilities. We believe that a culture of peace holds
the key to sustainable peace in post-conflict societies.
Even in societies that are in a state of peace or apparent
peace, we have to nurture that idea so that no one can
think about violating the peace.
In conclusion, I would like to express our
profound gratitude to all Member States that have
shown their solidarity by serving as sponsors of this
annual resolution over the past nine years. Last year,
we had as many as 124 sponsors, and I hope that the
number will be even higher this year. The increase in
the number of sponsors in each successive year has
been a source of great encouragement to the delegation
of Bangladesh to the United Nations.

17

A/64/PV.41

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now call on
the representative of Turkey to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.14.
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to welcome the report of the Secretary-General on
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace (A/64/325), which highlights
activities carried out by the United Nations system and
provides an overview of regional and global initiatives
taken in this field.
The Prime Ministers of Turkey and Spain
launched the Alliance of Civilizations initiative in
2005 in an effort to galvanize international action
against intolerance and extremism through intercultural
and interreligious dialogue and cooperation. The
initiative is intended to respond to the need for a
concerted effort by the international community to
bridge
divides
and
overcome
prejudices,
misconceptions and polarization between different
cultures. Since then, the Alliance has made substantial
progress in moving into the implementation stage and
in strengthening its institutional basis. Today, we are
pleased to see that the Alliance has a structure that
produces concrete projects and solutions.
We are grateful to the Secretary-General, Mr. Ban
Ki-moon, who has placed this initiative under his
auspices since the very beginning. Indeed, his
contributions and his leadership have played an
important role in the progress that the Alliance has
made in such a short time. I would also like to express
our great appreciation to High Representative Jorge
Sampaio, whose dedicated efforts greatly contributed
to the development of the initiative. Today, the number
of countries and institutions represented in the Group
of Friends has grown to more than 100, and we believe
that each country in the Group is now a sponsor of this
initiative. That is a reflection of the international
community’s will for global peace and harmony.
We believe that no one has a monopoly on efforts
for dialogue on cultural and religious issues. We are all
members of a family working for the same noble cause.
In that context, we welcome similar initiatives that
complement the work of the Alliance. We are pleased
that specialized agencies of the United Nations and
other multilateral organizations are showing an active
interest in the Alliance. In that regard, we appreciate
the role played by UNESCO. We believe that UNESCO

18

and its new Director-General, Ms. Irina Bokova, will
continue to be important partners of the Alliance.
The first Forum of the Alliance of Civilizations,
which was held in Madrid in January 2008, was a
milestone for the initiative. The Forum initiated several
projects and mechanisms and provided an opportunity
for the Alliance to conclude partnership agreements
with several international organizations. The second
Forum, held in Istanbul in April 2009, was indeed
another milestone for the Alliance. The Forum made it
possible to establish a powerful network of global
leaders, heads of international organizations,
corporations, media, civil society and youth groups.
The action-driven event provided participants with a
unique international platform on which to develop joint
initiatives and forge partnerships. The success of the
Istanbul Forum confirmed that the Alliance had
completed its institutionalization phase and was now
ready for the implementation of its objectives.
The third Forum will be held in Rio de Janeiro on
28 and 29 May 2010. We would like to take this
opportunity to thank the Government of Brazil for
hosting the next Forum. It will enrich the global scope
of the Alliance with the Latin American experience of
cultural diversity. We would also like to thank Qatar
and Austria for their offers to host subsequent Forums
in 2011 and 2012.
We consider national plans and regional strategies
to be important instruments for the implementation of
the Alliance’s objectives. That is why we attach
particular importance to the inclusion of those goals in
national agendas through the implementation of
national plans. The third meeting of focal points, to be
held in Rabat on 10 and 11 November 2009 by the
Islamic
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization, will be yet another opportunity to
promote broader ownership of the Alliance’s goals.
I would also like to highlight the importance of
regional strategies in creating synergies among various
stakeholders. In that respect, we look forward to the
approval of the regional strategy for South-East Europe
in Sarajevo this coming December.
As sponsors, Turkey and Spain believe that,
having made sound progress on the ground, it is now
time for the Alliance to have the backing and the
recognition of the General Assembly. That is why we
have prepared a focused and balanced draft resolution

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

for the consideration of Member States, and we very
much hope that it will be adopted by consensus.

draft resolution will be embraced by the wider
membership of the General Assembly.

It is therefore my pleasure to introduce to the
Assembly the draft resolution on the Alliance of
Civilizations contained in document A/64/L.14. The
preambular part of the draft resolution before the
Assembly reflects agreed language from one of the
most relevant documents that the United Nations has
produced in the past few years, namely, the 2005 World
Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1).

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Spain, also to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.14.

I would like to take this opportunity to introduce
an oral revision to the fourth preambular paragraph, so
that the role of UNESCO, as one of the main partners
of the Alliance of Civilizations, is accurately reflected
in the text. To that end, we would like to replace the
words “including the programmes led by the United
Nations
Educational,
Scientific
and
Cultural
Organization in this regard” with the words “and
emphasizing the important role of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in
this regard”.
The fourth preambular paragraph would thus read
as follows:
“Recognizing
the
importance
of
intercultural and interreligious and intra-religious
dialogue in promoting tolerance in matters related
to religion or belief, and emphasizing the
important role of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization in this
regard.”
The draft resolution already has the sponsorship
of 73 Member States from all regional groups. I am
glad to announce that, in addition to those listed in
document A/64/L.14, the following Member States
have expressed their willingness to sponsor the draft
resolution: Benin, Bolivia, Bulgaria, the Central
African Republic, the Congo, Cyprus, the Dominican
Republic,
Eritrea,
Gabon,
Haiti,
Honduras,
Liechtenstein, Mali, Norway, the Republic of Moldova,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Seychelles,
Thailand, Togo, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, the United
Arab Emirates and Viet Nam. This brings the total to
96 sponsors.
We are encouraged by this broad support. We
believe that it shows that the Alliance of Civilizations
is a noble cause. We would like to express our thanks
to our fellow sponsors, and we very much hope that the

09-59928

Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
The promotion of a culture of peace is one of the
fundamental purposes of the United Nations. In the
2005 World Summit Outcome (resolution 60/1), heads
of State or Government and United Nations Member
States committed themselves to taking action to
promote a culture of peace and dialogue at the local,
national,
regional
and
international
levels.
Furthermore, on that occasion, they welcomed the
Alliance of Civilizations and recognized the value of
the various initiatives on dialogue among cultures and
civilizations, including interreligious dialogue and
cooperation for peace.
In that context, it is a great pleasure for me to
address the General Assembly to introduce for the first
time, together with Turkey, a draft resolution devoted
to the Alliance of Civilizations, under agenda item 49,
“Culture of Peace”. Allow me to highlight the fact that
the draft resolution, contained in document A/64/L.14,
with the slight oral revision just made by the
representative of Turkey, enjoys the support of almost
100 sponsors. Let me convey to them our sincerest
gratitude for their support in the promotion of this draft
resolution.
Five years ago, on 21 September 2004, during the
general debate of the fifty-ninth session of the General
Assembly (see A/59/PV.4), the President of the
Government of Spain, Mr. José Luis Rodríguez
Zapatero, proposed an alliance of civilizations in order
to promote greater understanding and cooperation
among nations and peoples of differing cultures and
religions, as a way to counteract the forces that feed
extremism and endanger peace.
In order to achieve that objective, the President of
the Government of Spain soon joined his efforts to
those of the Prime Minister of Turkey, Mr. Recep
Tayyip Erdoğan. Since then, Spain and Turkey have
worked hand in hand to strengthen the Alliance of
Civilizations as a useful tool in the context of the
United Nations.
Mr. Tommo Monthe (Cameroon), Vice-President,
took the Chair.

19

A/64/PV.41

Since the beginning, and despite criticism from
some quarters and scepticism from others, the Alliance
of Civilizations has grown and further developed its
goals. It has become a United Nations initiative, thanks
to the commitment of successive Secretaries-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan and Mr. Ban Ki-moon, who have made
this initiative their own.

society, the media, the private sector, religious leaders
and others, to work together to achieve the goals of the
Alliance of Civilizations. The two reports of the High
Representative that the Secretary-General has
conveyed to the General Assembly (see A/63/336 and
A/63/914) describe in detail the many activities carried
out by the Alliance of Civilizations in recent years.

Furthermore, the Alliance of Civilizations has, in
a short time, gained the support and credibility, not
only of the entire international community, but also of
numerous actors within our societies. That is, to a large
extent, due to the fact that the Alliance has been able to
identify problems that affect our coexistence and has
filled a gap for which there was no instrument before
its creation. In just a few years, it has become a
platform for action in reaching common goals such as
respect, tolerance, dialogue, understanding and peace
among individuals and peoples from diverse cultures
and religions. It is based on universal values that
govern its action and spirit, inspired by the United
Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, among other basic instruments of
international law.

Furthermore, the credibility of, respect for and
political soundness of the Alliance of Civilizations are
due in large part to its sizable and active Group of
Friends. The Group now has more than 100 members,
including States and international organizations, which
is a good indicator of the initiative’s political
relevance.

As the President of the Government of Spain
noted at the opening meeting of the first Forum of the
Alliance, in Madrid in 2008, the Alliance of
Civilizations seeks to mobilize those great majorities in
our societies who want to live in peace and to help
prevent the use of diversity for political purposes. The
Alliance of Civilizations wants to help fight against
extremist and intolerant discourse by those who preach
an ideology of hatred and confrontation by invoking
supposedly insoluble cultural and religious conflicts.
In our view, the Alliance of Civilizations should
work through dialogue and intercultural cooperation to
create a propitious atmosphere for reaching political
objectives. We believe that that political and cultural
orientation, together with the capacity to produce
practical results, represents the added value offered by
this initiative.
I would like to highlight the extraordinary work
done by the Secretary-General’s High Representative
for the Alliance of Civilizations, Mr. Jorge Sampaio.
He is working very hard to make the Alliance a
credible, solid and dynamic initiative, able to produce
real results. Thanks to his leadership, commitment and
dedication, he has been able to mobilize States,
international organizations, representatives of civil

20

The designation of focal points for the Alliance
by the States members of the Group of Friends has
made it possible to establish a broad and active
network of contacts. Tomorrow, more than 70
designated focal points will meet in Rabat to share
ideas and proposals. In addition, the adoption of
national plans by States is making it possible to
promote the incorporation of Alliance objectives into
public policies at the domestic level.
With regard to cooperation with international
organizations, the Alliance has a full work slate and
has entered into a diverse range of cooperation
agreements. In particular, I wish to emphasize the
important role played by such organizations as
UNESCO, whose programmes and activities in the area
of cultural cooperation are undoubtedly of value to the
Alliance.
I should also highlight the holding of Alliance of
Civilizations forums in Madrid in 2008 and in Istanbul
this year. At the Forums, States and international
organizations met with, inter alia, representatives of
civil society, the private sector and the media in an
innovative and dynamic format. The Alliance Forums
have also made it possible to launch specific
initiatives, projects and activities that are now fully
operational. Our next meeting will be held in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, in May 2010, in a clear demonstration
of the spirit of universality pervading and prevailing at
the Alliance of Civilizations. We warmly welcome the
offers of Qatar and Austria to host successive Forums
in 2011 and 2012, respectively, because they ensure
that the initiative will continue in the coming years.
Another aspect that I wish to highlight is the
regional dimension of the Alliance of Civilizations.

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

The forthcoming Sarajevo conference, to be held in
December, will enable us to lay the groundwork for the
development of a regional strategy for South-Eastern
Europe within the framework of the Alliance. The
objectives of the conference will be to share
experiences and promote the adoption of initiatives and
projects to enhance intercultural and interreligious
understanding, tolerance, dialogue and cooperation in
order to help prevent or overcome conflicts in an area
of the European continent greatly in need of just such
initiatives. Moreover, in the effort to enhance the
Alliance’s regional aspect, much commendable work is
being
done
by
Governments,
international
organizations and civil society in the Mediterranean
region and Latin America.
Given the growth and the potential of the
Alliance of Civilizations, we believe, together with
Turkey, that the General Assembly must now provide
renewed support and momentum to the initiative by
adopting this draft resolution. As the Secretary-General
recalled in his letter dated 23 June 2009 conveying to
the President of the General Assembly the report of the
High Representative (A/63/914), the Alliance of
Civilizations was established under the auspices of the
United Nations, at the initiative of the Governments of
Spain and Turkey, to counteract divisions and
polarization within and between societies. The Alliance
of Civilizations seeks to be an instrument of preventive
diplomacy that works to reduce tensions and bridge
cultural divides.
I wish to conclude by thanking all sponsors of the
draft resolution and by expressing our hope that it will
be adopted by consensus by the General Assembly.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.15.
Mr. Davide (Philippines): At the outset, let me
place on record how pleased we were to note the
announcement in the opening statement made by the
President of the General Assembly, under agenda
item 49, of his decision to convene an informal
thematic debate on the dialogue among civilizations,
religions and cultures next year. We thank him for that
very wise decision. It will enhance all initiatives on the
culture of peace.
I have the honour and the special privilege to
introduce, on behalf of Pakistan and the Philippines, as
the main sponsors, and of the other sponsors, draft

09-59928

resolution A/64/L.15, entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace”, under agenda item 49,
“Culture of peace”. It is our modest contribution to the
global and collective effort to put an end to the culture
of hate, violence, distrust, intolerance and religious and
cultural misunderstanding that still plagues many parts
of the world, and instead to build a world and
civilization of love, understanding, respect, tolerance,
harmony and peace. It is a vision inspired by one of the
goals enshrined in the United Nations Charter: to
practice tolerance and live together as good
neighbours. It is a recognition of God’s plan for the
world as one human family. It is an expression of our
fidelity to the opening paragraph of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which affirms that
recognition of the inherent dignity and of the equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family
is the foundation of freedom, justice and peace.
The draft resolution updates resolution 63/22,
bearing the same title, which the General Assembly
adopted last year by consensus. Allow me to briefly
highlight the new elements in draft resolution
A/64/L.15.
First, let me recall that, in resolution 63/22, the
General Assembly invited UNESCO, in consultation
with Member States, to play a leading role in the
preparations for the celebration of the International
Year for the Rapprochement among Cultures in 2010.
In that connection, we welcome the decision taken by
the General Conference of UNESCO on 23 October
2009 approving the action plan for the celebration of
the International Year of Rapprochement among
Cultures in 2010. In our draft resolution, we encourage
UNESCO, as well as United Nations Member States,
other organizations and institutions and civil society, to
join the celebration of the Year to demonstrate our firm
commitment to interreligious, intercultural and
intercivilizational dialogue for peace. We also request
the Secretary-General to organize a special event to
launch the celebration of the Year.
Secondly, we commend the focal point in
interreligious, intercultural and intercivilizational
matters in the Secretariat for ably discharging its
mandate. At the same time, we recognize the
importance for it to interact and coordinate further with
the relevant entities of the United Nations system and
to coordinate their contributions to the expanding
intergovernmental processes on interfaith and

21

A/64/PV.41

intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace. With the proliferation of interfaith dialogue
processes around the world, including at the national,
regional and interregional levels, and the increasing
interaction of United Nations agencies with faith
communities as their vital partners in the pursuit of
their respective mandates, the focal point in the
Secretariat could more effectively deliver on its tasks if
it were adequately empowered.

reconciliation not only to our national life but also in
our individual and personal lives.
Our draft resolution therefore calls on States
Members of the United Nations, following the
commemoration of the International Year of
Reconciliation in 2009, to further promote
reconciliation to help to ensure durable peace and
sustained development through such reconciliatory
steps as forgiveness and compassion.

Thirdly, we call for further work on the proposal
for a United Nations decade of interreligious and
intercultural dialogue, understanding and cooperation
for peace, for which civil society has clamoured,
spearheaded by a coalition of more than 60 religious
bodies and multi-faith and values-based organizations
representing all the world’s faith traditions uniting
millions of their faithful across the globe.

Many of us pray daily for forgiveness as we
forgive others. There can be no reconciliation without
forgiveness and compassion. Let me stress, however,
that forgiveness and compassion should never condone
injustice. There can be no forgiveness without
dialogue. There can be no dialogue without respect and
mutual understanding.

The increasing plurality of spiritual and religious
initiatives seeking to achieve peace and harmony in the
world represents a positive development in expanding
the frontiers of our partnerships with all relevant
stakeholders. The proposed United Nations decade
would thus bring together diverse initiatives and
activities around a defined set of shared objectives
espoused principally by the United Nations: peace,
development and the promotion of human dignity.

Let me conclude by stressing that the United
Nations must pursue peace along two separate but
parallel routes or means: the political, through the tools
of politics, and the faith-driven, through interfaith or
interreligious dialogue. This dialogue provides the
internal force that can work out a faster and surer
formula for building a world of freedom, justice and
peace, and a civilization of love, thereby giving life to
what the Psalmist envisioned — a world where love
and truth will meet and justice and peace will kiss.

Fourthly, we request that the President of the
General Assembly, in keeping with one of the priorities
of his presidency, to hold an interactive thematic
debate
on
interreligious,
intercultural
and
intercivilizational understanding, inviting leaders of
the world’s major religions and representatives of
faith-based organizations to participate in this event.
Fifthly and finally, we celebrate this year the
International Year of Reconciliation, in accordance
with resolution 61/17, which was a response by the
General Assembly to the urgent need for reconciliation
processes in countries and regions of the world that
have suffered or are suffering conflicts that have
divided societies. This process would rely on such
mechanisms as dialogue among opponents as an
essential element of peace and reconciliation.
Reconciliation is the pervasive theme of our
updated draft resolution. We should not let this
International Year of Reconciliation pass by as a mere
footnote for the future. We should ensure that there be
follow-up on this work, given the sheer importance of

22

Since religions are united in one abiding faith —
faith in One God, holy, immortal and sovereign — this
interfaith dialogue has internal force no Government
can provide. That power can fortify our faith, unite
peoples of different religions and cultures and make
them understand each other better, deepen humility and
erase pride, hate anger and intolerance. It uplifts our
hopes in times of crisis. I would thus like to request
once more, on behalf of the main and other sponsors of
our draft resolution, that we adopt it, after adequate
consultations, by consensus, as we have done annually
since 2004.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan to also introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.15.
Mr. Sial (Pakistan): The agenda item entitled
“Culture of peace” recalls the commitment made by
our fellow brothers and sisters 64 years ago under the
Charter of the United Nations to practise tolerance and
live together in peace with one another as good
neighbours, to unite their strengths to maintain

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

international peace and security, and to promote social
progress and better standards of life in larger freedom.
The General Assembly adopted the Declaration
on a Culture of Peace on 13 September 1999
(resolution 53/243) to reaffirm these objectives and to
cause a new era of hope and peaceful coexistence to
unfold. The Declaration is a set of values, attitudes and
behaviours. It is based on the principles of multilateral
cooperation in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations, respect for life, the ending of violence
and the promotion and practice of non-violence
through education, dialogue and cooperation, and
commitment to the peaceful settlement of disputes.
Religions and cultures share a common set of
universal values. Concepts of peace, tolerance,
equality, sharing and respect for humanity are the core
message of all world religions. Therefore, religion and
culture must not be allowed to become a source of
division, as they are sometimes portrayed in the
context of contemporary life. We must cherish the
unity and indivisibility of the human race and all
humankind, regardless of what religion or particular
culture we belong to.
Throughout history, greed and self-interest have
resulted in inequities and tension among societies. This
ultimately leads to situations of conflict. Conflict can
be avoided only through understanding, sharing,
sacrifice and dialogue among the parties concerned. We
are aware that peace cannot be achieved without
dialogue. The challenge we face every day is to replace
fear with acceptance, harassment with tolerance, and
hatred with respect. Cooperation — and not the clash
of civilizations — must be the paradigm for our
collective
endeavours.
The
promotion
of
understanding, harmony and cooperation among
religions and cultures is the indispensable avenue
through which we can lift the veil of ignorance,
misconception and prejudice that has become so
tragically pervasive in recent times.
In today’s world, the need for interfaith dialogue,
cooperation and harmony cannot be overemphasized in
the context of ongoing political and security disputes.
The multiple crises of finance, fuel and food have
further aggravated the divide. In order to make our
world a better place, we must all share the
responsibility to highlight and propagate our common
values of peace, tolerance, equality, sharing and respect
for humanity.

09-59928

Pakistan fully recognizes the growing need to
promote religious and cultural harmony and the
necessity of interfaith dialogue. We have taken several
important initiatives to promote dialogue and
understanding among various faiths and religions at the
national level and in all major international forums,
including the draft resolution we have jointly
sponsored with the Philippines entitled “Promotion of
interreligious and intercultural dialogue, understanding
and cooperation for peace” (A/64/L.15).
I am confident that the draft resolution, as at
previous sessions, will be adopted unanimously by the
General Assembly. This in a way will be an affirmation
by the members of the international community of their
shared commitment to advancing the goals of universal
understanding, harmony and peace, as well as security
and prosperity among all nations and peoples of all
faiths and cultures.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/64/L.13.
Mr. Sangqu (South Africa): On behalf of the
Government and people of South Africa, I have the
honour and privilege to introduce draft resolution
A/64/L.13 designating 18 July, the birthday of Nelson
Mandela, as Nelson Mandela International Day. I do so
on behalf of all the sponsors listed in document
A/64/L.13, and I thank these countries for their
sponsorship and unwavering support. In particular, we
would like to thank the heads of State and Government
of the Non-Aligned Movement for their support for and
endorsement of this initiative.
Since the publication of this document, the
following countries have joined in sponsoring the draft
resolution: Albania, Armenia, Austria, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bulgaria, Cambodia,
Chad, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, France, Germany,
Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Kazakhstan,
Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Monaco, Montenegro, the
Netherlands, New Zealand, Paraguay, Poland, the
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Lucia, Samoa,
San Marino, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Spain, Sweden, Turkmenistan and the United
Arab Emirates. The total is thus over 160 sponsors. We
thank them all equally.
On 18 July 2009, millions of people from across
the globe came together to give 67 minutes or more of

23

A/64/PV.41

their time in community service, their actions inspired
by the life’s work of Nelson Mandela. In turn, the
actions of these million of people, men, women and
youth across the globe and from all sectors of society,
have inspired us to introduce this draft resolution to the
General Assembly.
During the dark days of apartheid, Nelson
Rolihlahla Mandela said, “To be free is not merely to
cast off one’s chains but to live in a way that respects
and enhances the freedom of others”. When the chains
of apartheid were severed in our country, he embodied
these words, showing that both the victors and the
vanquished could live in peace. Mandela’s leadership
through South Africa’s most terrible and triumphant
times is enough to make him an enduring hero in our
history books.
His legacy however, is even larger than this.
Through his extraordinary actions and personality, he
has become a moral compass that we can all look up to.
Indeed, Nelson Mandela is an international icon and a
symbol of hope for oppressed and marginalized people
across the globe. He has dedicated his life to the
service of humanity and has contributed greatly to the
promotion of the culture of peace throughout the
world. Nelson Mandela worked tirelessly in the
struggle for democracy and for the promotion and
protection of human rights internationally. Nelson
Mandela’s contribution to conflict resolution,
reconciliation, the rights of children and uplifting the
poor is acknowledged across the world. He has been
bestowed with numerous awards and honours,
including the Nobel Peace Prize. But even at such
times of great recognition, he has been selfless. A
memorable example of that was when he dedicated his
Nobel Peace Award to “all the courageous people of
my country, black and white, who have suffered and
endured so much”.
Nelson Mandela has become one of the greatest
leaders who have supported and steadfastly promoted
the ideals of the United Nations. The ideals of the
United Nations, represented by the victory of unity
over division and of negotiation over confrontation, are
the ideals mirrored by Nelson Mandela throughout his
life.
Perhaps the only fitting way to pay tribute to this
great man is to look back at his public and political
life. Therefore, permit me to provide some glimpses of
Nelson Mandela through his own words.

24

On 20 April 1964, standing trial in Rivonia for
treason for leading the African National Congress’s
struggle against the apartheid State, Nelson Mandela
spoke for hours in his own defence, knowing that a
sentence of death was a possibility. He said,
“I have fought against white domination and
I have fought against black domination. I have
cherished the ideals of a democratic and free
society in which all persons live together in
harmony and with equal opportunities; it is an
ideal, which I hope to live for and to achieve. But
if needs be, it is an ideal for which I am prepared
to die.”
Upon his release from brutal and inhumane
incarceration for 27 years, Nelson Mandela addressed
the South African people and said,
“I stand here before you not as a prophet but
as a humble servant of you, the people. Your
tireless and heroic sacrifices have made it
possible for me to be here today. I therefore place
the remaining years of my life in your hands.”
He had one regret that day, however. There were
so many reporters and cameras and supporters around
him the moment he set foot from prison that he did not
have a chance to say goodbye to the prison staff, whom
he cherished because they had been his only link to
humanity for so long.
On 10 May 1994, Nelson Mandela stood tall
before a crowd of people in Pretoria after taking the
oath of office as the first democratically elected
President of a free South Africa, and said, “The time
for the healing of the wounds has come. The moment
to bridge the chasms that divide us has come. The time
to build is upon us”.
Having decided to retire from public office,
Mandela addressed the General Assembly of the United
Nations on 21 September 1998 for the final time. He
stated that the social ills of the world do not stem from
the forces of nature or a curse of the deities, but from
the decisions that people make or refuse to make, and
he urged that all those in this great Hall
“not allow that any should be denied their
freedom, as we were; that any should be turned
into refugees, as we were; that any should be
condemned to go hungry, as we were; that any
should be stripped of their human dignity, as we
were” (A/53/PV.7, p. 16).

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

He went on to say:
“Then would history and the billions throughout
the world proclaim that it was right that we
dreamt and that we toiled to give life to a
workable dream” (ibid.).
Nelson Mandela is not a god or a saint. He is
simply a man who has acted in a manner that is a little
wiser, a little stronger and a little better than the rest of
us. This is evident from his words in his seminal
biography, Long Walk to Freedom:
“I have walked that long road to freedom. I
have tried not to falter; I have made missteps
along the way. But I have discovered the secret
that after climbing a great hill, one only finds that
there are many more hills to climb. I have taken a
moment here to rest, to steal a view of the
glorious vista that surrounds me, to look back on
the distance I have come. But I can rest only for a
moment, for with freedom comes responsibilities,
and I dare not linger, for my long walk is not yet
ended.”
It is in this spirit that we, the people of South
Africa, pledge to work together in reviving ubuntu, to
create a better society for all and to make a positive
contribution to humanity, built on compassion,
humility, respect, forgiveness and unity.
The adoption of this draft resolution by the
General Assembly should serve as a constant reminder
of the need to answer the question Nelson Mandela
posed to this Assembly when he said,
“The great challenge of our age to the
United Nations is to answer the question ‘Given
the interdependence of the nations of the world,
what is it that we can and must do to ensure that
democracy, peace and prosperity prevail
everywhere?’” (A/49/PV.14, p. 8)
It is our hope that the entire membership of the
United Nations will support and sponsor the draft
resolution before us, and that every year, beginning in
2010, the United Nations and the billions of people
represented here will celebrate 18 July as Nelson
Mandela International Day. In doing so, we make the
moral compass of Nelson Mandela a little brighter and
bigger so that we can see it all the more clearly as we
strive in this great Hall to realize the workable dream
of Nelson Mandela. Halala, Madiba, Halala.

09-59928

Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union.
Not every generation is fortunate enough to
witness the emergence of a figure of unique
international standing who has a profound impact on the
lives of people across the world. The European Union
would like to pay tribute to the extensive personal
achievements of Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela — a man
who has come to symbolize the triumph of hope over
despair, of justice over oppression and of peace over
conflict.
Nelson Mandela’s incredible story of personal
sacrifice and his achievements for South Africa are
well known to everyone in this Hall and will forever be
remembered with the greatest respect by all democratic
nations. As the representative of South Africa just
quoted, Nelson Mandela was ready to die for his ideals
of a democratic and free society in which all persons
live together in harmony and with equal opportunities.
Fortunately, he has had a long life, and throughout his
life he has lived to realize those ideals.
Mandela’s steadfast perseverance and his
commitment to these ideals and to living in a
democratic and free society continue to stand out for
all those around the world who are still denied their
human rights and their fundamental freedoms. We hope
that all prisoners of conscience, wherever they are, will
one day be able to enjoy the freedom that is denied to
them and that was denied to Mandela for too many
years.
Mr. Mandela’s work to build peace and to
promote reconciliation at the national level has rightly
been recognized by awards of the most prestigious
nature, including the Nobel Peace Prize. The legacy of
his struggle for social justice and his efforts to combat
HIV and AIDS continue to this day. We salute these
achievements.
What sets him apart is also his ability to touch the
hearts of ordinary people. Many of us remember the
long years of Mr. Mandela’s incarceration, and we
were shaped by the example he set for us. His dignity
and compassion in the face of seemingly overwhelming
challenges have made people realize what an
individual and what humankind as a whole can
achieve.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt): I have the pleasure of
speaking today on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement

25

A/64/PV.41

in the general debate under agenda item 49, entitled
“Culture of peace”, to convey the Movement’s full
endorsement of the initiative to designate 18 July every
year as Nelson Mandela International Day, as
stipulated in draft resolution A/64/L.13.
Many leaders have changed the future of their
countries with their vision, commitment and
determination, but few leaders have affected the course
of history. From a small village on the outskirts of the
city of Umtata, Transkei, in the Kaffraria region of
South Africa, the young Mandela learned the meaning
of life and freedom. Named Nelson on his first day of
school by his teacher, Mandela still proved to be
worthy of the name given him at birth, Rolihlahla,
which can be translated as Troublemaker.
With the enactment of apartheid laws in 1948,
one of the worst forms of racial discrimination in
history was institutionalized. It was thus not a
coincidence that Mandela joined the freedom fighters
of his homeland in pursuit of justice and equality. The
price was high, but his sense of purpose was much
higher. Despite his initial commitment to non-violent
resistance, like many generations in South Africa that
were influenced by Mahatma Ghandi’s teachings and
methods, Mandela was detained for five years on
charges of treason. After his acquittal, he found no
alternative but to resort to armed struggle against the
racist regime. He became the leader of the Spear of the
Nation, the armed wing of the African National
Congress, only to be convicted of treason a year later.
Mandela’s philosophy in life was forged on
Robben Island, from which he emerged a mediator, a
Nobel Peace Prize laureate and the first black President
of South Africa. Twenty-seven years behind bars made
him a worldwide symbol of resistance to racism who
lives on to inspire ongoing efforts all around the world
to eliminate all forms of racism, racial discrimination,
xenophobia and related intolerance.
Mandela has been one of the Non-Aligned
Movement leaders who have played an instrumental
and active role over the years on issues of concern and
vital importance to its members, such as decolonization,
apartheid, the maintenance of international peace and
security, disarmament and the situation in the Middle
East, including the question of Palestine.
The heads of State and Government of the
Non-Aligned Movement, at their fifteenth summit, held
in Sharm el-Sheikh, recognized Mandela’s leading role

26

in and support for Africa’s struggle for liberation, selfdetermination and unity and his outstanding
contribution to the creation of a non-racial, non-sexist
and democratic South Africa. They further recognized
his values and dedication to the service of humanity as
a humanitarian in the fields of conflict resolution, race
relations, the promotion and protection of human
rights, reconciliation, gender equality, and the rights of
children and other groups in vulnerable situations, and
in uplifting the poor and underdeveloped communities.
In an unprecedented move, the heads of State and
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement unanimously
adopted a special declaration at the Sharm el-Sheikh
summit, expressing their support for and solidarity
with the Nelson Mandela International Day campaign.
They called on Non-Aligned Movement member States
and peoples to join in the campaign, including by
contributing 67 minutes of their time in service to their
communities, in recognition of Madiba’s 67 years of
contribution in service of humanity. The leaders
endorsed the call to designate 18 July, Madiba’s
birthday, as Nelson Mandela International Day and
requested that a draft resolution to this effect be
adopted by the General Assembly at its sixty-fourth
session.
Humankind has suffered various social maladies
that have, regrettably, been related more often that not
to race, colour, sex and religion, and which have
resulted in numerous historic atrocities. Despite the
serious steps taken by many countries to implement the
United Nations Convention on the Abolition of Slavery
and the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination, and despite the
progress made so far in realizing the universality of the
international covenants on human rights, we continue
to witness the growth of new forms of bigotry and
racism in our world today. Guided by Mandela’s vision
and struggle, the ongoing deliberations within the
Human Rights Council on the development of standards
complementary to the International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination are
thus of paramount importance, as they would
contribute to rebuilding confidence and combating all
forms of discrimination across the globe.
It is indeed necessary to complement our efforts
in implementing our common commitments under the
2001 Durban Declaration and Programme of Action
and the outcome document of the Review Conference
in April 2009. Our endeavours in this regard should

09-59928

A/64/PV.41

avoid any attached conditionalities that seek to impose
controversial notions which lack legal grounds, fail to
take into account the divergent social, cultural and
value systems of different societies, or link such
notions to development assistance programmes. The
Non-Aligned Movement believes that it will be
possible to eliminate these negative phenomena only
through the consolidation of the international
community’s resolve and action in the context of a
multifaceted approach, in tandem with our efforts to
reinforce the principles of democracy and respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms.
Enhancing cooperation at the international level
to promote dialogue, mutual understanding and
enlightened education is of equally great importance
and should be based on a framework of partnership and
cooperation among non-governmental organizations,
the private sector and national institutions and
associations. It is crucial in this regard to continue our

09-59928

efforts to promote the freedom of expression according
to our commitments under existing international human
rights instruments in a manner that prevents the
exacerbation of the sentiments of hatred and racism
and that encourages intellectuals and the media to
shoulder their responsibilities in building awareness,
educating communities and confronting the trends that
promote intolerance and conflict.
The Non-Aligned Movement looks forward to the
designation by the United Nations of 18 July as the
annual Nelson Mandela International Day. The
Movement hopes that the observance of this day will
not only acknowledge the history of his great leadership,
but also become a reminder of the international
community’s commitment to exerting its utmost efforts
to fulfil its pledge to combat all forms of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and
to spread the culture of peace.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

27
