UNITED

NATIONS
Dietr.

SECUR'ITY

GENERAL

COUNCil

S/3736
5 November 1956
ENGLISII
ORIGINAL:

RUSSIAN

CABLEGRAM DATED 5 NOVEMBER 1956 FROM THE MINISTER FOR FOREIGl\fAFFAIRS
011' TIlE UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST REPUBLICS, ADDRES$ED TO THE PRESIDENT
OF THE SECURITf COUNCIL
Egypt has become a victim of,aggression 'by the United Kingdom, France and
Israel.

Egyptian towns and populated areas are 'being subjected to 'barbarous

bombin(5 by Anglo..Frehch aircraft.

Landing operations have begun and Egyptian

terl'itory is being directly invaded by the fOl~ces of the interventionists.

The

number of civilian victims is increasing and property is being destroyed.
, ,Despite the de'cision of the emergency specialsessil)n of the General'Assem15J,.y' of
\

.

'

"

the United Nations of 2 November, concerning the cessation of mili~ary activities
and the withdrawal of all foreign troops which have invaded Egypt, the
aggressive war against Egypt is being intensified.
This s:ttuation imposes the need for irmuedi'ate and effective action by the
United Nations ~or the prevent:ton of aggreSsion.

If at this decisive moment the

United Nations is. unable to curb the aggressors, 'the trust which the peoples
of the ''1hole world place in the Organization "rill be undermined a.nd i'bshigh
ideals and principles will be trampled tmderfoot.
The 8.oviet, Government, as a defender of the peace and security of nations,
calls for an ·imme(l:i.ate meeting of the Security Counc:tl" to discuss the
following question:

"Non...compliance by the United Kingdom" France and Israel

with the decision of the emergency special session of the General Assembly of
the Un:tted DTationsof 2 November 1956 and immediate steps to halt the aggression
of the af'oresaj.d States against Egypt".
Wi'th a view to the adoption of rapid and effective me~sures for stopping
the aggressive war against the Egyptian people, the Government of 'the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics presents the following draft resolution to the
Security Council:

56-29596

, 8/3736
English
Page 2
"The Securit;y COunC:t~1
"Ta~?g note of the fact that the resolution of the emergency special
session of the General Assembly of 2 November 1956, recommending that the
Governments of the United Kingdom, France and Israel should immediately
cease military action against Egypt and should withdraw 'cheir troops from
Egyptian territo17, has not been observed by the aforesaid states and
that the military action against Egypt is continuing,

tI~~..!!~the necessity of taking immediate'steps to put an end
to the aggression launched against Egypt by the United Kingdom, France
and Israel,
1Ip.::,0J?£~ to the Governments of the United K:tngdom, France and
Israel that they should immediately and not later than twelve hours after
the adoption of this resolution aeaseaU military action against Egypt
and v.'i thdraw vI thin three da.:lS the troops that have invad,ed Egyp·c.

.....

liThe Security Council, in accordance with Article 42 of the
United Nations Charter, considers it essential that all States Members
of the United No.tions,espec1a.lly tb,e United states of Ame:dco... and 'the
USSR, as pel"Illa.nent members ()f the Security Counc:U having 'powerful air
and naval forces at their disposal, nuo\ud give military and other
assistance to the E&Y.Ptian RePublic, which has been the Victim of aggression,
bysend.!:ag no.vaJ. a.nd air forces, milit~ryunits, volunteers, military
instructors and other forms of assistance, if the United Kingdom, li'rance
and Isra.el fail to ca.l~ry out this resolution within. the stated time limits."

The Soviet Government for its part declares that it is ready to contribute
to the cause of curbing, th? aggressbrs~ of defending the victims et aggression
undof restoring peace, by sending to Egypt the air and naval forces necessary
for the achievement of this purpose.
The Soviet Government expresses its confidence that the states Members
of the United Nations '1dll take the necessary measures to defend the sovereign
rights of the Egyptian State and to restore peace.
I would ask you, Mr. President, to circulate this declaration by the
Soviet Government to all the members of the Security Council and to all other
States Members of the United. Nations.
(~~2)

D. SHillPIJ.JOV

for Foreign Af.fa1rs of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics

~tnister

.----
