36

General AHembly-Fourteenth Seseion

Noting with satisfaction that some Non-~elf-Governing
Territories are already participating fruitfully in the
work of certain specialized agencies and certain regional
economic commissions,
1. Invites the Administering Members to submit to
the specialized agencies the candidature of the Territories referred to in Article 73 of the Charter of the
United Nations with a view to their admission as members, associate members or observers, according to the
constitution of the agency concerned ;
2. Specially requests all Member States administering Non-Self-Governing Territories in Africa to propose the participation of these Territories in the work
of the Economic Commission for Africa ;
3. Re-emphasizes the great advantage of the Administering Members including in their delegations representatives of the Non-Self-Governing Territories to
participate in the work of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories and in the discussion of such matters in the Fourth Committee;
4. Invites the Administering Members to furnish the
Secretary-General with a report on the practical measures taken to implement the present resolution ;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its fifteenth session on the progress
made.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1467 (XIV). General questions relating to the
transmission and examination of information

The General, Assembly,
Having regard to the provisions of Chapter XI of
the Charter of the United Nations, and in particular to
tl:e obligation to transmit information under Article 73 e
accepted by Members which have or assume responsibilities for Territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-govern-nent,
Recalling that, hy its resolution 334 (TV) of 2 December 1949, the General Assembly considered that it
is within its responsibility to express its opinion on
the principles which have guided, or may in future
guide, the Administering Members in enumerating the
Territories for which the obligation exists to transmit
information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Recalling also that, by its resolution 742 (VIII) of
27 November 1953, the General Assembly approved a
list of factors to be taken into account in deciding
whether a Territory is or is not a Territory whose
people have not yet attained a full measme of selfgovernment,
Noting that Member States have expressed differing
opinions as to the application of the provisions of
Chapter XI to Territories whose peoples have not yet
attained a full measure of self-government, including
the obligation to transmit the information called for in
Article 73 e of the Charter,
1. Considers that it would be desirahle for the
General Assembly to enumerate the principles which
should guide Members in determining whether or not
an obligation exists to transmit the information called
for in Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations:
2. Decides to establish a special committre consisting
of six members, to be elected hv the Fourth Committee
on behalf of the General Assrmhlv----three of whom shall

be l\lembers who transmit information under Article 73 e
oi the Charter and three non-administering Memberstu study these principles and to report on the results of
its study to the Assembly at its fifteenth session ;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare for the
use of this committee an account of the history of this
matter. including a summary of the opinions on the
subject which have been expressed by Member States
in the past and of the relevant legal treaties on the
interpretation of the Charter;
4. Invites Member States to submit in writing to
the Secretary-General, before I May 1960, their views
on these principles, in order that the committee may
take them into account.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

•

•

•

At ,ts 994th meeting, the Fourth Committee, acting in the
name of the General Assembly, elected the members of the
sf,ecial committee established under the terms of the above
resolutiott. At its 857th plenary meeting on 12 December 1959,
the General Assembly confirmed the election.
The Committee is composed as follows: INDIA, MEXICO,
MOROCCO, NETHERLANDS, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
A ND \'oRTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES m· AMERICA.

1468 (XIV). Voluntary transmission of information on political developments in Non-SeliGoverning Territories

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 144 (II) of 3 November
1947, 327 (IV) of 2 December 1949, 551 (Vl) of
7 December 1951 and 848 (IX) of 22 November 1954
regarding the voluntary transmission of information
on political developments in the Non-Self-Governing
Territories,
Noting that only some Members resp0nsible for the
administration of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
voluntarily transmit information on the c1evelopment of
political institutions in those Territories,
Rccogni::ing that the principles and objectives set
forth in Article 73 of the Charter of the United Nations
relate as much to the political advancement of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories as
to their advancement in economic, social and t'ducational fields,
Recalling further that under Article 73 b of the
Charter the Administering Members have assumed the
obligation to develop self-government in the Non-Self(;overning Territories, with due regard to the political
aspirations of the peoples, and to assist them in tht'
progressive development of their free political instituti(ln,..
Conscious of the inextricable relationship lwtween
developments in the political and functional fields,
1. Endorses the observations of the Committee on
Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories, based
on its examination of the information transmitted by
the Administering Members, that speedy advancement
in the functional fields is usually obtained where there
i, tht' broadest participation of the inhabitants in political
hodit's empowere(I to establish policies and to vote
I,udgets ;32
3 :: /hi ..

Suf'l'lnncnt

\",,

15 IA/41111, part two, para. 27,

RP-11olutione adopted on the reporte of the Fourth Committee

37

2. Requests the Administering Members to do their
utmost to mobilize the effective participation of the
inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories by
transferring to them effective power in order to accelerate their social, economic and educational advancement;
3. Considers that the transmission of information on
developments in the political field will enable the
General Assembly better to assess the information
transmitted by the· Administering Members concerning
educational, social and economic development in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories;
4. Reiterates the view that the voluntary transmission of information on political developments in the
Non-Self-Governing Territories is fully in accord with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter of the United
Nations;
5. Urges the Administering Members concerned to
extend their full co-operation in this matter by voluntarily transmitting information of a political and constitutional character with regard to developments in the
Territories under their respective administrations, including the establishment of intermediate time-tables
leading to the attainment of self-government by these
Territories.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

longer appropriate or necessary for it to transmit information under Article 73 e of the Charter of the
United Nations in respect of Alaska and Hawaii;
2. Expresses the opinion, based on its examination
of the documentation and the explanations provided,
that the people of Alaska and Hawaii have effectively
exercised their right to self-determination and have
freely chosen their present status;
3. Congratulates the United States of America and
the people of Alaska and Hawaii upon the attainment
of a full measure of self-government by the people of
Alaska and Hawaii ;
4. Considers that, owing to the circumstances mentioned above, the declaration regarding Non-Se!tGoverning Territories and the provisions established
under it in Chapter XI of the Charter can no longer he
applied to Alaska and Hawaii;
5. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Alaska and Hawaii under
Article 73 e of the Charter should cease.
855th plenary meeting,
12 December 1959.

1469 (XIV). Cessation of the transmission of
information under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska and Hawaii

The General Assembly,
Referring to its resolution 1330 (XIII) of 12 December 1958,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General
on the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community,8 ~
Noting with concern that the Administering Members have not yet submitted sufficient information on
the possible effects of the association of the Non-SelfGoverning Territories under their administration with
the European Economic Community,
Considering that the association of Non-Self-Governing Territories with the European Economic Community may have significant effects on the development
of these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the association oi Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community;
2. Again invites the Administering Members concerned to transmit to the Secretary-General information
on the possible effects of the association of the NonSelf-Governing Territories under their administration
with the European Economic Community;
3. Requests the Committee on Information from
Non-Self-Governing Territories to devote special attention at its 1960 session, at which it is to deal particularly with the economic development of the NonSelf-Governing Territories, to the question of the
association of certain Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the European Economic Community and to the
possible effects of tltls association on the development of
these Territories towards the objectives of Article 73
of the Charter of the United Nations;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare, for the
fifteenth session of the General Assembly, a report on
new developments connected with the association of

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, by resolution 222 (III) of 3 November 1948, the General Assembly, while welcoming any
development of self-government in Non-Self-Governing
Territories, considered it essential that the United
Nations be informed of any change in the constitutional
status of any such Territory as a result of which the
responsible Government concerned thinks it unnecessary
to transmit information in respect of that Territory
under Article 73 e of the Charter of the United Nations,
Having received from the Government of the United
States of America communications dated 2 June 195938
and 17 September 19593 4 informing the SecretaryGeneral that Alaska and Hawaii, respectively, have, as
a result of their admission into the United States as
the forty-ninth and fiftieth States, attained a full measure of self-government and that, as a consequence of
this change in their constitutional status, the United
States Government would cease to transmit information
under Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of Alaska
and Hawaii,
H wing examined the communications of the Government of the United States of America in the light
of the basic principles and objectives embodied in
Chapter XI of the Charter and of all the other elements
of judgement pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General
Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the Charter,
1. Takes note of the opinion of the Government of
the United States of America that, owing to the new
constitutional status of Alaska and Hawaii, it is no
33 Jbid., Fourteenth Session, Annexes, agenda item 36, document A/4115.
34 Jbid., document A/4226.

1470 (XIV). Effects of the European Economic
Community on the development of certain
Non-Self-Governing Territories

a~ !hid., document A/4197.
