United Nations

A/RES/62/62

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 January 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 79

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 6 December 2007
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/62/447)]

62/62. United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its commitment to the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations and international law and to an international order based on the rule
of law and international law, which is essential for peaceful coexistence and
cooperation among States,
Recalling its resolution 2099 (XX) of 20 December 1965, in which it
established the United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law to contribute towards a
better knowledge of international law as a means of strengthening international
peace and security and of promoting friendly relations and cooperation among
States,
Noting the significant contribution of the Programme of Assistance to a better
knowledge of international law for more than four decades, as envisaged in the
above-mentioned resolution,
Considering, nevertheless, that much remains to be done in this field,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of the Programme of Assistance 1 and the views of the Advisory
Committee on the Programme of Assistance, which are contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an appropriate place in the
teaching of legal disciplines at all universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States at the bilateral level to
provide assistance in the teaching and study of international law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States and international organizations and
institutions should be encouraged to give further support to the Programme of
Assistance and increase their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination
_______________
1

07-46749

A/62/503.

A/RES/62/62

and wider appreciation of international law, in particular those activities which are
of special benefit to persons from developing countries,
Reaffirming that in the conduct of the Programme of Assistance it would be
desirable to use as far as possible the resources and facilities made available by
Member States, international organizations and others,
Reaffirming also the hope that, in appointing lecturers for the seminars to be
held within the framework of the fellowship programmes in international law,
account would be taken of the need to secure the representation of major legal
systems and balance among various geographical regions,
Approves the guidelines and recommendations contained in section III of
1.
the report of the Secretary-General,1 in particular those designed to achieve the best
possible results in the administration of the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of
International Law within a policy of maximum financial restraint;
Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in 2008 and 2009 the
2.
activities specified in his report, including the provision of:
(a) A number of international law fellowships in both 2008 and 2009, to be
determined in the light of the overall resources for the Programme of Assistance and
to be awarded at the request of Governments of developing countries;
(b) A minimum of one scholarship in both 2008 and 2009 under the
Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea, subject
to the availability of new voluntary contributions made specifically to this
fellowship fund;
(c) Subject to the overall resources for the Programme of Assistance,
assistance in the form of a travel grant for one participant from each developing
country, who would be invited to possible regional courses to be organized in 2008
and 2009;
and to finance the above activities from provisions in the regular budget, when
appropriate, as well as from voluntary financial contributions earmarked for each of
the activities concerned, which would be received as a result of the requests set out
in paragraphs 18 to 20 below;
Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for his constructive
3.
efforts to promote training and assistance in international law within the framework
of the Programme of Assistance in 2006 and 2007, in particular for the organization
of the forty-second 2 and forty-third 3 sessions of the International Law Seminar, held
at Geneva in 2006 and 2007, respectively, and for the activities of the Office of
Legal Affairs of the Secretariat related to the International Law Fellowship
Programme and to the Hamilton Shirley Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the
Law of the Sea, carried out, respectively, through its Codification Division and its
Division for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea;
Requests the Secretary-General to consider admitting, for participation in
4.
the various components of the Programme of Assistance, candidates from countries
willing to bear the entire cost of such participation;
_______________
2

See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-first Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/61/10),
chap. XIII, sect. F.
3
Ibid., Sixty-second Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/62/10), chap. X, sect. E.

2

A/RES/62/62

5.
Also requests the Secretary-General to consider the relative advantages
of using available resources and voluntary contributions for regional, subregional or
national courses, as against courses organized within the United Nations system;
Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to provide the
6.
necessary resources to the programme budget for the Programme of Assistance for
the next and the future bienniums with a view to maintaining the effectiveness of the
Programme of Assistance;
Recognizes the importance of the United Nations legal publications
7.
prepared by the Office of Legal Affairs, and strongly encourages their continued
publication;
Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Office of Legal Affairs to bring
8.
up to date the United Nations legal publications;
Also welcomes the placing on the Internet of the Reports of International
9.
Arbitral Awards, 4 the Summaries of Judgments, Advisory Opinions and Orders of
the International Court of Justice 5 and other legal information, as well as the
expansion of the website of the International Law Commission 6 to include all its
documentation;
10. Further welcomes the establishment of the website on the Programme of
Assistance; 7
11. Notes the need to safeguard and preserve the audiovisual history of legal
developments within the United Nations, which constitutes an invaluable resource
for promoting a better knowledge of international law;
12. Notes with satisfaction the efforts made by the Codification Division of
the Office of Legal Affairs to revitalize, within available resources, the United
Nations Audiovisual Library of International Law, and urges States to make
voluntary contributions to enable the Codification Division to develop and maintain
the Library;
13. Welcomes the training and technical assistance activities in international
law undertaken by the Office of Legal Affairs in the framework of the Programme
of Assistance, as described in the report of the Secretary-General, and encourages
the continuation of such activities within available resources;
14. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Institute for Training
and Research for its participation in the Programme of Assistance through the
activities described in the report of the Secretary-General;
15. Also expresses its appreciation to the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization for its participation in the Programme of
Assistance through the activities described in the report of the Secretary-General;
16. Further expresses its appreciation to The Hague Academy of
International Law for the valuable contribution it continues to make to the
Programme of Assistance, which has enabled candidates under the International
Law Fellowship Programme to attend and participate in the Fellowship Programme
in conjunction with the Academy courses;
_______________
4

Available from www.un.org/law/riaa.
Available from www.un.org/law/ICJsummaries.
6
www.un.org/law/ilc.
7
www.un.org/law/programmeofassistance.
5

3

A/RES/62/62

17. Notes with appreciation the contributions of The Hague Academy to the
teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law, and calls
upon Member States and interested organizations to give favourable consideration to the
appeal of the Academy for a continuation of support and a possible increase in their
financial contributions, to enable the Academy to carry out its activities, particularly
those relating to the summer courses, regional courses and programmes of the Centre
for Studies and Research in International Law and International Relations;
18. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to publicize the Programme
of Assistance and periodically to invite Member States, universities, philanthropic
foundations and other interested national and international institutions and
organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the
financing of the Programme of Assistance or otherwise to assist in its
implementation and possible expansion;
19. Reiterates its request to Member States and to interested organizations
and individuals to make voluntary contributions, inter alia, for the International Law
Seminar, the International Law Fellowship Programme, the Hamilton Shirley
Amerasinghe Memorial Fellowship on the Law of the Sea and the United Nations
Audiovisual Library of International Law, and expresses its appreciation to those
Member States, institutions and individuals that have made voluntary contributions
for this purpose;
20. Urges in particular all Governments to make voluntary contributions for
the organization of regional courses in international law by the Codification
Division of the Office of Legal Affairs, in collaboration with the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research, especially with a view to covering the amount
needed for the financing of the daily subsistence allowance for up to twenty-five
participants in each regional course, thus alleviating the burden on prospective host
countries and making it possible to continue to organize the regional courses;
21. Decides to appoint twenty-five Member States, six from Africa, five from
Asia, three from Eastern Europe, five from Latin America and the Caribbean and six
from Western European and other States, as members of the Advisory Committee on
the Programme of Assistance for a period of four years beginning on 1 January
2008; 8
22. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its
sixty-fourth session on the implementation of the Programme of Assistance during
2008 and 2009 and, following consultations with the Advisory Committee on the
Programme of Assistance, to submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme of Assistance in subsequent years;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-fourth session
the item entitled “United Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study,
Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law”.
62nd plenary meeting
6 December 2007

_______________
8
The following States have been appointed members of the Advisory Committee on the Programme of
Assistance: Canada, Colombia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, France, Germany, Ghana, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Italy, Jamaica, Kenya, Lebanon, Malaysia, Mexico, Nigeria, Pakistan, Portugal, Russian
Federation, Sudan, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukraine, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America
and Uruguay.

4
