Resolutions adopted on the reporb of the Seeond Committee

Commissions the President of the twenty-ninth session of the General Assembly and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations to request the Government of
Chile to release immediately Mr. Clodomiro Almeyda,
the President of the third session of the United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3216 (XXIX). Fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964 and Trade and Development Board decision
113 (XIV) of 13 September 1974, 9
Bearing in mind the invitation of the Government of
Kenya to hold the fourth session of the United Natic--~
Conference on Trade and Development at Nairobi,
1. Accepts with appreciation the invitation of the
Government of Kenya;
2. Decides that the fourth session of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development will
be held at Nairobi in May/June 1976 for a period
not exceeding four weeks.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3217 (XXIX). United Nations Institute for
Training and Research

The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions relating to the
United Nations Institute for Training and Research,
particularly resolution 3064 ·(XXVIII) of 9 November
1973, and the resolutions of the Economic and Social
Council on the same subject,
l. Takes note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Institute for Training 'and Research;10
2. Notes with satisfaction the increasing effectiveness of the Institute in the discharge of its responsibilities;
3. invites the Institute to organize its work in the
sphere of economic and social research and training
within its field of competence, taking full account of
the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic
Order; 11
4. Expresses the hope that the Institute will have
greater and wider financial support.
2278th plenary meeting
6 November 1974
3241 (XXIX). Economic co-operation among
developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3177 (XXVIII) of 17 December 1973 on economic co-operation among developing countries,

Reaffirming the provisions of paragraph 4 of that
resolution concerning the role of the specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system in promoting economic co-operation among
developing countries,
Recognizing that collective self-reliance and growing co-operation among developing countries will further strengthen their role in the new international economic order,
Noting the Action Programme for economic cooperation among non-aligned and other developing
countries, adopted by the Conference of Foreign Min.
ist~rs of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Georgetown
from 8 to 12 August 1972, and reaffirmed at the Fourth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries, 12 held at A!giers from 5 to 9 September 1973,
Mindful also of the determination of the non-aligned
and other c!eveloping countries to provide, by selfreliance and joint efforts and through mutual solidarity
and assistance, the necessary conditions for their independent and accelerated economic and political development,
l. Takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;13
2. Endorses Trade and Development Board decision
121 (XIV) of 13 September 1974 on trade expansion,
economic co-operation and regional integration among
developing countries;14
3. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations within the United Nations system to provide
continuing support for the promotion of economic cooperation among developing countries in accordance
with paragraph 4 of General Assembly resolution 3177
(XXVIII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirtieth session on the contribution made by the specialized agencies and other
organizations within the United Nations system in promoting economic co-operation among developing
countries.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
3242 (XXIX). Economic and social assistance for
Honduras

The General Assembly,
Noting that the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America held its ninth
extraordinary session at United Nations Headquarters
on 21 and 22 October 1974 for the purpose of considering the short-term, medium-term and long-term
international co-operation which, within the framework
of the United Nations, "C_ould be given to Honduras for
the reconstruction of the country following the disaster
which struck it between 18 and 20 September 1974,
Bearing in mind the report on the magnitude of the
economic and social impact of the destruction suffered
by Honduras; prepared by the secretariat of the Eco12 A/9330 and Corr.I, p. 85.
1a A/9760.

11 Ibid.

10 Ibid., Supplement No. U (A/9614).
11 Resolutions 3201

45

(S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI).

14 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Twentyninth Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/9615/Rev.1), annex I.

46

General A111embly-Twenty-ninth Se111ion

nomic Commission for Latin America in co-operation
with the United Nations Development Programme, 15
Also bearing in mind the report on the ninth extraordinary session of the Committee of the Whole of the
Economic Commission for Latin America, 16
Recognizing the urgency and importance of implementing the measures which the Committee of the
Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America
unanimously recommended in resolution 343 ~AC.67)
of 22 October 1974, entitled "International co-operation to deal with the natural disaster which occurred in
Honduras during the period 18 to 20 September 1974",
1. Conveys to the people and Government of Honduras its feeling of solidarity in the face of the tragedy
they have suffered;
2. Endorses resolution 343 (AC.67), adopted by
the Committee of the Whole of the Economic Commission for Latin America at its ninth extraordinary
session;
3. Requests the Secretary-General and the international organizations of the United Nations system to
ensure the dedicated and prompt execution of the
recommendations contained in resolution 343 (AC.67).
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
3243 (XXIX). Strengthening of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971, by which it created the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and established
its primary functions of co-ordinating disaster relief,
especially through its role as an information clearinghouse, and of assisting in disaster prevention and
preparedness,
Endorsing Economic and Social Council resolution
1891 (LVII) of 31 July 1974, in which the Council
requested the Secretary-General to investigate the feasibility of measures to strengthen the disaster prevention,
pre-disaster planning and co-ordinating roles of the
Office c: the United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and to submit his findings to the Council at its
fifty-ninth session, and in which the Council recommended that the General Assembly, at its twenty-ninth
session, should reconsider the proposals of the Secretary-General for additional staff resources,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations, 17 and of the
statement made to the Second Committee by the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator on the
activities of his Office, 18
Noting in particular the statements in the SecretaryGeneral's report that, while some progress has been
made in the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator in establishing its assigned func15 E/CEPAL/ AC.67 /2 and Corr.I and 2.
16 Official Records of the Economic and

Social Council,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 9A (E/5608/Add. I).
17 ,...,, 9637.
18 Official. Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Session, Second Committee, 1620th meeting, paras. 1-7.

tion of mobilizing and co-ordinating relief, the lack of
staff and facilities, combined with the frequency, duration and simultaneity of disaster situations, has seriously impaired the effectiveness of the Office in discharging these and other responsibilities,
Concerned that Jack of adequate co-ordination on a
world-wide basis results, in some cases, in lapses in
meeting priority needs and, in others, in costly duplication and in the. supply of unneeded assistance,
Convinced that the Office of the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator is in a unique position,
given adequate staff and facilities, to provide a worldwide system of mobilizing and co-ordinating disaster
relief, including the collection and dissemination of
information on disaster assessment, priority needs and
donor assistance,
Convinced further that this capability should be
strengthened, as a matter of priority and urgency and
without prejudice to the disaster prevention and disaster preparedness roles assigned to the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Convinced that disaster prevention and pre-disaster
planning should form an integral part of the international development policy of Governments and of international organizations,
1. Calls upon the Secretary-General to provide sufficient staff, equipment and facilities to strengthen the
capacity of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator to provide an efficient and effective world-wide service of mobilizing and co-ordinating
disaster relief, including particularly the collection and
dissemination of information on disaster assessment,
priority needs and donor assistance;
2. Decides that the additional costs of providing
this strengthened capability should be met by voluntary
contributions during the first year, commencing as soon
as possible, and during the biennium 197 6-1977, at
which time the method of financing for succeeding
periods shall be subject to review in the light of experience, with the understanding that the additional resources made available under the terms of the present
resolution should be concentrated on strengthening the
co-ordinating capability of the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, but without prejudice to any improvements that can be made in the
roles of that Office in disaster prevention and in predisaster planning within the resources otherwise
available to it;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate measures, drawing upon the aforementioned voluntary funds, to prepare a plan and budget for this increased capability, and to proceed with its immediate
implementation;
4. Requests the Secretary-General, as called for in
Economic and Social Council resolution 1891 ( LVII),
to continue to investigate the feasibility of measures to
strengthen the United Nations machinery with regard
to disaster prevention and pre-disaster planning;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to report on the
implementation of the present resolution to the Economic and Social Council at its fifty-ninth session and
to the General Assembly at its thirtieth session.
2303rd plenary meeting
29 November 1974
