A/77/429

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
18 November 2022
Original: English

Seventy-seventh session
Agenda item 168

Report of the Committee on Relations with the
Host Country
Report of the Sixth Committee
Rapporteur: Ms. Sarah Zahirah Ruhama (Malaysia)

I. Introduction
1.
The item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”
was included in the provisional agenda of the seventy -seventh session of the General
Assembly pursuant to Assembly resolution 76/122 of 9 December 2021.
2.
At its 3rd plenary meeting, on 16 September 2022, the General Assembly, on
the recommendation of the General Committee, decided to include the item in its
agenda and to allocate it to the Sixth Committee.
3.
The Sixth Committee considered the item at its 34th and 36th meetings, on 7 and
18 November 2022. The views of the representatives who spoke during the
Committee’s consideration of the item are reflected in the relevant summary records. 1
4.
For its consideration of the item, the Committee had before it the report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country (A/77/26).
5.
At the 34th meeting, on 7 November, the Chair of the Committee on Relations
with the Host Country introduced the report of that Committee.

II. Consideration of draft resolution A/C.6/77/L.14
6.
At the 36th meeting, on 18 November, the representative of Cyprus, also on
behalf of Bulgaria, Canada, Costa Rica and Côte d’Ivoire, introduced a draft
resolution entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”
(A/C.6/77/L.14).
7.
At the same meeting, the Committee adopted draft resolutio n A/C.6/77/L.14
without a vote (see para. 8).
__________________
1

22-26236 (E)

A/C.6/77/SR.34 and A/C.6/77/SR.36.

251122

*2226236*

A/77/429

III. Recommendation of the Sixth Committee
8.
The Sixth Committee recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of the
following draft resolution:

Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, 1
Recalling Article 105 of the Charter of the United Nations, the Convention on
the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, 2 the Agreement between the
United Nations and the United States of America regarding the Headquarters of the
United Nations, 3 the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations 4 and the
responsibilities of the host country,
Recalling also that, in accordance with paragraph 7 of General Assembly
resolution 2819 (XXVI) of 15 December 1971, the Committee should consider, and
advise the host country on, issues arising in connection with the implementation of
the Headquarters Agreement, and noting that bringing issues to the attention of the
host country may in some cases help to have them be expeditiously resolved,
Recognizing that effective measures should continue to be taken by the
competent authorities of the host country, in particular to prevent any acts violating
the security of missions and the safety of their personnel,
Recognizing also that the Headquarters Agreement provides that it shall be
construed in the light of its primary purpose to enable the United Nations at its
headquarters in the United States, fully and efficiently, to discharge its responsibilities
and fulfil its purposes,
Emphasizing that the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United
Nations does not distinguish between permanent and visiting representatives,
1.
Endorses the recommendations and conclusions of the Committee on
Relations with the Host Country contained in paragraph 144 of its report;
2.
Considers that the maintenance of appropriate conditions for the normal
work of the delegations and the missions accredited to the United Nations and the
observance of their privileges and immunities, which cannot be subject to any
restrictions arising from the bilateral relations of the host country, are in the interest
of the United Nations and all Member States, notes the efforts made by the host
country to this end and that numerous issues raised before the Committee remain
unresolved, takes seriously concerns raised by permanent missions regarding the
normal performance of their functions, notes that the Committee expresses its
readiness to effectively address them and expects that all issues raised at its meetings
that remain unresolved will be duly settled expeditiously, in a spirit of cooperation
and in accordance with international law, notes that the Committee encourages
Member States to bring issues to the attention of the host country and th e Committee
as soon as they occur, requests the host country to continue to solve, preferably
through negotiations, problems that might arise and to take all appropriate steps to
__________________

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-seventh Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/77/26).
Resolution 22 A (I).
3
See resolution 169 (II).
4
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 500, No. 7310.
1
2

2/5

22-26236

A/77/429

protect the premises of missions against any intrusion or damage and to preve nt any
disturbance of the peace of missions or impairment of their dignity, and urges the host
country to continue to take appropriate action, such as the training of police, security,
customs and border control officers, with a view to maintaining respect for diplomatic
privileges and immunities, and to continue efforts to ensure that diplomats transiting
to and from United Nations Headquarters are treated respectfully, and, if violations
occur, to ensure that such cases are properly investigated and remedied, in accordance
with applicable law;
3.
Recalls the privileges and immunities applicable to the premises of the
permanent missions to the United Nations enjoyed under international law, in
particular the instruments listed in paragraph 144 (a) of the r eport of the Committee,
and the obligations of the host country to observe such privileges and immunities,
takes note of the alleged ongoing violations thereof by the host country and of the
repeated concerns expressed thereon, urges the host country to re move without delay
any restrictions applied to the premises of a Permanent Mission inconsistent with
those privileges and immunities, and in that regard to ensure respect for such
privileges and immunities, expresses concern regarding the lack of resolutio n of these
matters, remains seized of these matters, and anticipates that they shall be duly
addressed in a spirit of cooperation and in accordance with international law;
4.
Also recalls that, prior to the institution by the host country of any
proceedings that require any person referred to in article IV, section 11, of the
Agreement between the United Nations and the United States of America regarding
the Headquarters of the United Nations, including representatives of a Member State,
to leave the host country, article IV, section 13 (b) (1) of the Headquarters Agreement,
inter alia, requires the host country to consult with the Member State, the Secretary General or other principal executive officer, as appropriate, and considers that, given
the seriousness of any such measure being exercised by the host country, the
consultation should be meaningful;
5.
Notes the problems experienced by some permanent missions to the United
Nations in connection with the implementation of the Parking Programme for
Diplomatic Vehicles, 5 and notes that the Committee shall remain seized of the matter,
with a view to continuing to maintain the proper implementation of the Parking
Programme in a manner that is fair, non-discriminatory, effective and therefore
consistent with international law;
6.
Strongly urges the host country to remove all remaining travel restrictions
imposed by it on staff of certain missions and staff members of the Secretariat of
certain nationalities, and, recalling privileges and immunities enjoyed by the
representatives of Member States and staff members of the Secretariat under
applicable international law, notes that the Committee recalls the lifting in 2021 of
the more stringent travel restrictions applicable to one Mission, while remaining
concerned about the more stringent travel restrictions that continue to affect another
Mission, as well as more stringent travel restrictions applied to a Mission in 2021 and
additional restrictions applied to the same Mission in 2022, and the statements of
affected delegations that travel restrictions impede their ability to carry out their
functions and negatively impact their staff and families, and notes the positions of
affected States, as reflected in the report of the Secretary -General, of the host country
and of the Legal Counsel, as set out in document A/AC.154/415, according to which,
inter alia, “there is no room for the application of measures based on reciprocity in
the treatment accorded to permanent missions accredited to the United Nations in
New York”;
__________________
5

22-26236

A/AC.154/355, annex.
3/5

A/77/429

7.
Recalls article IV of the Headquarters Agreement, notes the concerns
expressed by some delegations concerning the denial and delay of entry visas to
representatives of Member States, and further notes that the Committee remains
seized of an increasing number of entry visa-related issues raised at its meetings, and
stresses that these issues should be duly resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in
accordance with international law, including the Headquarters Agreement;
8.
Expresses serious concern regarding the non-issuance of entry visas to
certain representatives of certain Member States, in particular to delegates
participating in the work of the Main Committees at the seventy -sixth session of the
General Assembly, emphasizes the importance of the full participation of all
delegations in the work of the United Nations, and takes note of the statements of the
Legal Counsel at the 297th and 298th meetings of the Committee, reiterating his
statement at the emergency, 295th, meeting of the Committee, set out in document
A/AC.154/415, where he confirmed that the legal position regarding the host
country’s obligations with respect to the issuance of v isas to persons covered by the
Headquarters Agreement remains unchanged from that which was provided by the
then Legal Counsel to the Committee in 1988, set out in document A/C.6/43/7,
according to which, inter alia, “the Headquarters Agreement makes it clear that there
is an unrestricted right of persons mentioned in section 11 to enter the United States
for the purpose of proceeding to the Headquarters district”;
9.
Anticipates that the host country will ensure the issuance of entry visas to
all representatives of Member States and members of the Secretariat pursuant to
article IV, sections 11 and 13, of the Headquarters Agreement, in a timely manner, to
enable persons recruited to serve in the Secretariat or assigned as members of
permanent missions to take up their assignments as promptly as possible and to enable
representatives of Member States to travel, in a timely manner, to New York on United
Nations business, including to attend official United Nations meetings, and notes that
the Committee anticipates that the host country will continue to enhance efforts,
including visa issuance, to facilitate the participation of representatives of Member
States in other United Nations meetings, as appropriate;
10. Notes that a number of delegations have requested shortening the time
frame applied by the host country for issuance and renewal of visas to representatives
of Member States and members of their families, since the present time frame poses
difficulties for the full-fledged participation of Member States in United Nations
meetings, and invites the host country to inform the Committee, as appropriate, of
efforts to address such difficulties, and also notes that the Committee calls upon the
host country to review its differing processes of granting visas to the personnel of
certain missions, including single-entry visas, and the waiting time for issuance, with
a view to ensuring that delegations are able to participate fully in the work of the
United Nations;
11. Notes with concern the difficulties experienced by some permanent
missions to the United Nations in obtaining suitable banking services, and welcomes
the continued efforts of the host country to facilitate the opening of bank accounts for
those permanent missions;
12. Stresses the need for the permanent missions and the United Nations to
benefit from appropriate banking services, and anticipates that the host country will
continue to assist the permanent missions accredited to the United Nations and their
staff in obtaining such services;
13. Expresses its appreciation for the efforts made by the United States
Mission to the United Nations, including to respond to requests from the diplomatic
community in the challenging circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic since March 2020, and expects that the issues raised at the
4/5

22-26236

A/77/429

meetings of the Committee will be resolved in a spirit of cooperation and in
accordance with international law, including the Headquarters Agreement;
14. Affirms the importance of the Committee being in a position to fulfil its
mandate and meet on short notice to deal with urgent and important matters
concerning the relations between the United Nations and the host country, and in that
connection requests the Secretariat and the Com mittee on Conferences to accord
priority to requests from the Committee on Relations with the Host Country for
conference-servicing facilities for meetings of that Committee that must be held while
the General Assembly and its Main Committees are meeting, without prejudice to the
requirements of those bodies and on an “as available” basis;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to remain actively engaged in all aspects
of the relations of the United Nations with the host country at various levels in order
to resolve the issues raised in the report of the Committee on Relations with the Host
Country, and to more actively engage in the work of the Committee with a view to
ensuring the representation of the interests concerned, in accordance with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI), and in this regard recalls the statements of the
Legal Counsel at the emergency, 295th, meeting of the Committee, as set out in
document A/AC.154/415, and also at its online informal meeting on 17 Septem ber
2020, recalls the position of the Committee as set out in paragraph 191 (p) of its
previous report 6 and that of the General Assembly as set out in paragraph 15 of its
resolution 76/122 of 9 December 2021, notes the discussions that have been
formalized since the inclusion of subparagraph (p) in chapter IV of the report of the
Committee on Relations with the Host Country in 2019 7 between the Legal Counsel
and the competent authorities of the host country regarding unresolved issues and his
reports on the outcome of these discussions, and further notes with concern that issues
still persist without resolution, recalls in this regard, once more, that serious
consideration should be given to taking steps under section 21 of the Headquarters
Agreement if certain issues raised in the report of the Committee remained unresolved
following a reasonable and finite period of time, and accordingly reiterates its
recommendation to the Secretary-General to now give most serious consideration and
take any appropriate steps under section 21 of the Headquarters Agreement and to
enhance efforts to resolve the issues;
16. Requests the Committee to continue its work in conformity with General
Assembly resolution 2819 (XXVI) and, in this framework, to continue to consider
additional appropriate measures to enhance the work of the Committee and its
effectiveness and to make recommendations in its report to the Assembly at its
seventy-eighth session;
17. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-eighth session
the item entitled “Report of the Committee on Relations with the Host Country”.

__________________
6
7

22-26236

Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-sixth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/76/26).
Ibid., Seventy-fourth Session, Supplement No. 26 (A/74/26).
5/5
