United Nations

S/PV.6120

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6120th meeting
Thursday, 7 May 2009, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Churkin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Russian Federation)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Long Zhou
Mr. Guillermet
Mr. Vilović
Mr. Ripert
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. İlkin
Mr. Rugunda
Mr. Parham
Ms. Rice
Mr. Bui The Giang

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Ninth semi-annual report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2009/218)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-32887 (E)

*0932887*

S/PV.6120

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

the implementation of Security Council resolution
1559 (2004). I now give the floor to Mr. Roed-Larsen.

Adoption of the agenda

Mr. Roed-Larsen: I have the honour today to
present the ninth semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004).

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Ninth semi-annual report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 1559 (2004) (S/2009/218)
The President (spoke in Russian): I should like
to inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Lebanon, in which he requests to
be invited to participate in the consideration of the item
on the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite that representative to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Salam
(Lebanon) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Russian): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Terje RoedLarsen, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
implementation of Security Council resolution 1559
(2004).
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Roed-Larsen to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/218, which contains the ninth semiannual report of the Secretary-General to the Security
Council on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 1559 (2004).
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Terje Roed-Larsen, Special Envoy for

2

One year ago, Lebanon was taken to the brink of
civil war and back. The violence that erupted on 7 May
2008 was one of the greatest threats to the very
foundations of the Lebanese State. A year has passed
since the adoption, on 21 May 2008, of the agreement
between Lebanese political leaders, brokered by the
Emir of Qatar at Doha with the support of the League
of Arab States. Ever since, Lebanon’s domestic
political and security situation has improved markedly.
Fortunately, the commitments made at Doha have
been either implemented or meaningfully acted upon.
Political divisions between the 14 March majority and
8 March opposition have not led to paralysis, although
there have been occasional tensions. President Michel
Sleiman has worked tirelessly to forge national unity.
The general improvement of the situation in the
country, combined with reconciliation efforts in the
region, has created a favourable environment for
strengthening
Lebanon’s
sovereignty,
political
independence and government control throughout the
country.
In this context, I am glad to report today on
further strides towards the full implementation of the
requirements of resolution 1559 (2004).
The momentum created by the summit meeting
held in Damascus in August 2008 between Presidents
Bashar Al-Assad and Michel Sleiman has continued to
bear positive results. On 20 December, the Lebanese
Council of Ministers appointed Michel Khoury as
Lebanon’s first ambassador to Syria. On 22 December,
Syria’s embassy in Beirut became operational. On
16 March 2009, the embassy of Lebanon in Damascus
was inaugurated. On 24 March 2009, President
Sleiman approved the appointment of Ali Abdel Karim
Ali as Syria’s first ambassador to Lebanon. On
20 April, Michel Khoury arrived in Damascus to take
up his post. This very morning, he presented his
credentials to President Bashar Al-Assad. With these
recent steps, Syria and Lebanon have nearly completed
the process leading to the establishment of full
diplomatic relations between the two neighbouring
countries, in fulfilment of resolution 1680 (2006).

09-32887

S/PV.6120

The Secretary-General has maintained his efforts
to encourage Syria and Lebanon to achieve the full
delineation of their common border. In Doha this past
March, Presidents Al-Assad and Sleiman informed the
Secretary-General separately that the joint border
committee would convene rapidly to start its work on
the delineation of the borders, pursuant to the
agreement reached in Damascus between the two
Presidents on 13 and 14 August 2008. On 23 December
2008, President Sleiman issued a presidential decree
naming the Lebanese members of the Lebanese-Syrian
border committee tasked with delineating their
common border. The United Nations is looking forward
to the appointment by Syria of its delegates to the
committee. The Secretary-General welcomes the
renewed commitment of Syria and Lebanon to make
progress on this matter and expects its early
materialization. Tangible progress on the demarcation
of the border is important and will benefit both
countries.
The Secretary-General is glad that relations
between the two historically close neighbours have
improved significantly and have entered a new phase,
particularly with the establishment of diplomatic
relations. The Secretary-General has applauded
Presidents Al-Assad of Syria and Sleiman of Lebanon
for the leadership they have been demonstrating. He
welcomes the renewed commitment by the Government
of Syria, as conveyed in a letter from the Permanent
Representative of Syria to the Secretary-General dated
4 May 2009 (S/2009/227), to preserve the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon, as
called for in resolution 1559 (2004). The United
Nations is hopeful that all these recent achievements
herald a new era of renewed cooperation between the
two countries, in mutual respect for their sovereignty
and political independence.
During the reporting period, diplomatic efforts in
relation to the issue of the Shab’a Farms area have
been continuing. A further report on this will be
contained in the upcoming report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006).
Over the past six months, Israel continued to
occupy the northern part of Ghajar in violation of
Lebanon’s sovereignty and relevant Security Council
resolutions. The Secretary-General has urged his Israeli
interlocutors again over the past few weeks to find an
early solution to this matter.

09-32887

Intrusions into Lebanese airspace by Israeli
aircraft have continued in high numbers, in violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and Security Council resolutions.
The Government of Lebanon continued to protest these
overflights, which the Government of Israel claim are
carried out for security reasons. The United Nations
has repeatedly deplored these violations and called on
Israel to cease these overflights.
Over the past few weeks, the Lebanese authorities
have arrested a series of individuals on suspicion of
spying for Israel. The investigation is ongoing. On
4 May 2009, Prime Minister Siniora publicly addressed
the matter and described it as a serious violation of
Lebanon’s sovereignty. The Prime Minister also
indicated that he had requested his Foreign Minister to
provide full information about these alleged spy
networks to the United Nations. At this stage, the
Secretariat has not yet received any official
communication from the Government of Lebanon
concerning this matter. If these allegations prove to be
true, they would constitute indeed a serious violation
of Lebanon’s sovereignty.
Allow me now to move on to the provision of the
resolution calling for the disarming and disbanding of
Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias. The disbanding
and disarming of Lebanese and non-Lebanese militias
is vital for the complete consolidation of Lebanon as a
sovereign and democratic State. Over the reporting
period, there has been no tangible progress towards the
disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, as called for by the Taif
Accords and resolution 1559 (2004).
The threat that armed groups and militias pose to
the sovereignty and stability of the Lebanese State
cannot be overstated, as the events in May 2008
demonstrated. It creates an atmosphere of intimidation
in the context of the upcoming parliamentary elections.
It also undermines the stability of the region and is
incompatible with the objectives of resolution 1559
(2004), which aims at strengthening Lebanon’s
sovereignty, territorial integrity, unity and political
independence.
There are alarming reports of a large number of
arms in Lebanon, held by groups across Lebanon’s
political spectrum. During the reporting period,
Hizbullah’s leadership has continued to assert that it
has acquired more sophisticated military technology.
The United Nations takes those reports seriously, but

3

S/PV.6120

does not have the means to independently verify them.
In addition, we remain concerned by the porous nature
of Lebanon’s border with the Syrian Arab Republic and
the continuing potential for breaches of the arms
embargo. While the most recent deployment of Syrian
troops along the northern Lebanese border — in
coordination with the Lebanese army — is a positive
step, further operational coordination between Syria
and Lebanon will be required to enhance border
control. In that context, it is noteworthy that the
Government of Syria has denied any involvement in
any illegal transfer of weapons across its border with
Lebanon.

The Secretary-General has called upon the
Lebanese authorities to take the necessary measures,
consistent with the decisions of the National Dialogue,
to dismantle the paramilitary infrastructures outside
refugee camps. While he is keenly aware that that
matter falls primarily under the responsibility of the
Lebanese authorities, he recalls that that the Popular
Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General
Command and Fatah al-Intifadah are both
headquartered in Damascus. Therefore, cooperation
between the Governments of Syria and Lebanon will be
important in addressing this matter in the best interest
of regional stability.

As the Council is aware, the most significant
remaining Lebanese militia is the armed component of
Hizbullah. In addition, several Palestinian militias
operate in the country, inside and outside refugee
camps.

Hizbullah continues to maintain a significant
paramilitary capacity and infrastructure separate from
the State, in violation of Security Council resolution
1559 (2004). That arsenal is a direct challenge to the
sovereignty of the Lebanese State and a threat to
regional stability.

We are concerned by security incidents in and
around Palestinian camps. Some refugee camps
provide safe haven for those who seek to escape the
authority of the State. They constitute a reminder of the
grave threat that armed groups pose to the stability and
sovereignty of Lebanon, underscoring the urgency to
disarm them. Security coordination and cooperation
between the Lebanese security agencies and the
Palestinian factions have improved, and should be
further encouraged. More needs to be done to contain
violence, which could potentially spill over into
surrounding areas.
During the reporting period, the issue of
Palestinian arms outside Lebanon’s 12 official refugee
camps has been discussed again within the National
Dialogue. Those military installations are being
illegally maintained by the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine-General Command and Fatah
al-Intifadah. There are four such military bases located
along the Lebanese-Syrian border, which give those
militias de facto control of parts of the land border.
There is also a fifth such installation, south of Beirut.
While Lebanon’s 14 key political leaders achieved
agreement in the 2006 National Dialogue that those
Palestinian armed positions had to be dismantled
within six months, no progress has been achieved. At
the last session of the National Dialogue, held on
28 April, Lebanese political leaders reiterated the
necessity to implement previous decisions by the
National Dialogue. The time has come to implement
that important decision.

4

Over the past few weeks, there has been a
growing concern that Hizbullah has engaged in
clandestine and illegal militant activities beyond
Lebanese territory. Indeed, on 8 April, the General
Prosecutor of Egypt announced that 49 people had
been arrested based on information from State security
investigations. According to the General Prosecutor,
they have allegedly been part of a cell assigned by
Hizbullah “to plan and carry out hostile operations on
Egyptian soil”. On 10 April, the Secretary-General of
Hizbullah, Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah, publicly
acknowledged that Egyptian authorities had detained a
Hizbullah operative for attempting to provide logistical
and military assistance to Gaza-based militants.
On 26 April 2009, I met in Cairo with the
President of Egypt and his Foreign Minister. They
shared with me preliminary elements of the
investigation into the cell and requested that I convey
them to the Secretary-General. Pursuant to that visit,
the Foreign Minister of Egypt held a telephone
conversation with the Secretary-General in which he
indicated that the Government of Egypt would keep the
United Nations abreast of the results of the ongoing
investigation.
In a recent correspondence, the Government of
Egypt informed the Secretary-General that, a cell led
by a Lebanese member of Hizbullah had been
uncovered during 2008. Using a real passport with a
false identity, the Hizbullah operative had visited

09-32887

S/PV.6120

Egypt over several years, where he recruited members
for the network. The Government of Egypt has shared
with the Secretary-General a number of details
concerning the plans, resources and actions of the cell,
as well as about the materials and devices confiscated.
In a televised speech on 29 April, the SecretaryGeneral of Hizbullah, Sayyed Hassan Nasrallah,
rejected the accusations made by the Egyptian
authorities that the organization was aiming to
destabilize the country. The Government of Egypt
informed the United Nations that the issue was now in
the hands of the judiciary authorities of Egypt.
The Secretary-General’s report on resolution
1559 (2004) has expressed concern about the
statements made by Hizbullah leaders and has
condemned such unwarranted interference in the
domestic affairs of a Member State. Equally alarming
is the fact that Hizbullah has publicly admitted to
providing support to Gaza-based militants from
Egyptian territory. Those activities exceed Hizbullah’s
stated national agenda.
The issue of Hizbullah’s weapons continues to be
central to the political debate in Lebanon. The
Secretary-General reiterates his conviction that the
disarming and disbanding of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias should take place through an
inclusive political dialogue that addresses the political
interests of all Lebanese. It should ultimately confirm
the sole political and military authority of the
Government of Lebanon. Hizbullah should therefore
cease any militant activities outside of Lebanon and
complete its transformation into a solely Lebanese
political party, consistent with the requirements of the
Taif Agreement. Regional parties, particularly those
that maintain close ties with Hizbullah, must encourage
it in the same direction.
We are pleased that the National Dialogue, under
the auspices of the President of the Republic, has
continued to convene on a quasi-monthly basis to
develop a national defence strategy, which should
consider ways to enhance the authority of the State.
The last session was held on 28 April. In previous
sessions, the participants committed themselves, inter
alia, to work to guarantee a political and security
climate favourable to the peaceful conduct of the
Parliamentary election, devoid of violence and with
calm electoral rhetoric. It was also agreed that experts

09-32887

would continue to seek to develop a national defence
strategy. The next session will convene on 1 June.
The Dialogue touches upon fundamental issues
that will affect Lebanon’s future and character as a
State well beyond the immediate horizon. However,
while recognizing the merits of the process, the overall
gains of the National Dialogue remain limited at this
stage. All Lebanese leaders must approach this process
in a spirit of cooperation and exert every effort towards
a positive and concrete outcome that formalizes the
Government of Lebanon’s monopoly over the use of
force within Lebanon’s boundaries and results in
progress towards the disarmament of all Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias, consistent with Security
Council resolutions and the Taif Agreement. That is
also essential for the stability of the region. We remain
mindful of the regional ramifications of this issue, and
therefore call on all parties, inside and outside of
Lebanon, to halt immediately all efforts to transfer and
acquire weapons and build para-military capacities
outside the authority of the State.
The United Nations would like to pay tribute to
the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF), which play a
crucial role in strengthening Lebanon’s sovereignty
and control over the whole country, thereby promoting
stability in Lebanon and beyond. The multiple security
responsibilities of the LAF, compounded by the fact
that it lacks adequate military equipment, have an
impact on its capacity to meet its obligations under
relevant Security Council resolutions. I therefore call
on donor countries to continue to come forward and
assist the LAF to improve its logistical and operational
capabilities.
In sum, I recall that since the adoption of
resolution 1559 (2004) in September 2004, several of
its provisions have now been implemented.
Presidential elections took place in May 2008. Syria
withdrew its troops and military assets from Lebanon
in April 2005. Lebanon and Syria have established
diplomatic relations and engaged in high-level talks on
matters of relevance to Lebanon’s sovereignty, political
independence and territorial integrity, such as the
delineation of an international boundary between the
two countries, as strongly encouraged by the Security
Council in its resolution 1680 (2006).
However, we remain concerned by the occasional
security incidents during the reporting period, some of
which have led to casualties. These occurrences

5

S/PV.6120

highlight the proliferation of weapons and armed
groups that continue to operate in Lebanon and whose
existence is an ongoing violation of resolution 1559
(2004). These are direct threats to the stability of the
country and the region as a whole. The threats posed
by the existence of militias outside the control of the
State render valid the remaining provisions of
resolution 1559 (2004) as they relate to the
disarmament of all armed groups and the extension of
the Government’s control throughout the country. The
disbanding and disarming of Lebanese and
non-Lebanese militias is a necessary element to the
complete consolidation of Lebanon as a sovereign and
democratic State.
The upcoming parliamentary elections scheduled
for 7 June 2009 will constitute a new milestone in the
momentous transition that Lebanon has undertaken
since the adoption of resolution 1559 (2004). It is
indeed heartening that the Lebanese leaders have
committed themselves to free and fair elections void of
violence and inflammatory rhetoric. It is indeed
essential that the parties continue to adhere to the Doha
Accord, including the commitment to refrain from the
use of weapons to settle internal political disputes. The
leaders of Lebanon must think first and foremost about

the future of their country and transcend sectarian and
individual interests. On 7 June, the Lebanese people
will have a unique opportunity to express their genuine
commitment to democracy.
It is a clear imperative that Lebanon preserve its
comprehensive political framework of coexistence as
set out in the Taif Agreement in an atmosphere free
from intimidation.
The Secretary-General calls on all parties and all
actors to fully abide by resolutions 1559 (2004), 1680
(2006) and 1701 (2006). He will continue his efforts
for the purpose of achieving full implementation of
these and all other relevant Security Council
resolutions concerning the restoration of the territorial
integrity, full sovereignty and political independence of
Lebanon.
The President (spoke in Russian): I thank
Mr. Roed-Larsen for his briefing.
I have no more speakers on my list. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

6

09-32887
