A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/114
20 January 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 101
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/53/616)]
53/114. Strengthening the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice
Programme, in particular its technical cooperation capacity
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 46/152 of 18 December 1991 on the creation of an effective United Nations
crime prevention and criminal justice programme, in which it approved the statement of principles and
programme of action annexed to that resolution,
Bearing in mind the goals of the United Nations in the field of crime prevention and criminal justice,
specifically the reduction of criminality, more efficient and effective law enforcement and administration of
justice, respect for human rights and promotion of the highest standards of fairness, humanity and
professional conduct,
Convinced of the desirability of closer coordination and cooperation among States in combating crime,
including drug-related crimes such as money-laundering, illicit arms trade and terrorist crimes, bearing in
mind the role that could be played by both the United Nations and regional organizations in this respect,
Recognizing the urgent need to increase technical cooperation activities in order to assist countries, in
particular developing countries and countries with economies in transition, with their efforts in translating
United Nations policy guidelines into practice,

99-76345

/...

A/RES/53/114
Page 2

Recalling its relevant resolutions in which it requested the Secretary-General, as a matter of urgency, to
provide the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme with sufficient resources for
the full implementation of its mandate, in conformity with the high priority attached to the Programme,
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made in the
implementation of General Assembly resolution 52/90 of 12 December 1997;1
2. Reaffirms the importance of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme
and the crucial role it has to play in promoting effective action to strengthen international cooperation in
crime prevention and criminal justice, in responding to the needs of the international community in the face of
both national and transnational criminality and in assisting Member States in achieving the goals of
preventing crime within and among States and improving the response to crime;
3. Also reaffirms the priority of the Programme, in accordance with the relevant resolutions, and
requests the Secretary-General further to strengthen the Programme by providing it with the resources
necessary for the full implementation of its mandate, including follow-up action to the Naples Political
Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized Transnational Crime, adopted by the World
Ministerial Conference on Organized Transnational Crime, held at Naples, Italy, from 21 to 23 November
1994,2 and to the Ninth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders,
held at Cairo from 29 April to 8 May 1995;3
4. Further reaffirms the high priority attached to technical cooperation and advisory services in the
field of crime prevention and criminal justice, and stresses the need to continue to improve the operational
activities of the Programme, in particular in developing countries and countries with economies in transition,
in order to meet the needs of Member States, at their request, for support in crime prevention and criminal
justice;
5. Encourages the ongoing efforts of the Centre for International Crime Prevention of the Office for
Drug Control and Crime Prevention of the Secretariat to obtain executing agency status with the United
Nations Development Programme;
6. Calls upon States and United Nations funding agencies to make significant financial contributions
for the operational activities of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme, and
encourages all States to make voluntary contributions for that purpose to the United Nations Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice Fund, taking into account the activities required for the implementation of
the Naples Political Declaration and Global Action Plan against Organized Transnational Crime;
7. Expresses its appreciation to non-governmental organizations and other relevant sectors of civil
society for their support to the Programme, and encourages them to increase such support;
8. Calls upon States to review funding policies for development assistance so as to include crime
prevention and criminal justice in such assistance;

1

A/53/380.

2

A/49/748, annex, chap. I, sect. A.

3

See A/CONF.169/16/Rev.1.
/...

A/RES/53/114
Page 3

9. Calls upon all relevant programmes, funds and organizations of the United Nations system, in
particular the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and other international, regional and
national funding agencies, to support technical operational activities in this field;
10. Takes note with appreciation of the contributions of the United Nations Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice Programme to United Nations peacekeeping and special missions, as well as its
contributions to the follow-up to those missions, inter alia, through advisory services, and encourages the
Secretary-General, as a way of strengthening the rule of law, to recommend the inclusion of the reestablishment and reform of judicial and criminal justice systems in peacekeeping operations;
11. Requests the Executive Director of the Office for Drug Control and Crime Prevention to continue
to strengthen cooperation between the United Nations International Drug Control Programme and the Centre
for International Crime Prevention, in particular in the areas of transnational organized crime and moneylaundering;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary measures to assist the Commission on Crime
Prevention and Criminal Justice, as the principal policy-making body in this field, in performing its activities,
including cooperation and coordination with other relevant bodies, such as the Commission on Narcotic
Drugs, the Commission on Human Rights and the Commission on the Status of Women;
13. Calls upon the open-ended intergovernmental ad hoc committee, established on the
recommendation of the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice, for the purpose of elaborating
a comprehensive international convention against transnational organized crime to devote attention to the
drafting of the main text of the convention, as well as, as appropriate, of international instruments addressing
trafficking in women and children, combating the illicit manufacturing of and trafficking in firearms, their
parts and components and ammunition, and illegal trafficking in and transporting of migrants, including by
sea;
14. Welcomes the efforts undertaken by the Commission on Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice to
improve the strategic management of the United Nations Crime Prevention and Criminal Justice Programme
and to exercise more vigorously its mandated function of resource mobilization, and calls upon the
Commission to strengthen further its activities in this direction;
15. Also welcomes the decision of the Commission to mainstream a gender perspective into all its
activities and its request to the Secretariat that a gender perspective be integrated into all activities of the
Centre for International Crime Prevention;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the implementation of the present resolution
to the General Assembly at its fifty-fourth session.
85th plenary meeting
9 December 1998
