S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9181st meeting

Thursday, 3 November 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Oppong-Ntiri . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Qorri
Mr. Figueiredo Sobral Torres
Mr. Yao Jialiang
Ms. Fériaud
Mrs. Onanga
Mr. Adhana
Ms. Drumm
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. Ríos Sánchez
Ms. Erno
Mr. Tretiakov
Ms. Tantawy
Mr. Weld-Blundell
Ms. Strainic

Agenda
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Integrating effective resilience-building in peace operations for sustainable peace
Letter dated 24 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Ghana to
the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/799)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-67336 (E)
*2267336*

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Chatrnúch (Slovakia): Slovakia welcomes
the opportunity to share its remarks on this important
topic and start a conversation on reconfiguring
United Nations peace operations to ensure a situationally
determined balance between kinetic and non-kinetic
actions aimed at restoring peace and addressing the
underlying causes of conflict. Slovakia attaches great
importance to a comprehensive approach to sustaining
peace, particularly through the prevention of conflict
and addressing its root causes; national reconciliation
and unity, including through inclusive dialogue and
mediation; gender equality; and respect for, and the
protection of, human rights and fundamental freedoms.

03/11/2022

society with the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women, youth and persons with disabilities.
Moreover, youth can play an important role in
conflict prevention. It has been proven to be the case
that, when young people are meaningfully engaged in
peace processes, the outcomes are usually more lasting
and sustainable. Therefore, it is important to underline
the importance for peace operations to have a strong
youth, peace and security dimension. Nevertheless,
supporting youth advocates goes beyond just giving
them a platform. It is about building capacity, fostering
partnerships and fully integrating their perspective
across the full spectrum of work.
Last but not least, let me assure you, Madam
President, that Slovakia, as the co-Chair of the Group
of Friends of Security Sector Reform, together with
South Africa, stands ready to provide continued support
and commitment to the United Nations security sector
reform agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.

We believe that sustaining peace in Africa is a
challenge that needs to be addressed in a holistic way.
For many years, Slovakia has long identified security
sector reform (SSR) to be one of the key elements
for effective conflict prevention and successful postconflict rebuilding and stabilization. The direct
experience of many United Nations and African
Union peace missions and operations clearly shows
that a nationally led and inclusive SSR process can
progressively deal with the root causes of insecurity
and fragility and create an enabling environment for
bringing about sustainable development and peace.

Ms. Brandt (Netherlands): Let me start by
congratulating you, Madam President, on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for this month and
thanking you for organizing this open debate. We also
thank the briefers for their insightful contributions.

In that context, we need to accord priority
support to broadening inclusion and diversity so that
peacebuilding processes are nationally owned in the
fullest sense. Slovakia also recognizes the importance
of the women and peace and security agenda in
contributing to peacekeeping operations that create the
conditions for stability and lasting peace. The combined
contributions of uniformed women peacekeepers and
local women networks and organizations ensure that
women’s concerns are part of conflict prevention and
resolution efforts. In that context, Slovakia appreciates
resolution 2594 (2021) on United Nations peacekeeping
missions’ transitions, which underlines the need to
include engagement with the local community and civil

We align ourselves with the statement to be made
on behalf of the European Union, and I would like to
make three points in my national capacity.

2/21

As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) and a champion of performance and the protection
of civilians, as defined within the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping agenda, the Kingdom of the
Netherlands feels that this debate on resilience and the
nexus between peacebuilding and peacekeeping is both
timely and of crucial importance.

First, it is crucial that peace operations have
strategic political mandates that include long-term
objectives to enhance resilience and achieve sustainable
peace. That means that adequate attention for transition
needs to be incorporated into mandates from the very
start of the operation. We believe that, in order to
achieve that, a stronger role for the PBC is warranted.
The PBC is well-placed to provide timely strategic
guidance on peacebuilding efforts during consultations
and briefings on mandate renewals.
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Secondly, when it comes to peacebuilding, we
support the systematic inclusion of areas such as
inclusive justice, mental health and psychosocial
support, and, as my colleague from Slovakia just
mentioned, the full integration of the women and peace
and security and the youth, peace and security agendas.
And we really need to increase our work with local
actors in those areas if we want to build resilience and
sustainable peace, especially at the community level.
Thirdly, with regard to funding, although the point
has already been made, let me repeat that investing
in prevention and peacebuilding is one of the best
investments that we can make. It has been proven to
work, save lives and, in the end, save money. Clearly,
peacebuilding is not a short-term, one-off effort.
Therefore, short-term, one-off funding will not work
either. Building peaceful inclusive societies requires
long-term commitment and predictable funding, which
requires genuine commitment that also translates into
some form of assessed contributions.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands takes that
commitment to adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding for peacebuilding seriously and has therefore
decided to contribute an additional €10 million to the
Peacebuilding Fund on top of our annual contribution
of €20 million — which speaks to the issue of adequate
funding. And we have made that commitment for a
period of five years — which speaks to the issue of
predictable and sustainable funding.
Lastly, we feel that there is great value in
coordinating efforts with organizations such as the
African Union and international financial institutions
such as the World Bank. Joint analysis has already
proven itself to be valuable, for instance, in the Sahel,
and we strongly encourage further cooperation and
coordinated action among all players — whether local
or international — as we have a common interest
in investing in effective resilience-building and
sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank Ghana for organizing
this ministerial-level open debate.
We strongly believe that, in any conflict situation,
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions
is key to achieving a sustainable peace that is resilient in
the face of today’s multifaceted challenges that threaten

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

human security in many parts of the world. In order to
overcome such challenges, it is indeed time to update
and strengthen the functions of the United Nations,
including its peace operations.
Today I would like to offer a few ideas on how
United Nations peace operations, namely, peacekeeping
operations and special political missions, can work
with United Nations entities and other partners to
more effectively promote institution-building and
resilience-building for sustainable peace.
First, the role of United Nations peace operations
to coordinate and integrate efforts to support nationally
led peacebuilding activities must be strengthened. In
situations in which United Nations peace operations are
deployed, the bulk of peacebuilding activities are shared
and implemented by a wide range of partners, including
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes,
international
financial
institutions,
regional
organizations and civil society organizations, to name
a few. In that environment, the most important role of
United Nations peace operations is that of coordination
and integration, and we strongly believe that that role
should be further strengthened. Meanwhile, other
partners, including Member States, can contribute to
coordination and integration by promoting openness
and transparency regarding their own activities and by
recognizing each other’s roles and advantages.
Secondly, the Security Council should more
regularly request, deliberate on and draw upon the
advice of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), so that
the activities of peace operations can take into account
the longer-term perspective required for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace, consistent with each mission’s
specific situation on the ground. In that regard, I
commend Ghana, as President, for having invited the
PBC to provide written advice to the Security Council
on today’s discussion.
Thirdly, on the question of sustainable funding in
support of resilience-building against security threats,
including in the Sahel and coastal West Africa, we should
further leverage the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF), as well
as the Peacebuilding Commission, to promote a more
coordinated, effective and sustainable use of resources.
The PBC should bring together all relevant actors to
marshal resources where the need for addressing
threats is identified, while the PBF should strengthen
its primary function as a seed fund to mobilize other
bilateral and multilateral financial resources.

22-673363/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Moving forward, Japan will remain committed to
supporting resilience-building and efforts to address
the underlying root causes of conflict in order to
advance sustaining peace.
The President : I now give the floor to Mr. Gonzato.
Mr. Gonzato: First, let me congratulate Ghana on
assuming the presidency of the Security Council for the
month of November – I should have done so yesterday,
but I forgot, so I am doing it today.
We welcome today’s open debate on how to better
equip peace operations to address the underlying causes
of conflict and promote sustainable peace.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries North Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia, Albania, Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova,
the country of the Stabilization and Association Process
and potential candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as Georgia, align themselves with this statement.
The European Union and the United Nations
enjoy a close strategic partnership on peace operations
and crisis management, dating back two decades.
Today 13 of the 18 EU missions and operations around
the world work side by side with United Nations
missions, for example in the Central African Republic,
Somalia, Libya and Iraq.
Promoting a holistic approach to conflict prevention
and crisis management is an essential element of EU
foreign and security policy. The support to dialogue,
reconciliation and mediation of agreements to end
violent conflict are demonstrated best practices to
address conflict. However, building resilient peace
means looking beyond peace agreements and taking
into account long-term reconciliation, social cohesion,
institution-building, respect for human rights and
economic development. It also means continuously
working on the underlying root causes of conflict,
such as climate change, food insecurity, inequality and
fragile governance.
In the Sahel, the United Nations, supported by
the EU, promotes stability and peace through a range
of actions focusing on peacebuilding, dialogue,
mediation and stabilization. An example of that is the
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)-led
and EU-funded stabilization facility for the LiptakoGourma region, which supports the establishment of
State authority and the delivery of essential services. In
4/21

03/11/2022

West Africa, the EU also focuses on conflict prevention
with a multi-country “arc of stability” action of
€17 million to address the risks of contagion of the
Sahelian crisis in the coastal countries of Côte d’Ivoire,
Senegal, Guinea, Ghana, Togo and Benin.
Working as One United Nations and across the
humanitarian-development-peace nexus is essential
to ensuring a coherent strategy in support of breaking
the vicious cycles of conflict. To that end, the EU
pledging conferences on the Horn of Africa and the
Sahel successfully brought together humanitarian,
development and peace instruments and actors, thereby
ensuring a comprehensive response to those crises.
Another example is the FREXUS project on improving
security and climate resilience in fragile contexts
through the water-energy-food security nexus, in
the Niger river basin and Lake Chad basin, which is
co-funded by the EU with €4 million.
The women and peace and security and youth and
peace and security agendas are mainstreamed across our
EU-United Nations joint priorities. The EU promotes
gender mainstreaming and the participation of women
in conflict prevention, as much as in conflict response
and recovery. À good example of how that can be
built into prevention measures is the Liptako-Gourma
stabilization facility, which emphasizes the role of
women in generating and sustaining livelihoods – an
important factor in relaunching local economies.
The recent Youth Action Plan in EU External
Action is aimed at strengthening engagement with
young people worldwide and will contribute to the
implementation of the United Nations youth and peace
and security agenda. Among other actions, the EU will
incorporate the youth, peace and security dimension
into conflict prevention and crisis management efforts.
The Security Council must be informed by and
work in sync with United Nations country offices and
organizations specializing in conflict prevention and
sustaining peace. À good example of tapping into the
expertise of United Nations agencies is the Climate
Security Mechanism, which brings together the
conflict prevention and early warning expertise of the
Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs with the climate
mitigation and adaptation expertise of UNDP and the
United Nations Environment Programme.
The establishment of the Informal Expert Group on
Climate and Security is also an important example of
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

connecting the Security Council to other organs of the
United Nations to better address the emerging threat
of climate and security. The EU and its member States
support many of the United Nations bodies that focus
on various aspects of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, including the Standby Team of Senior Mediation
Advisers, the Peace and Development Advisers and
the Peacebuilding Fund. Those are only some of the
many valuable aspects of the conflict prevention and
sustaining peace architecture of the United Nations.
There is clearly a need for a strengthened and
more coherent approach to peace and security. We
fully support an ambitious New Agenda for Peace, as
proposed by the Secretary-General. We look forward to
contributing and engaging in a global conversation on
that important initiative in the coming months.
Finally, as always, sustainable funding is a key part
of the puzzle. Since 2004, the EU has provided some
€3 billion in support of African-led peace and security
operations on the continent. We will remain heavily
engaged, politically and financially, as demonstrated
by the recent adoption of a €600 million package in
support of the African Union’s mandated peace and
security operations on the continent for the period
2022–2024.
The EU has 11 training and capacity-building
missions across Africa, providing training to more
than 30,000 African soldiers, police officers and
magistrates. The European Peace Facility is now up
and running. It has already adopted several support
measures for African countries and has more in the
pipeline. In all those efforts, we encourage cohesion
with the peacebuilding and stabilization efforts of
African subregional organizations and initiatives, such
as the Southern African Development Community, the
Economic Community of West African States or the
Accra Initiative.
The EU and its member States are among the biggest
contributors to the Peacebuilding Fund, providing more
than 60 per cent of the funding to that mechanism. We
do, however, recognize the gap between demand and
available resources of the Peacebuilding Fund and
peacebuilding efforts at large. We therefore welcome the
adoption by consensus of General Assembly resolution
76/305 on financing for peacebuilding, facilitated by
Kenya and Sweden, which sends a strong signal about
the shared commitment of all States Members of the
United Nations to peacebuilding. We now need to

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

match that political signal with adequate and concrete
financial commitments, and we look forward to a
positive outcome in the Fifth Committee in that regard,
in addition to other forms of support to peacebuilding
by the United Nations membership as a whole.
More broadly, the EU is committed to creating
more sustainability and predictability in the funding
of peace operations. At the African Union-EU Summit
held earlier this year, the European Union and the
African Union committed to continue our support to
African-led peace support operations and the ongoing
discussions to use United Nations assessed contributions
for operations authorized by the Security Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Chile.
Mrs. Narváez Ojeda (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Chile thanks the Permanent Mission of Ghana for
convening this timely debate, and the briefers for their
important interventions.
Peace operations can be considered one of the
most visible tools of the work of the United Nations,
but we recognize that the complex international context
in which we find ourselves subjects them to various
tensions and new needs. For example, the spread of
the coronavirus disease intensified many national and
international conflicts as a result of the social and
economic tensions caused by the health crisis, which
directly affected peace operations throughout the world.
Against a global backdrop marked by the complexity
of conflicts and after more than 70 years of history,
peace operations face a particularly worrisome political
environment for multilateralism, which has been greatly
aggravated in some parts of the world by the emergence
of ultranationalism, xenophobia and populism.
In view of the difficult scenarios that peace
operations must confront, a comprehensive and
multidimensional approach to conflicts is required in
order to address their structural causes. In the same
vein, priority attention must be given to existing
vulnerabilities, which compound inequalities, poverty,
the loss of ecosystems, the scarcity of resources, the
spread of disease and forced displacement.
Moreover, we cannot forget that peace operations
are often deployed in areas severely damaged by
climate change. In order to achieve successful peace
operations, coordinated work among the three pillars
of the United Nations system is essential, especially

22-673365/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

with regard to the need to harmonize the objectives of
international peace and security with the Sustainable
Development Goals and human rights provisions.
Therefore, peace operations should also seek to foster
stable, more just and inclusive societies that are based
on the rule of law, human rights and the empowerment
of young people and women, among other principles. I
would like to emphasize that women’s empowerment
can be achieved only through the increased presence
of women in peacekeeping contingents and leadership
positions linked to decision-making. In that connection,
28 per cent of Chilean peacekeepers deployed to
missions as military experts are women, and that level
is slated to reach 57 per cent by December.
In addition, we must take into consideration the
various threats faced by field operations, such as
organized crime, terrorist attacks, cyberattacks and
pandemics. That also means that the security of Blue
Helmets must be among the Organization’s priorities.
Finally, the work of regional mechanisms for peace
and security in accordance with Chapter VIII of the
Charter of the United Nations — such as the European
Union and the African Union, which have a wealth of
experience in the field of peace operations — should
be highlighted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia): Let me first congratulate
you, Madam, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council and wish you and your able team
every success during this month. I thank the briefers
for their insightful presentations and commend you on
the decision to dedicate your first signature event to
discussing the issues of effective resilience-building in
peace operations for sustainable peace.
I am glad that today’s topic recalls similar
discussions initiated by previous African members
of the Council aimed at highlighting the need for this
organ, in discharging its primary responsibilities, to
take into consideration the changing security landscape
and fully address the underlying causes and drivers of
conflict. In fact, despite the active engagement of the
Council in the maintenance of international peace and
security by making use of the various tools at its disposal
as provided for in the Charter of the United Nations,
sustainable peace remains beyond reach in many parts
of the world.
6/21

03/11/2022

That is especially the case in fragile contexts in
Africa, where a number of underlying, diverse and
interconnected drivers have undermined the resilience
of populations, exacerbating existing tensions, fuelling
cycles of violence and protracting conflicts. Such
drivers include the spread of terrorism and violent
extremism benefiting from the illegal trafficking of
natural resources, organized crime and the smuggling
of small arms, chronic poverty, mass unemployment,
exclusion and growing inequalities, which have all
fuelled tension and discontent among populations.
The absence of State authority and efficient
institutions often provide breeding grounds and
safe havens for terrorist groups, transnational crime
networks and violent non-State actors, who use those
contexts as strongholds to conduct their destabilizing
operations locally and on a larger scale, threatening the
stability, security and even the territorial integrity of
neighbouring States.
The disastrous impact of environmental shocks
due to climate change, combined with threats to food
security, risk reviving intercommunal violence and add
another layer of complexity when it comes to addressing
peace and security in those contexts.
Some Council members may argue that some
underlying drivers of instability and conflicts do not
fall within the mandate of the Security Council. It has
to be pointed out, however, that failing to address those
issues properly has clearly impacted the efficiency of
the Security Council and undermined its credibility. If
left unattended, such structural factors could jeopardize
efforts aimed at restoring peace and security and
contribute to the resurgence of conflicts during or after
peace operations. They might even have a spillover
effect that amplifies insecurity at the regional level,
given their cross-boundary nature.
It is clear that those security challenges require the
Council to reflect further on how to ensure that peace
operations respond in such fragile contexts through
better coordinated and tailor-made mandates that also
integrate effective measures for building resilient
communities and bridging efforts related to State
institution-building.
Today more than ever, the Security Council is
required to devise comprehensive approaches to
international peace and security, including in terms of its
interaction and cooperation with other United Nations
organs, regional organizations, especially the African
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Union, and international financial institutions, in
order to support national and regional efforts to build
resilient communities and facilitate complementary
and coherent responses for sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): My delegation
expresses its appreciation to you, Madam, and your
delegation for convening this important meeting to shine
a spotlight on the imperative role of resilience-building
in peace operations to sustain peace. We extend our
gratitude to Secretary-General António Guterres and
all of our briefers for their insightful interventions
this morning.
South Africa reiterates its support for United
Nations peacekeeping as one of the mechanisms at the
Organization’s disposal for promoting international
peace and security, especially the protection of
civilians. We echo the view that we should pursue
peacekeeping operations that are relevant, effective,
efficient and fit for purpose in a changing and dynamic
environment. The evolving nature of threats, the
dynamism of international peace and security and
the complex, volatile and dangerous environments in
which peacekeeping missions operate, including their
increasing exposure to asymmetrical threats, requires
us to continually strengthen collective resilience and
adaptation in the wider peacemaking architecture.
As many speakers have highlighted in today’s
debate, peace operations have undergone significant
shifts since they were first conceived of. Those
changes, accompanied by an evolving dynamic
environment, call for adaptation and resilience in peace
operations in order to ensure that they meet present
and future security needs. We were also reminded
today by some delegations, including that of Kenya,
that the idea of peacekeeping operations in itself was
an innovation that was not included in the Charter of
the United Nations. Peacekeeping by its nature should
therefore continually evolve and adapt to changing
circumstances. Nevertheless, in ensuring the evolution
of peacekeeping, we should use all its existing tools
mandated by the Security Council to their full extent.
For example, the existing doctrine gives peacekeeping
missions sufficient tools to fulfil their mandates for
the protection of civilians, so it is when peacekeeping
missions underperform in those areas that their
efficiency and utility are questioned.

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

We are pleased that the ongoing reform process of
United Nations peacekeeping operations is exploring
the use of new technologies to enhance their efficiency
and effectiveness in terms of strategic communications,
as well as ensuring the safety and security of
peacekeepers, shelter and camp management, health,
the protection of civilians and the overall efficient
implementation of the mandates. South Africa had the
honour of hosting the sixth International Partnership
for Technology in Peacekeeping Symposium in June,
where we discussed the role of advanced modern
technology in peacekeeping operations and identified
the successes, challenges and opportunities that the
United Nations could leverage.
We would like to join other speakers in underscoring
that transformative and innovative strategies must
be adopted as part of resilience-building in peace
operations. They include but are not limited to the full
implementation of commitments made to advancing
the women and peace and security agenda. We must
therefore pursue every means of ensuring targeted
recruitment and the availability of facilities that are
adequate and appropriate for women peacekeepers, as
well as women’s mentorship and training programmes,
in order to increase the level of women’s participation
in peacekeeping operations.
We would also like to emphasize the importance
of partnerships between the United Nations, regional
organizations and subregional organizations. In line
with the outcome of the sixteenth African Union-United
Nations joint consultative meeting, held on 14 October,
the African Union (AU) and regional organizations
continue to be at the forefront of working to pacify
conflicts on our continent in support of the Security
Council’s mandate to maintain international peace
and security. In that context, we reiterate our call
for the United Nations to do its part and contribute
to the financing of AU-led peace support operations
authorized by the Council from its core resources, as
recognized in many of its resolutions, in particular
resolutions 2320 (2016) and 2378 (2017).
Finally, we underscore the importance of synergies
and complementarity between peacebuilding and
peacekeeping and call for enhanced collaboration
between the Peacebuilding Commission and the
Security Council, particularly during the consideration
of mission mandates and transition periods.

22-673367/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President : I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Gaouaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic) : At
the outset, I would like to congratulate you, Madam
President, on your country’s assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council this month and
express the Algerian delegation’s best wishes for
success in your tasks. We also thank the SecretaryGeneral and the briefers for their statements.
Our meeting’s topic today is a good and very
important choice, especially for Africa, which continues
to be plagued by conflicts and crises. Algeria shares
the view that every peacekeeping operation should
strive to restore sustainable security, consolidate and
maintain the pillars of stability and create a foundation
for rebuilding peace, sustainable development and
preventing conflict, coupled with working to address
the root causes of crises and conflicts and eliminating
them through peaceful dialogue and negotiations. The
success of a transitional phase towards a peaceful
solution is tied to the extent to which peacekeeping
operations support efforts aimed at genuinely realizing
the goals of concluded peace agreements, as well as
the political arrangements agreed between the parties
to the conflict. In view of that basic role, and before
the mandate of any peace process is terminated, its
mandate and mission should be completely fulfilled
and its withdrawal carried out gradually and in a way
that ensures that no security vacuum is created that
could lead to a relapse into violence and conflict.
The
peacebuilding
process
requires
the
establishment of a coherent, comprehensive national
political structure based on legitimacy through
elections, the building of a constitutional base, the
establishment of strong national institutions in all fields
that crystallize good governance, the rule of law, justice
and respect for human rights without discrimination
or exclusion. The process of rebuilding peace is
not complete without the political will to develop a
comprehensive strategy for building society with the
participation of all actors. At the same time, one of the
dangers of conflicts is the huge amounts of weapons that
flow from within or from outside and are difficult to
control, whether during a conflict or even after it ends.
So the activation of disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration programmes during and after conflicts
plays an important role in restoring stability and aligns
with strengthening national military capabilities and
unifying their ranks to ensure security and stability
8/21

03/11/2022

throughout countries’ territories and confront various
threats, including those of armed and terrorist groups
and the proliferation of weapons.
We are fully aware that the rapid evolution of
security threats in both scope and nature may at times
exceed the ability of peace operations to respond to them,
and in some cases those threats can pose an imminent
danger not only to civilians but to peacekeepers
themselves. That is unfortunately something we
have witnessed in recent attacks by terrorist groups
on the sites and personnel of some United Nations
peacekeeping operations. In order to address those
asymmetric threats, we must strengthen early-warning
systems, enhance the capacity of States and their
competent national structures to combat terrorism
and violent extremism, strengthen cooperation among
national agencies, including regional and international
ones, intensify coordination in the exchange of
information, promote national security at borders and
combat organized crime, which is frequently a source
of funding for terrorist and extremist groups.
In conclusion, raising the level of prevention
and prior warning against any security threats in the
peacebuilding phase in order to avoid a return to conflict
requires strengthening the capacity of individuals and
societies by spreading awareness and educational
programmes. Moreover, building peace requires
international support and accompaniment, especially
in developing the economy and infrastructure to ensure
sustainable development.
The President : I now give the floor to the
representative of Peru.
Mr. Llosa (Peru) (spoke in Spanish) : I would first
like to thank Ghana, in its capacity as President of the
Security Council, for inviting us here and taking the
initiative to convene today’s open debate, which is an
opportunity for us to examine together the need to
integrate the aspect of resilience into peace operations
in order to achieve sustainable peace.
The traditional practices of peace operations are
being enhanced by taking into account the need to
structure approaches to ensuring resilience in areas
previously affected by conflict. It is therefore essential
to build trusting relations between the personnel
of peace missions and key local actors, such as the
national authorities, the private and productive sectors
and local and grass-roots movements, such as those led
by women and young people.
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The structure of such approaches should be
consistent with processes of transition from conflict to
peacebuilding, as well as being reflected in the mission
mandates established by the Security Council, while
taking into account key principles, such as respect
for human rights, the promotion of gender equality,
the strengthening of the rule of law, the eradication
of poverty and the building of robust and resilient
institutions, in order to achieve peaceful coexistence.
Peru strongly supports the gradual evolution of
the regulatory and operational frameworks of peace
operations. We are committed to that in our own
diplomatic activities, which is why we have actively
contributed to six operations aimed at consolidating
peace in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Sudan, South Sudan, Abyei
and Lebanon. That is further demonstration of our
commitment to multilateralism and collective security.
With regard to the root causes of conflict and
insecurity in areas where missions are deployed, Peru
believes that the development of approaches to building
resilience must be based on flexible criteria and
independent evaluation indicators and benchmarks on
a case-by-case basis, as well as ethical considerations,
moral imperatives and the fact that strengthening
governance leads to increased trust and the restructuring
of the social fabric, in which civil-society partnerships
and other civic groups are the main stakeholders.
In that regard, and in order to support national
and regional efforts to address conflict situations,
we believe that effective resilience must include
the participation of women and young people in
the various decision-making bodies and processes,
particularly with regard to all aspects related to peace
and transition processes involving previously conflictaffected areas. That should involve their leadership
in their communities, their increased participation in
political life and their inclusion in economic recovery
and transitional justice processes.
It is vital that coordination efforts between the
Security Council and United Nations agencies engaged
in resilience planning in conflict-affected areas focus
on improving the capacity of local authorities in
their work to bridge the divides that can fuel violent
collective struggles by prioritizing food security, health
care, citizen security and political participation.
Finally, with regard to funding to support
resilience-building against security threats, we

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

commend the work being done by the Peacebuilding
Fund in its efforts to ensure that resources, from both
the public and the private sectors, are predictable and
sustainable and that they prioritize the protection
of civilians and disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, while, at the same time, increasing
capacities in the areas of justice and security, as well as
productive entrepreneurship.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Dvornyk (Ukraine): Ukraine highly appreciated
the initiative of the presidency of Ghana to hold this
important open debate. We express our gratitude to all
the briefers for their thoughtful briefings.
Ukraine aligns itself with the statement made on
behalf of the European Union, and we would like to
make a few comments in our national capacity.
The recent coronavirus disease pandemic has
explicitly shown how dramatically newly emerging
challenges can complicate our efforts to address longlasting threats. Health emergencies, food insecurity,
poverty, environmental degradation and climate change
are just a few of the new challenges that could become
triggers of conflict. Given the fact that most such
triggers take no notice of national borders, we fully
agree with the assumption made in the concept note
for this debate (S/2022/799, annex) that unaddressed
structural factors could contribute to the resurgence of
conflicts, even during or after peace support missions.
Regrettably, the practical activities of the
international efforts to respond to the contemporary
threats and challenges remain insufficient. One of the
explanations is that, along with facing new challenges,
we are still compelled to confront the threat of a
large-scale inter-State conflict as a result of an armed
aggression and the full-fledged invasion of a sovereign
State. It is even more worrisome that the aggressor
resorts to deliberate terrorist practices, attacking
critical infrastructure in an attempt to deprive millions
of civilians of electricity and water, striking ahead of
the winter season. That attack occurred despite, and in
violation of, resolution 2341 (2017), on the protection of
critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks, adopted
unanimously in 2017.
It is clear that an efficient remedy to the underlying
causes of insecurity across the globe, such as poverty
and hunger, particularly in Africa, will hardly be

22-673369/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

possible without a proper and sufficient response to the
aggressive behaviour of Russia. Its war of aggression
against Ukraine has already affected global food
supplies, thereby exacerbating the food crisis in the
most vulnerable regions. Russia recently resorted to
blackmailing the world by threatening to undermine
the Black Sea Grain Initiative, which, I recall, enabled
the supply more than 9 million tons of foodstuffs from
Ukraine between August and October. We praise the
United Nations and Türkiye, the brokers of the Grain
Initiative, which took a strong stance, along with
Ukraine, to ensure the continuation of the Initiative.

I will use my time today to offer some perspectives
on integrating resilience in peace operations to
sustain peace.

Civilians and their rights are among the first to
be hit by any war. Taking into account our own tragic
experience following the full-fledged invasion of
Ukraine, we believe that it should be a top priority
for any peacekeeping operation to fully implement its
mandate in relation to the security and safety of civilians.
Ukraine’s experience as an active contributor to United
Nations peace operations attests to the fact that the
efficient protection of civilians should be in conjunction
with supporting the capacity-building of the host State,
rule-of-law institutions and democratic procedures.

But in many contexts where United Nations peace
operations are deployed, those ingredients are missing
and, where they are absent, missions are struggling. The
Security Council has a central role in putting the peace
operations it authorizes in the best possible position for
success, using all of the tools at its disposal.

In conclusion, let me reiterate that a human rights
violator and abuser of the fundamental norms of
international law can hardly be a reliable partner in
addressing the pressing problems on the global agenda,
including the underlying root causes of conflicts
worldwide. That is why we are convinced that, now
more than ever, we need a strong Security Council,
where all members are legitimate and responsible, as
well as reliable contributors to safeguarding the rulesand values-based international order.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): Allow me to congratulate
Ghana on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of November. We thank Ghana
for having convened this open debate to explore
the peacekeeping and peacebuilding nexus and to
consider how the Security Council can better respond
to threats without borders, such as climate change and
terrorism. We also look forward to Ghana hosting the
United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial in 2023 and
to contributing to the process. We know that we are in
good hands, and we want Ghana to know that it can
count on our support.
10/21

First, on the Council’s role in ensuring that
United Nations peace operations can address the causes
of conflict and insecurity, over time we have come to
understand that certain ingredients are key to mission
success — genuine commitment by the conflict parties
to a gender-responsive and inclusive peace process,
clear and achievable mandates with the resources to
match, the full backing of the Security Council and
positive regional engagement.

But the peacekeeping partnership extends beyond
the Security Council — from host Governments to
local civil society and women’s rights organizations,
to troop- and police-contributing countries, financial
contributors, regional organizations and the Secretariat.
Mission success depends on all of those actors working
together and holding each other accountable.
Peacekeeping is one of the most effective and
efficient tools we have to mitigate conflict and protect
civilians. It is incumbent upon all of us to think
constructively and critically about how to ensure that
peace operations can evolve and deliver to meet existing
and new challenges.
This open debate is a welcome start to that
discussion, which Member States can carry through
the upcoming session of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations, as well as the 2023
Peacekeeping Ministerial process.
Secondly, on how we can leverage thematic
agendas, like the women and peace and security agenda,
to build resilience, Canada is part of a growing number
of countries — 104 — that have developed a national
action plan on women and peace and security. That is a
testament to the commitment of more than 50 per cent
of the United Nations membership to implement, at
home, resolution 1325 (2000) and the subsequent nine
Council resolutions on women and peace and security.
Canada is now in the process of drafting its next
women and peace and security national action plan.
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

As part of that process, we are seeking to address a
broader range of security issues and recommitting
to meaningful engagement with civil society and
indigenous representatives. We are also determined to
promote and protect women peacebuilders in all their
diversity, recognizing that supporting them is one of
the single most important contributions we can make
to building sustainable peace. We are redoubling our
own efforts, together with partners, to implement
resolution 2538 (2020) and address the barriers that
women peacekeepers face. I wish to commend Ghana
for its leadership in that regard.
Canada’s Department of National Defence recently
undertook an independent assessment of barriers to the
meaningful participation of women from the Canadian
Armed Forces in peace operations. And having renewed
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations
for another five years, we will continue to deepen the
work we are doing within our own institutions, and
with partners globally, in order to ensure receptive
environments for women uniformed personnel.
(spoke in French)
Thirdly, on the collaboration between the Council
and other United Nations organs to ensure more
coherent strategies to build resilience, we believe there
is good practice to build on, fortunately, in the form of
the relationship between the Security Council and the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC). Thanks to the work
of consecutive PBC Chairs, including Bangladesh and
Egypt, there has been good progress in strengthening
the Commission’s crucial advisory role, in particular
in offering advice to the Security Council. Canada also
made that a pillar of its term as Chair in 2020.
The strength of the PBC is that everything is done
at the request and with the consent of the countries and
regions with whom the Commission engages. The PBC
speaks with countries, not just about them. Its work
is grounded on national priorities to build peaceful,
just and inclusive societies. There is deep value in
the advice that the PBC can offer to the Security
Council, particularly on the renewal of mandates for
United Nations peace operations — and especially in
contexts where the United Nations is transitioning. It is
in those contexts in particular where we must leverage
the strengths of these two organs and support countries
on the path to sustainable peace.
Fourthly and finally, on the funding mechanisms
available to support resilience building, particularly for

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Sahelian and coastal States in West Africa, the General
Assembly took an important step in September by
adopting by consensus the resolution on financing for
peacebuilding (General Assembly resolution 76/305).
We thank Kenya and Sweden for acting as facilitators
for that resolution.
The clear call for Member States to increase their
contributions to peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
including through voluntary, innovative and assessed
contributions, is important. Peacebuilding and conflict
prevention is not only the right thing to do, it is the
smart thing to do. The earlier we are able to act, the
more tools we have at our disposal and the more lives
and financial resources we can save.
In December, Canada proudly announced a
commitment of $70 million over three years to the
United Nations Peacebuilding Fund in order to help
close the peacebuilding funding gap and support
gender-focused interventions. We are making that
investment because we believe the Peacebuilding Fund
is a critical mechanism and catalyst to help sustain
peace, particularly for States under the stress of armed
conflict and climate change. We look forward to working
with partners to continue to close the financial gap in
the area of peacebuilding, and we hope to continue to
receive guidance from the United Nations so as to ensure
adequate funding for its peacebuilding activities.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): We congratulate Ghana
for taking over the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November. I also thank you, Madam
President, for organizing this important open debate.
I express my sincere appreciation to all the briefers
for their insightful and comprehensive briefings
this morning.
The whole gamut of peacekeeping missions
changed in the past decade owing to numerous evolving
challenges, including the surge in the activities of
non-State armed groups, climate-related crises, natural
disasters, displacement, poverty and so on. Traditional
and non-traditional security threats exacerbated the
root causes and drivers of conflict both directly and
indirectly. It is quite evident that military operations
alone are not sufficient to bring effective and sustainable
peace to conflict-affected areas. Capacity-building
of relevant host country institutions is important in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace. Peacekeeping

22-6733611/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

forces can play a vital role in building resilient hostcountry institutions so as to ensure sustained peace
when peacekeeping operations leave the host country.
An integrated approach is needed in order to ensure that
peacekeeping operations are fit for purpose and that
they are a true collective investment in global peace
and security. In that regard, the role of the Security
Council is crucial.
Being the leading troop- and police-contributing
country to United Nations peacekeeping operations,
Bangladesh has been making remarkable contributions
to the peacebuilding components of peacekeeping
operations that facilitates resilience-building in host
countries. Within the limited mandate, Bangladesh
peacekeepers have prevented conflicts, enforced
peace deals, monitored truces and successfully
mobilized the affected populations in various
nation-building activities.
I would like to recall Bangladeshi peacekeepers’
active engagements in many countries in facilitating
the transition to democratic process and playing a
supporting role in electoral processes, disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration processes and
infrastructure development, including the construction
of roads and schools and agricultural development. We
are also contributing to strengthening the judiciary,
reforming the security sectors and supporting
institution- and capacity-building in host countries.

03/11/2022

Thirdly, we underscore the role of effective
partnership and coordination among peacekeeping
operations, special political missions, United
Nations country teams, United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, international and regional
financial institutions and regional and subregional
organizations in order to undertake and subsequently
maintain an integrated and coordinated approach
towards resilience-building. In addition to this
partnership, national ownership is critical. We recall
resolution 2594 (2021) in this regard.
Fourthly, witnessing a surge in climate change
effects, we encourage intensifying efforts to reduce
the overall environmental footprint of peacekeeping
operations. The Council should set the mandate of
peacekeeping operations in a way that leaves a positive
legacy for the host community and contributes to its
own efforts aimed at sustaining peace and development.
Fifthly,
emphasizing
the
synergies
and
complementarity
between
peacebuilding
and
peacekeeping, we recognize the critical advisory role
that the Peacebuilding Commission plays, particularly
in mandate-setting for peacekeeping operations. We
also highlight the importance of ensuring adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding
activities so as to facilitate effective resilience-building.
Before concluding, I reiterate Bangladesh’s
commitment to contributing to the peacekeeping and
peacebuilding activities of the United Nations.

Allow me to briefly touch upon some important
points for effective resilience building.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Poland.

First, institution-building is a major prerequisite
for strengthening resilience. Effective, accountable and
inclusive institutions are needed in order to facilitate
national reconciliation efforts and ensure a country’s
capacity to maintain peace. In that regard, we underscore
the critical role of peacekeeping missions in reforming
judicial and security sectors and assisting service
delivery by national institutions, within the mandate.

Mr. Szczerski (Poland): Let me begin by thanking
Ghana for organizing today’s important debate. Poland
also wishes to express its appreciation to all the briefers
for their insightful remarks.

Secondly, inclusivity is the key to the effective
implementation of the peacekeeping mandate. In
that regard, the full and effective implementation
of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2250 (2015) and the
subsequent resolutions are essential to realizing the full
and meaningful participation of women and youth in
peace processes. We also emphasize the inclusion and
engagement of civil society and local stakeholders.
12/21

The international peace and security architecture
requires broad and effective engagement of all countries
devoted to the values enshrined in the United Nations
Charter, and these countries must be ready to defend the
Charter. That is why United Nations peace operations
remain a core instrument of our collective endeavours
aimed at conflict resolution and protection of those who
cannot defend themselves.
However, the recent rapid evolution of the global
security environment has posed new challenges for
all Member States, which now require better-tailored
approaches and strategies of engagement. It is essential
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

that United Nations peace operations, having faced the
perfect storm of the coronavirus disease pandemic,
disruptions of supply chains, food and energy insecurity
stemming from the Russian aggression against Ukraine,
as well as climate challenges, evolve. Now, more than
ever, they need to be approached holistically. Only
then will we be able to stop the domino effect of wars
creating new crises and new crises causing new wars.
We believe that there can be no long-term stability
without eliminating the underlying causes of conflicts,
including, inter alia, the lack of sociopolitical unity,
exclusion from political processes, inequalities, weak
institutions, climate-related risks and food insecurity.
That is why Poland attaches great significance to
promoting actions that are driven by the humanitariandevelopment-peace nexus.
In other words, we need to overcome the silo
mentality and apply a more comprehensive approach
that cuts across the areas of conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Reducing the risk
of conflicts requires resilient and accountable State
institutions, good governance and social cohesion,
as well as investments in infrastructure resilience as
an element of sustainable development — in short,
sustainability through resilience.
We are fully aware that the peace and security
landscape has been increasingly influenced by climate
change and environmental degradation. Climate
insecurity often overlaps with an increase in poverty
and social disparities. Scarcity of food, water and
other natural resources forces people to migrate,
undermining the stability of entire regions. While
our understanding of complex interactions between
climate, food and conflict is improving, allowing us to
better anticipate potential frictions, we need to deliver
innovative and cross-cutting approaches to ensure that
stabilization and peace efforts are climate-sensitive.
As an active participant in peacekeeping operations,
Poland recognizes the need to continue our collective
efforts aimed at better adaptation of United Nations
missions and the enhancement of their effectiveness.
Partnerships are another important ingredient of
sustainable peace. Poland endorses closer cooperation
among the United Nations, other international and
regional
organizations,
including
international
financial institutions. We commend the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and the Peacebuilding Fund
for bringing together international, national and

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

local stakeholders to examine and address complex
peacebuilding challenges. We strongly support the
PBC’s collaboration with various United Nations bodies,
including the Security Council, the General Assembly,
the Economic and Social Council, and United Nations
missions in the field.
Peace operations have proved their strategic worth
in building foundations for sustainable peace. What
we must do now is keep them relevant and resilient.
Poland stands ready to work towards this goal, both at
the negotiating table and on the ground.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): Let me
first congratulate Ghana and you personally, Madam
President, for assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for this month and for organizing today’s
open debate on a key issue affecting the efficiency and
effectiveness of our action in favour of international
peace and security. Our fraternal country, Ghana, can
count on Morocco’s full support during its presidency
of the Security Council.
I
also
thank
Secretary-General
António
Guterres, Assistant Secretary-General Martha Pobee,
Commissioner Bankole Adeoye, Her Excellency
Mrs. Mary Robinson and Ms. Karin Landgren for their
briefings and the enlightening elements they shared
with us.
As we have heard many times in today’s debate, it is
clear that United Nations peacekeeping operations are
the Organization’s most effective means of responding
to threats to international peace and security. The
tasks of peacekeeping operations have evolved over
the past decade to include conflict prevention and
peacebuilding activities in modern multidimensional
missions, in accordance with their respective mandates.
However, the gap between the ambitious aspirations of
multidimensional mandates and the resources available
to peacekeeping operations remains wide. The response
to today’s challenges, which are multiple and complex
in nature, must be based on new and innovative
approaches that anticipate and intervene rather than
simply observe and react. It is therefore essential that
the work of peacekeeping operations be supported,
with greater efforts and resources being devoted to
strengthening the various tools at the disposal of the
United Nations in order to guarantee complementarity

22-6733613/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

in missions’ actions and to ensure that they receive all
the political and financial resources they need.
To that end, we welcome the sustained and
continuous attention the Secretary-General has given
to this issue, including his proposal to develop a new
agenda for peace with the objective of achieving a
more proactive and coherent collective approach in and
more effective results from action by the international
community. We reiterate our firm belief that the
establishment of lasting peace requires investing in
the peace-security-development nexus in order to
eliminate the root causes of conflict and strengthen the
capacities of Member States to prevent and respond to
risks of crisis.
Morocco, which has put the peace-securitydevelopment nexus approach at the heart of its
commitment to peace and security, would like to
emphasize the following three points. First, preventive
diplomacy, mediation and special political missions, as
important elements in the United Nations toolbox, must
be able to fully play their roles. Morocco expresses its
appreciation for the work of the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs (DPPA) in this context, in
particular in terms of building the local capacity of
women and youth for mediation and conflict prevention
and supporting political processes. In this regard,
Morocco is honoured to have been a member of the
DPPA donor group for several years.
Secondly, the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC),
its country configurations and the Peacebuilding Fund
play a central role in strengthening the integration of
peacekeeping and peacebuilding through economicrecovery and capacity-building efforts based on
national ownership, which underscores the need to
strengthen complementarity and coordination between
the Security Council and the PBC. On the eve of
each renewal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic mandate, the Central African Republic country
configuration, which Morocco is honoured to chair,
continues its good practice of sharing recommendations
with the Security Council based on peacebuilding
priorities in the Central African Republic.
Finally, we reiterate the importance of the
Security
Council
developing
clear,
focused,
sequenced, prioritized, realistic and achievable
mandates in consultation with host States and troopand police-contributing countries and providing
14/21

03/11/2022

peacekeeping missions with all the support they need
to accomplish their tasks. Financial support to these
missions is, of course, also fundamental. We commend
the continued efforts of the Department of Peace
Operations and the Department of Operational Support
that regard.
In conclusion, I would like to affirm Morocco’s
full and active support for efforts aimed at preventing
conflicts and maintaining and building peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sierra Leone.
Mr. Turay (Sierra Leone): At the outset, Madam
President, let me congratulate you on Ghana’s
assumption of the presidency of the Security Council
for the month of November 2022. I thank Ghana for
organizing today’s open debate on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace.
Sierra Leone concurs with the view that integrating
resilience in peace processes is critical for conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. For some peacebuilding
proponents, resilience can act as a boundary object that
facilitates cooperation among security, humanitarian
and development actors involved in a protracted crisis.
Resilience also relates to strengthening capacities, as
opposed to fragilities or the phenomenon of so-called
failed States. That is a powerful metaphor to remind
peacebuilders that successful outcomes for peace
depend on local actors engaging with the peacebuilding
community in order to value prevention more and focus
those outcomes on the long term and on peacebuilding
at the local level, and not only at the national level.
A key factor in building sustainable peace is local
ownership, which is often inadequately attended to or
undermined by international actors in the process of
humanitarian action, development assistance, disaster
recovery and peacebuilding efforts. That is compounded
by the fact that external actors often focus only on the
fault lines of conflict in a country and fail to notice,
invest in or prioritize the sources of resilience of the
people in the most difficult circumstances.
Therefore, it helps greatly to work closely with
local actors to fully and truly understand the conflict
perspective and context-specific characteristics of a
given region, as well as people’s strengths, assets and
strategies in the face of violence. In that way, we can
identify and strengthen the capabilities for resilience
that are crucial for the development of peace and the
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

transformation of conflict. A resilience-building
approach therefore offers a crucial tool for analysing
and designing policies and programming that are
tailored to the specific needs of people at the local level.
In building peace and national reconciliation and
avoiding polarization, it is critical for all stakeholders,
Governments, civil society, the private sector, women
and young people to be holistically engaged.
In conclusion, we believe in the axiom that there can
be no peace without development and no development
without peace. Together we are stronger, and it is
much easier to sustain peace with all the stakeholders
on board than when some are of them are excluded
or marginalized.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the floor to share Rwanda’s
views on this important topic. I congratulate Ghana on
assuming the presidency for this month and convening
this high-level debate. I also commend the briefers
for sharing their informative perspectives, which
contribute substantively to this discussion. There is
no better time to discuss such a consequential topic
as “Integrating effective resilience-building in peace
operations for sustainable peace”, given the current
global and regional security contexts.
Effectively sustaining peace entails a deliberate
process and political will. Real peace cannot be achieved
when actors, stakeholders or their guarantors turn a
blind eye to the root causes and drivers of the conflict
itself. The inability to sustain peace results from the
failure to address the conflict’s real root causes and
outsourcing solutions that do not match the context.
The history of some successful processes shows
that addressing the actual causes of conflict with
impartiality builds trust among all actors, which in
turn allows the establishment of a solid foundation
for political processes, facilitates peacebuilding and
creates a positive peace.
Given the current security dynamics, the Charter
of the United Nations alone does not appropriately
guide the conduct of peacekeeping; there is therefore
a need to tailor the mandate to each specific country’s
realities and to implement it using various bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms in order to bring about the
synergy that is required.

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

The question is: how do we make peace operations
fit for the specific purpose and context? A countryspecific or region-specific approach to address the
specific underlying issues should be implemented in line
with the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and in partnership with the host country.
In most cases, the priority is to protect civilians and
deliver humanitarian responses, while finding longlasting solutions through negotiations and dialogue. That
priority must be well-communicated. There should be
an awareness-raising strategy to educate communities
on their role in restoring peace and rebuilding the
country to create ownership. Expectations should also
be well articulated to avoid local communities having
false expectations.
Let me now focus my intervention on the role of the
host nation. Peacekeeping operations should support
and mobilize host country authorities in enacting
their vision and strategy to address the issues that
compromise their security and stability. Host countries
should be able to develop and implement what is best
for them, bearing in mind the importance of including
all relevant stakeholders, including young people and
women, and ensuring that their needs, including those
of the most vulnerable, are addressed. There is no
one-size-fit-all template designed to build resilience.
Instead, the country-specific or region-specific context
should inform the best course of action.
After the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi in
Rwanda, homegrown solutions were embedded in the
reform framework. Initiatives such as Gacaca courts,
Imihigo, or performance contracts, Umuganda, or
monthly community work, mediation committees,
land reforms and accountability, to name only a few,
helped solve critical issues that would otherwise have
taken several years to accomplish had we chosen
classical methods.
Sustaining
peace
requires
comprehensive
institutional reforms to enable effective and democratic
security delivery by reducing poverty and promoting
sustainable economic, social and political development.
However, the host country remains fragile without
an efficient and well-governed broader security
architecture. Rwanda was able to establish institutional
reforms with the support of partners. However, we
preferred that the questions of what and how be left to
Rwandans. In that way, we could be accountable for our
decisions and note our failures as our own.

22-6733615/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

Finally, peacekeeping is essential for creating the
conditions in which the host country may ameliorate
its priorities and set strategies for achieving sustainable
socioeconomic transformation and proper institutional
reforms based on the local context. In that regard,
we echo the call for adequate funding to support
peacebuilding activities during both peacekeeping
and transitions.

more than 75 years ago. Although the number of wars
between States has decreased since 1946, intra-State
conflicts and violence have continued to increase.
Regional tensions, the breakdown of the rule of law,
the absence or takeover of State institutions, illicit
economic gains and a scarcity of resources exacerbated
by climate change have become the main drivers
of conflict.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.

Furthermore, new threats to international peace
and security are emerging that are difficult to address
through traditional responses, such as transnational
criminal networks and advances in weapons technology
through the use of cyberspace. In the current landscape
of constantly evolving conflicts, United Nations peace
operations have had to adapt and reinvent themselves.
In recent years there has been a growing call for robust
mandates for peace operations to respond to changing
security dynamics. Ensuring that peace operations are
adapted to modern times is therefore critical to the
credibility and effectiveness of the Council itself.

Mr. Mainero (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): The
number of armed conflicts worldwide is increasing and,
in those challenging environments, the humanitarian
needs of the affected populations far exceed the
capacities of national and international organizations to
meet them. People have no other choice than to become
resilient for their own immediate survival.
In such life-or-death situations, resilience is used to
describe the capacities of people and their communities
to survive and maintain essential life-sustaining services
when they are faced with extreme violence. When
people are pushed to their limits, their innate resilience
for survival and resistance can be seen clearly at the
community level. Inevitably, families and neighbours,
with the support of local organizations, are the first to
respond to provide essential life-sustaining resources.
In times of need, people work together and organize
themselves to mutually support each other, using their
networks to access assistance and critical resources.
In a broader sense, resilience can also mean the
ability to adapt to and recover quickly from a crisis
situation. In situations brought about by natural or
human-made crises, it is important to address both the
symptoms and the root causes, especially in conflict
situations in which history tends to repeat itself.
Emerging trends and dynamics linked to traditional
and non-traditional security threats are presenting the
Security Council with new challenges. That makes it
imperative for the Council to develop new approaches
to ensure an effective response in order to achieve
sustainable peace.
Implementing an approach centred on resilience
is predicated on learning from past experience and
addressing both emergency and long-term needs. It
also requires that special attention be given to issues
related to peacebuilding and rebuilding the State. The
nature of conflict and violence has been substantially
transformed since the United Nations was founded
16/21

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Indonesia.
Ms. Dhanutirto (Indonesia): Let me begin by
conveying my appreciation to all the briefers for their
notable insights. My delegation commends Ghana’s
initiative highlighting the need to ensure that peace
operations are fit for purpose. I would like to underline
three points in that regard.
The first is establishing mandates that are suited
to individual peace operations. As challenges related
to peace and security evolve with time, the Security
Council must be more agile in assigning the appropriate
type of mission throughout the peace continuum.
Inclusive participation and national ownership must
come into play in order to capture the actual situation on
the ground and ways to move forward. Moreover, clear,
focused and achievable mandates should be devised to
guide the course of the peace operations concerned.
The second point involves ensuring a positive
impact for the local population. That is critical,
especially when host countries embark on their
transitional processes, not only in facilitating national
stakeholders to promote dialogue and cooperation
in addressing the root causes of a conflict but also
to avoid the emergence of new security risks. In that
light, optimizing the role of women peacekeepers will
be essential to enhancing the performance of peace
operations, particularly in reaching certain elements
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of the local community, especially vulnerable groups,
including women and children.
The third point concerns strengthening training
and capacity-building. Indonesia believes that proper
training would ensure that peacekeepers are deployed
with competence that is adequate to their exercise of
their mandate. To that end, we consider it important
to foster partnerships to support targeted training and
capacity-building aimed at achieving specific tasks.
Soft skills, language skills and an understanding of
local culture are also needed to better connect with
communities. For its part, Indonesia has included
community engagement aspects as an integral part of
predeployment training for peacekeepers.
In conclusion, Indonesia reiterates its commitment
to being part of the collective commitment to improving
the quality and effectiveness of peace operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon): We would like to congratulate
the delegation of Ghana on assuming the presidency of
the Security Council for this month and express our
thanks for the organization of this debate on a signature
and timely theme. Our appreciation also goes to all the
briefers for their valuable input, which has enriched the
guidelines of the discussion.
Today the Security Council, which normally deals
with country-specific issues of war and peace, such as
crises in the Middle East and similar problems around
the world, is holding a day-long high-level debate on
the root causes that fuel conflict in the world, such
as poverty and underdevelopment, and the role that
peacekeeping operations might play in that regard
in the light of the emerging security threats that are
currently confronting the Council with new challenges.
That said, we believe the Security Council should
intensify its deliberations on social and development
issues in order to ensure effective transitions to peace.
Many cases around the world have presented blatant
examples in which socioeconomic issues may constitute
serious threats to international peace and security in
their own right. The evidence for that abounds. Nine of
the 10 countries with the lowest human-development
indicators have experienced conflict in the past 20
years. Countries dealing with stark inequality and
weak institutions are at an increased risk of conflict.
Poorly distributed wealth and a lack of sufficient

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

jobs, opportunities and freedoms, particularly for
populations with a large percentage of young people,
can also increase the risk of instability. That is the
main basis for our belief that sustainable peace implies
a comprehensive approach to security. We can no
longer address the two components, development and
security, in silos, because the root causes of conflicts
and crises in peace and security are interlinked and
mutually reinforcing.
In that context, some scenarios are calling for
drawdowns or the withdrawal of Council-mandated
peacekeeping operations by providing more seamless
transitions through the delegation of specific tasks to
United Nations country teams and other development
actors. While we believe that the Council might be
required to devise new approaches to ensure a balanced
response to both military operations and the underlying
causes of conflict to ensure sustainable peace, at the
same time we are in favour of the establishment of
United Nations country teams to work as parallel and
complementary structures together with peacekeeping
operations in the discharge of their mandated
responsibilities with the aim of creating, in tandem
and in close coordination with local communities and
Governmental entities, an enabling environment for
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
The nexus between climate change, security and
development in all its ramifications is becoming an
imperative focus in terms of revisiting mechanisms to
respond to changing security dynamics. Nevertheless,
what is seen today to be a sustainability gap for peace
operations should not constitute an alibi for revisiting
the initial raison d’être and mandate of peacekeeping
operations and troops in countries where they are
deployed, bearing in mind that any dilution of their
mandate configuration should remain subject to a
nuanced understanding and balanced provisions of
Security Council resolutions.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal
commends Ghana for convening today’s debate and
thanks the briefers for their insightful remarks.
We fully align ourselves with the statement made
earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Others have said it before — peacekeeping
operations are one of the most effective tools available

22-6733617/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

to the United Nations in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security. We pay tribute to
the Blue Helmets and honour those who have lost their
lives in the service of peace.
Portugal has consistently maintained its participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. We are
currently engaged in several missions, namely, in the
Central African Republic, South Sudan and Colombia.
As such, we are well aware that peacekeeping has
become increasingly demanding as we face new actors
in more complex and hostile operational environments.
That is particularly evident with regard to terrorism
and violent extremism, which are on the rise in several
parts of the world, especially in Africa.
While militarized responses to terrorism and
violent extremism can be effective in the short term,
they tend to address the symptoms rather than the
root causes of conflict. Political engagement at all
levels is necessary to address grievances and rebuild
trust between citizens and the State. An approach that
involves the military, law enforcement and intelligence
services must be complemented by measures to tackle
climate change, build institutions, promote employment
and build a just and inclusive economy.
Portugal has tried to follow that approach, for
instance, in our cooperation with Mozambique and
support for Mozambican authorities in their national
strategies, in particular in the context of the armed
conflict in Cabo Delgado. While contributing to
the training of Mozambique’s armed forces, we also
supported initiatives related to Mozambique’s justice,
security and defence sectors, as well as projects aimed
at fostering employment for young people and women
in the northern region of Cabo Delgado.
We are fully committed to seeking ways to make
peacekeeping operations more effective, while using an
integrated approach that promotes national and local
ownership and embraces the triple nexus of peace,
development and human rights. In that context, we
fully support the peace and security reform proposed
by the Secretary-General, including the Action for
Peacekeeping agenda and its implementation strategy.
As a member of the Peacebuilding Commission,
we believe that effective peacekeeping should be
combined with efforts aimed at preventing conflicts.
Peacekeeping and peacebuilding must be undertaken
together if they are to be sustainable in the long term.
There is also a need to enhance the complementarity
18/21

03/11/2022

between the work of the Security Council and the work
of the Peacebuilding Commission.
Inclusivity is also essential to the sustainability of
peace. The involvement of women and young people is
crucial throughout those processes, particularly given
the disproportionate impact on their lives of conflicts
and their aftermath. In that context, we support the full
implementation of the women and peace and security
and the youth and peace and security agendas.
Finally, the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative
recognizes the key role of regional organizations in
ensuring local ownership and promoting trust and
dialogue. In that context, we hope a decision will be taken
soon to ensure predictable and sustainable financing
for African Union-led peace support operations.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Portugal’s
commitment to peacebuilding and resilient peacekeeping
operations in order to ensure sustainable peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nigeria.
Mr. Muhammad-Bande (Nigeria): Let me begin
by commending Gabon for its leadership of the Security
Council during the month of October and congratulating
Ghana on its assumption of the presidency for the
month of November. Ghana can count on Nigeria’s full
support throughout its tenure.
Allow me to also thank Ghana for convening
today’s very important open debate on the topic
“Integrating effective resilience-building in peace
operations for sustainable peace”. I thank the briefers
for their insights.
Peace and security remain the bedrock of sustainable
development. With the new and emerging threats faced
by countries around the world and the destabilization
of communities, we are reminded that the Security
Council must enhance its tools to develop new coherent
strategies to deliver sustainable peace. We have seen,
especially in the Sahel, that communities affected by the
scourge of terrorism and violent extremism require the
restoration of livelihoods, social protection and basic
social services in order to build resilience and reduce
vulnerabilities to radicalization and recruitment.
In Nigeria, the Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs,
Disaster Management and Social Development is
working with subnational Governments, United Nations
agencies and development partners to effectively
22-67336

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

03/11/2022

implement social intervention programmes in order
to lift more than 100 million people, especially those
affected by conflict, out of poverty by next year.
As peace operations remain the Council’s apex
apparatus for securing peace in conflict settings,
integrating a holistic support mechanism that puts
resilience-building at the forefront is vital. In that regard,
let me highlight five key areas in which the Security
Council can integrate effective resilience-building in
peace operations to better deliver sustainable peace.
First, the Security Council cannot ignore climate
change and its impact on peace operations. Most
United Nations peace operations are conducted in
countries that are ranked among the most exposed
to climate change. To that end, the Council needs
to urgently identify partnerships and strategies for
properly planning for and addressing climate-related
security risks, particularly where we have
peacekeeping missions.
Secondly, for now and beyond the coronavirus
disease pandemic, peacekeepers can play a vital role
in supporting national responses to health crises. In
Africa, we have seen the important role they play in
conflict settings by providing more secure environments
for health workers, who risk their lives to prevent the
spread of deadly diseases.
Thirdly, protecting civilians from violence and
maintaining peace, while also supporting national
responses to build and restore livelihoods in vulnerable
communities, is important for the Council. As such,
peacekeeping operations could provide greater support
for the delivery and funding of vocational and skills
training in order to help local communities generate
income to support families.
Fourthly, Nigeria also recognizes the importance of
mainstreaming both the women and peace and security
and the youth and peace and security agendas in peace
processes. The disproportionate impact of conflict on
women and young people remains a hindrance to all our
efforts to build resilience. Women and young people
are crucial partners in strengthening the pillars of
lasting peace, economic recovery and social cohesion.
Therefore, the Council needs to continue empowering
them to play active roles in conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and post-conflict mechanisms.
Lastly,
sustainable

without
funding,

adequate, predictable and
building resilience against

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

security threats in the Sahel and coastal West Africa
will remain a Herculean task. Nigeria welcomes the
progress being made by the United Nations in securing
increased funding for peacebuilding, including through
assessed contributions, and emphasizes the need for
those efforts to guarantee greater funding and support
for African Union and Economic Community of West
African States peacekeeping operations in order to
enable them to play a more critical role in their areas
of mandate.
In conclusion, as a long-standing troopcontributing country, Chair of the Special Committee
on Peacekeeping Operations and member of the
Peacebuilding Commission, Nigeria remains committed
to working with members of the Council to improve the
effectiveness of peace operations and will continue to
make significant contributions to conflict prevention,
peacekeeping and peacebuilding in West Africa, the
Sahel and wherever needed.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan): Allow me to congratulate
you, Madam President, on your country’s assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month,
which we believe will be seminal for revitalizing
interactive debates on a number of important issues.
I want to share with the Council some practical
remarks from our national ownership perspective
of peacekeeping.
Based on my country’s experience, peacekeeping
seeks to create favourable conditions that prevent
the recurrence of violence. However, it also seeks
to achieve several other short- and long-term goals
through its goodwill and good offices, such as the
disarmament, demobilization, reintegration of armed
units; security sector reform to prevent the recurrence
of conflict or war; and the monitoring of elections
and institution-building in conflict-affected areas,
in accordance with national ownership. Among the
expected objectives are stimulating, peaceful and
constructive processes that aim to increase selfregulatory efficiency in order to enable societies to
effectively manage internal and external pressures.
To accommodate the diverse interests and needs
of communities, they should be represented through
practical efforts to build inclusivity within a process of
partnership and collective learning. What the process

22-6733619/21

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

of nationalizing peacebuilding means to us is the ability
to exercise options, circulate knowledge, wisdom and
experiences and synthesize practices from within
communities themselves in order to initiate various
community and sectoral initiatives and cooperative
mechanisms while constantly modifying the practices
and modalities of peacebuilding.
Peacebuilding should be implemented by focusing
on the principles of resilience and national or local
ownership in sustaining peace. It should endeavour
to achieve realistic peace through peaceful means
by positively linking the international peacebuilding
process to local political, cultural and social legitimacy
and by targeting methods of establishing peace through
contexts that promote sustainability with the participation
of the largest possible number of local actors. The main
aims of peacebuilding should target the restoration or
improvement of governance and governance institutions,
the consolidation of established peace agreements and the
restoration of human and State security. Peacebuilding
operations should also help to launch socioeconomic
reconstruction and development; promote healing,
reconciliation, justice and human rights; provide
humanitarian emergency assistance; encourage the
participation of women and young people; build strategic
partnerships at the national, regional, continental
and global levels and bolster resource mobilization.
In the Sudan, we expect peacebuilding efforts to
help mobilize the necessary resources and provide
support for national efforts aimed at establishing the
necessary mechanisms for drafting our Constitution,
without prejudice to the national ownership of those
efforts. They should also coordinate and unify the
efforts of the United Nations country team and all other
organizations and agencies, including international
financial institutions, in order to provide the necessary
support for transition and peacebuilding as stipulated
in paragraph 2 (iv) (c) of resolution 2524 (2020).
Peacebuilding efforts should be coordinated with the
work of the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Nations Development Fund for
Women in order to support the participation of women
in accordance with our constitutional document of 2019.
It will also be necessary to raise awareness of women’s
sectors in various communities and groups, especially
communities of internally displaced persons (IDPs), as
well as of the importance of women’s participation in
the political process. And it will be vital to coordinate
with international electoral observation centres such as
20/21

03/11/2022

the Carter Center, which work alongside UNDP to train
local observers from various civil-society organizations.
The mobilization of United Nations organs and
agencies, especially UNDP, UNICEF and the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, is key to
rehabilitating returnees and facilitating their voluntary
return in calm areas and host communities, as well
as in the provision of education, health and water
facilities. Peacebuilding operations should include
the implementation of quick-return and quick-impact
projects in the areas and villages of voluntary return
in order to encourage IDPs to return to their places of
origin, homes and communities.
It is also important to work with donors to provide
the resources required for the implementation of
reparations as a basis for reconciliation and the support
needed for the implementation of our national plan
for the protection of civilians, field protection and
environmental protection. Peacebuilding operations
should support the establishment of detection and
early-warning mechanisms to avoid communal and
intercommunal confrontations. Other tasks include
coordinating with UNICEF on the implementation
of field surveys for integrating human rights into
the curricula of both general and higher education,
providing financial and material resources for State
police to reinforce patrols and community policework
and supporting the establishment of subheadquarters for
national mechanisms for the protection of civilians.
As stipulated in the Programme of Action to Prevent,
Combat and Eradicate the Illicit Trade in Small Arms
and Light Weapons, peacebuilding efforts should support
the implementation of the third stage of the national
project for the collection of weapons and unlicensed
vehicles. They should mobilize the resources required
for the completion of the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration process as a priority within the
implementation of the security arrangements protocol.
Peacebuilding operations should also be carried out with
the international community to provide technical and
logistical support, including capacity-building in the
areas of illegal immigration and cross-border crimes,
especially arms smuggling and human trafficking.
Finally, peacebuilding operations must mobilize
donors to provide the support required to realize the
Sustainable Development Goals of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, particularly those pertaining
to poverty eradication and addressing the root causes of
conflict and violent extremism.
22-67336

03/11/2022

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Zahneisen (Germany): Along with many other
delegations, I would like to congratulate you, Madam,
on Ghana’s assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council and to wish you every success in that important
task. I thank you for putting this important issue on the
Council’s agenda so early on in your presidency.
At the outset, I would also like to underline that we
fully align ourselves with the statement delivered earlier
on behalf of the European Union.
It is our firm belief that peace operations can do
more to adapt to new security threats, increase their
overall impact and work even more efficiently towards
sustainable peace. Allow me to highlight some aspects
in that regard.
First and foremost, peace operations are constantly
striving to improve their situational awareness. However,
while they often have a very high level of analytical
capacity, their systematic analysis and use of data needs
improvement. Germany supports several initiatives in
the Secretariat aimed at leveraging digital technologies
to address that gap. We believe it to be an important
contribution to the fight against disinformation, which
is increasingly becoming a problem for peacekeeping
operations around the world. We have also been
advocating for increasing the ability of peacekeeping
missions to analyse how climate-related factors play
into conflict dynamics. Climate security advisers in
mission settings provide important analyses to mission
leaderships, and we welcome the recent inclusion of such
an adviser in the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Somalia. We believe such positions should be established
in all appropriate mission settings and call on Council
members to support those much-needed capacities.
Secondly, we believe firmly that consistently
implementing and advocating for the women and peace
and security and youth and peace and security agendas
will help create more just and stable societies. They offer
clear pathways to greater resilience and should therefore
receive more political support and funding.
Finally, peace operations should start with clear
objectives and benchmarks and a strategy for achieving
them. Thinking ahead of deployment about the desired
end state and the various steps that must be taken in

S/PV.9181 (Resumption 1)

between, including finding appropriate partners, is
crucial to making those operations more effective and
therefore more sustainable.
In our view, the key to solving the sustainability
gap in peace operations is to integrate the different
instruments of the United Nations — prevention,
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding — in
a more coherent way. The persisting institutional silos
need to be overcome. In terms of our own approach to
stabilization, we believe it is crucial to overcome the
silo-centric way of thinking if we want to have a real
impact on the ground. In that regard, we believe that the
Peacebuilding Commission has an important role to play
as one of the crucial instruments for addressing the root
causes of conflict and supporting national and regional
efforts to build resilient communities. The Commission
currently gives written advice to the Council, but
we believe that the cooperation between the two
institutions should be further enhanced. For instance,
the Peacebuilding Commission could brief the Council
on aspects that it has not yet given sufficient attention to.
In order to address the growing threat of violent
extremism and terrorism in Africa, the Security Council
has been discussing adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding for African Union-led peace support operations.
Germany looks forward to discussing further what the
modalities of such funding could look like.
In the Sahel and coastal West Africa specifically,
Germany has undertaken efforts aimed at buttressing
resilience against security threats. The Group of Seven
Plus Plus Working Group of Friends of the Gulf of
Guinea, currently co-chaired by Germany, aims to
support regional and national engagement in addressing
maritime threats such as piracy, transnational organized
crime, illegal and unregulated fishing, environmental
pollution and loss of biodiversity. In addition, Germany
supports an integrated border stability mechanism in
West Africa to implement regional and national strategies
to improve the security situation in border areas.
I want to underline that we will continue to support
your work, Madam, as well as the work of the Council.
We look forward to continuing our joint endeavour to
strengthen resilience in Africa by making the most of
all the United Nations tools available for the benefit of
the continent.
The meeting rose at 4.50 p.m.

22-6733621/21
