S/PV.8803

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8803rd meeting

Wednesday, 23 June 2021, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jürgenson . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Estonia)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Gupta
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Abarry
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Pham

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393
(2017), 2401 (2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020) (S/2021/583)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-16495 (E)
*2116495*

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the Agenda
The Agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolutions
2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191 (2014), 2258
(2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401 (2018),
2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020)
(S/2021/583)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham,
Acting
Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency Relief
Coordinator, and Ms. Sherine Ibrahim, Country
Director of CARE, Turkey.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/583, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of Security
Council resolutions 2139 (2014), 2165 (2014), 2191
(2014), 2258 (2015), 2332 (2016), 2393 (2017), 2401
(2018), 2449 (2018), 2504 (2020) and 2533 (2020).

23/06/2021

cent since 2011. Jobs have disappeared, prices have
skyrocketed and goods are scarce. People are coping
by reducing the size of their meals or forgoing them
all together. The economic crisis is now compounded
by a drought. The water deficit in the Euphrates
basin is the worst in memory. If water levels drop
any lower, the Tishreen and Tabaqah dams will stop
generating electricity.
The coronavirus disease pandemic is racing
across the country, with high transmission rates taxing
an already-fragile health-care system. And while
the ceasefire is largely holding, there are constant
violations, including the appalling attack on Al-Shifa
hospital earlier this month. The coping strategies of the
Syrian people are at their absolute limit.
The United Nations humanitarian operation
in Syria is today the largest of its kind in the world.
Our most recent appeal seeks $4.2 billion to ease the
country’s plight. Another $5.8 billion is being requested
to support refugees in the region. As of today, we
have recorded $636 million for the Syria response and
just $600 million for the regional response. That is a
fraction of what is needed. I appeal to donors to step up
life-saving assistance and assistance in helping to build
resilience to face such enormous challenges.
Let me turn now to the acute situation in the northwestern part of the country, where the situation is the
worst. More than 70 per cent of the region’s population
are in need, and almost all of them are in severe need
of basic humanitarian assistance to survive. Some
2.7 million people are displaced. It is absolutely
essential to maintain and increase our level of support.

The Secretary-General: I welcome this
opportunity to brief the Security Council about the
humanitarian situation in Syria. My latest report
(S/2021/583) is now before the Security Council, and
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
will brief members in detail. I will focus my remarks on
the decisions soon to be taken by the Security Council.

Despite the United Nations massive response in
Syria and across the region, more humanitarian access
is required to reach those most in need. That is why
I have been clearly expressing how important it is to
maintain and expand access, including cross-border
and cross-line operations. We are in dialogue with
Turkey and groups in control of the area, and I have
strong hopes that it will soon be possible to start crossline operations But we must recognize that they will
never be able to replace cross-border assistance at the
present levels.

For many of Syria’s people, the situation today
is worse than at any time since the conflict began;
13.4 million people are in need of humanitarian
assistance and 12.4 million people are food-insecure.
The gross domestic product has plummeted by 60 per

I organized the first large cross-line convoys in
Syria when I was High Commissioner for Refugees,
and I have been following closely the current cross-line
operations in the north-east. Even with such enhanced
effort, the situation there has become more difficult

I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. António Guterres.

2/28

21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

since the closure of cross-border operations last year. In
the past 12 months, we have been carrying out massive
cross-border operations in the north-west, with more
than 1,000 trucks moving through a single crossing
point a month. Every step of the delivery is scrupulously
monitored by people on the ground to ensure that the aid
is not diverted and reaches its intended beneficiaries.
I strongly appeal to the members of the Council to
reach consensus on allowing cross border operations as
a vital channel of support for another year. A failure
to extend the Council’s authorization would have
devastating consequences.
The Syrian people are in dire need, and it is essential
to mobilize all our capacities along all channels. Let us
not forget that the solution to the Syrian tragedy can only
be political. Syrians must come together to agree on
their future. It is time to end the decade-long nightmare.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his introductory remarks.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: Further to the SecretaryGeneral’s remarks and his most recent report
(S/2021/583), I will focus my briefing today on five
points — first, the ongoing spread of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19); secondly, the impact of the
economic crisis; thirdly, the water crisis; fourthly,
the protection of civilians and, fifthly, humanitarian
access, particularly as it relates to the United Nations
cross-border operation.
Let me begin with COVID-19. Transmission rates
are high, with the actual spread likely exceeding official
records. An already weak health system is overstretched.
Shortages of materials and trained personnel continue
to be reported. Vaccinations are under way across Syria.
In May, vaccines from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global
Access (COVAX) Facility were dispatched through
all available modalities — cross-line to north-eastern
Syria, cross-border to north-western Syria and within
Government-controlled territories. As of 20 June,
more than 97,000 people had received their first dose
in Government areas and the north-east. Some 26,000
people have received at least one dose in the north-west.
Current vaccinations prioritize front-line healthcare workers, helping to protect an essential group that
has been at the highest risk. The pandemic has been
severe for health-care workers. Each illness further
depletes the already critically low number of doctors

S/PV. 8803

and nurses, at a moment when all support is needed
to address the pandemic. It is important, however, not
to underestimate the burden of the disease in Syria.
The first COVAX delivery is only sufficient for about
0.5 per cent of Syria’s people. The total delivery from
the COVAX Facility is expected to cover only 20 per
cent of the entire population. As the Secretary-General
noted last month, equal access to vaccines, tests,
medicines and supplies, including oxygen, is needed
to curb transmission rates, especially among the most
vulnerable population, together with sustained access
and additional funding.
My second point is about the impact of the
economic crisis. Daily life in Syria is becoming less
and less affordable. The economic crisis has profound
consequences for people throughout the country. Across
Syria, they face eroded employment opportunities;
prices remain at record levels and goods and services are
becoming scarcer. In his report, the Secretary-General
notes his call more than a year ago for the waiving of
sanctions that may impede access to essential health
supplies, COVID-19 medical support or food in Syria.
The United Nations Population Fund has observed
in recent months an increase in child and early marriage
in north-western Syria. Desperate living conditions
have led many families to marry off their daughters
at a very young age. The vulnerabilities of children,
especially girls, grow exponentially under such difficult
conditions.
In May, a nationwide survey found that a growing
percentage of the population faces challenges in
accessing basic health services. Access to health care
remains most difficult in north-eastern Syria. Some
37 per cent of interviewed households reported not
being able to purchase necessary medicines. The lack of
financial resources was the overwhelming reason, with
82 per cent of participants indicating that medicine was
unaffordable. A shortage of medicine on the shelves
was second. Essential treatments are beyond the reach
of many, particularly in north-eastern Syria.
My third point concerns the water crisis in Syria. As
the Secretary-General just warned, Syria faces critical
water shortages, especially in the north-east. The water
deficit in the Euphrates basin is the worst in memory.
The Tishrin and Tabaqah dams will stop functioning if
the water levels become any lower, with far-reaching
impacts. Nearly 5.5 million people face reduced access
to drinking water. Three million people, as well as

21-164953/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

hospitals and other vital infrastructure, may lose access
to electricity. The potential long-term consequences
are severe. I urge all the parties concerned to find a
solution that accounts for the needs of everyone in the
region who depends on water from the Euphrates and
its tributaries.
With respect to the protection of civilians, the
destructive effects of a decade of armed conflict are
inescapable. In April and May, the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights verified
that at least 150 civilians were killed, and another 154
civilians injured in 186 incidents during hostilities.
Women and children made up a significant proportion
of those victims. There has been an alarming increase
in hostilities in north-western Syria in the last month,
which has resulted in many civilian casualties and the
displacement of more than 11,000 civilians.
Civilians in many parts of Syria live under constant
threat, even if front lines are relatively static. Vestiges
of armed conflict litter the country, and explosive
remnants of war, landmines and improvised explosive
devices pose a constant danger.
Amid growing needs and deepening hardship,
the attack that severely damaged the United Nationssupported Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin on 12 June was
all the more shocking. At least 19 civilians were killed,
including three children, and 40 were injured, including
a child with disabilities. Among the dead were four
humanitarian workers. In total, 11 hospital staff were
also injured.
The Al-Shifa hospital is one of the largest medical
facilities in northern Syria. Before the attack, it
provided an average of 15,000 medical services each
month, including 250 specialized surgeries. The attack
rendered the hospital inoperable. One missile reportedly
hit the emergency room. Another landed in the delivery
room, where some 350 babies were born each month.
Both units were destroyed, as were the outpatient
department and radiology rooms. It is not the first time
that Al-Shifa hospital has come under attack, but it is
the most recent attack in a long pattern that endangers
patients and medical workers and jeopardizes health
care in the long term. It also raises serious concerns
about compliance with international humanitarian
law, which prohibits attacks directed against medical
facilities and requires the parties to take all feasible
precautions to avoid and minimize civilian harm.
4/28

23/06/2021

Like many other health facilities, including the
Al-Atarib Surgical Hospital, hit on 21 March, the
location of the hospital was well known to all parties.
As the Secretary-General has stressed, and as required
under international humanitarian law, all allegations
of serious violations must be investigated and the
perpetrators must be prosecuted, where appropriate.
There must be accountability for war crimes in Syria.
My fifth point is on humanitarian access. The
Security Council’s authorization for the United
Nations cross-border operation in Syria expires on
10 July — just 17 days from now. While the Security
Council deliberates, the United Nations and its partners
will continue to operate, as they have since 2014, when
the Security Council first authorized the humanitarian
operation across borders and conflict lines. Hundreds
of trucks will continue to deliver assistance to people
otherwise unable to meet basic needs. Life-saving
services, such as vaccinations, will continue to be
provided. Humanitarian staff will continue to help
manage camps for women and children with nowhere
else to go.
The United Nations and its partners will also
continue to monitor its programmes to ensure assistance
reaches people in need. The United Nations cross-border
operation remains one of the most heavily scrutinized
and monitored aid operations in the world. A failure to
extend the authorization will have stark consequences.
It would disrupt life-saving aid to 3.4 million people
in need across the north-west, millions of whom are
among the most vulnerable in Syria.
Last week, a group of 42 non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) warned about such a scenario.
NGOs estimate that they have capacity to meet the
needs of only 300,000 people, leaving more than
1 million without food assistance. With 90 per cent of
people in need requiring assistance for their survival,
they would face a truly catastrophic situation. There is
simply no substitute for the cross-border operation.
The United Nations and its partners spare no effort
to access all people in need across north-western Syria,
using all possible means. The needs are simply too great
not to exhaust all options. That includes attempting to
reach people in need across front lines, from within
Syria. Consultations continue with relevant parties to
undertake such operations as soon as possible. Despite
all efforts, no such mission has been able to proceed.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

A cross-line operation would provide a vital
addition to the cross-border lifeline, but it could by
no means replace it. Even if deployed regularly, crossline convoys could not replicate the size and scope of
the cross-border operations. Cross-line operations can
complement, not substitute, a well-funded cross-border
operation to north-west Syria.
When it comes to delivering life-saving aid to
people in need across Syria, all channels should be
made and kept available. The stakes are simply too
high otherwise. Even with the massive United Nations
response in Syria, more humanitarian access is
required to reach those most in need of assistance. As
the Secretary-General notes in his report, with more
crossings and more funds, the United Nations can do
more to help the increasing number of people in need in
Syria. That potential remains, both for the north-west
and the north-east.
I echo the Secretary-General’s call to the Security
Council to help ensure that the United Nations and
its humanitarian partners have every opportunity to
assist people in need by extending the cross-border
authorization for 12 months.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for his
briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim.
Ms. Ibrahim: I am honoured to address the Security
Council today on behalf of my organization, CARE
International, and in solidarity with the humanitarian
community operating in Syria. CARE has been
operating in Syria since 2013. I lead CARE’s work in
Turkey and across the border in the north-west of Syria,
where incredible partners from non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) deliver aid into the hands of
Syrians in need.
The humanitarian situation in Syria is dire. Imagine
living in a country where approximately 90 per cent
of your fellow citizens live below the poverty line and
where the price of basic food items has increased 29-fold
since the start of the crisis. How do you contemplate a
future where the World Food Programme food baskets
that you rely on to feed your family might stop? That
will be the unthinkable reality for over 1 million Syrians
in the north-west come September if the United Nations
is not authorized to continue its cross-border operation.
My main message to the Security Council is simple:
now is not the time to scale back the humanitarian

S/PV. 8803

cross-border operation. Needs on the ground are higher
than ever, and they will continue to rise given the
financial crisis in neighbouring Lebanon, the new wave
of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) infections across
northern Syria, the deteriorating food situation and the
looming water crisis in the north-east.
Earlier this week, CARE International and 27
other humanitarian directors addressed an open letter
to the Council asking it to scale up humanitarian
access into Syria. The level of the crisis demands the
reauthorization of cross-border assistance to north-west
Syria via the Bab Al-Hawa and Bab Al-Salam crossings
for a minimum of 12 months. It also requires reinstating
the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the north-east for a similar
period, as needs there have shot up by 38 per cent since
the crossing closed last year.
The scale and scope of the humanitarian crossborder operation is one of the most, if not the most,
complex humanitarian operation in the world. It cannot
be replicated by NGOs. Despite our presence and
expertise, we cannot implement the scale of procurement,
transportation, warehousing, coordination and funding
required to keep that critical humanitarian operation
afloat. There is simply no replacement for the United
Nations cross-border capacity — not now, not in six
months’ or in 12 months’ time.
The Emergency Relief Coordinator has been clear
in successive briefings to the Council that cross-line
modalities are not a viable alternative to cross-border
operations. As members know, there has been no
single cross-line convoy to north-west Syria, where
2.5 million Syrians depend on aid. In the north-east,
cross-line operations remain woefully inadequate,
with approximately 70 per cent of the population
experiencing severe or catastrophic levels of need.
Last week, the heads of seven United Nations agencies
issued a joint statement with an unequivocal message:
they are convinced that, even if cross-line convoys
were deployed regularly to the north-west, they could
not replicate the size and scope of the cross-border
operation. There is simply no alternative.
It is time for the Council to recall the SecretaryGeneral’s advice after the closure of Al-Yarubiyah,
when he said that if adequate steps were not taken to
ensure effective cross-line deliveries, the Council would
need to authorize the United Nations to use additional
crossings. That expansion in humanitarian access by
the Council is now urgent, given the spike in COVID-19

21-164955/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

cases in northern Syria. We must ensure that the nascent
COVID-19 vaccination campaign will not be halted in
its tracks, not only undermining the global effort to
end the pandemic but also contradicting the Council’s
own resolution 2565 (2021) to facilitate equitable and
affordable access to COVID-19 vaccines in armed
conflicts and complex humanitarian emergencies.
In conclusion, I want to highlight the gender
dimensions to the multiple crises faced by Syrians,
which should inform the Council’s deliberations on
Syria. Earlier this year, CARE published a report
entitled If we don’t work, we don’t eat. That quote
captures the story of many Syrian women, already
overburdened by prevailing gender inequality and
forced to take additional roles to become breadwinners
and heads of households. It also conveys their strength
and resilience after a decade of conflict. Syrian women
do not want handouts; they want to enjoy their rights to
live in dignity.
Yet, compared to men, women struggle to find
work and fair wages. Too often, they resort to desperate
coping mechanisms to survive, including sending their
children to work, taking them out of school, buying
essential items on credit, skipping meals and marrying
off their daughters to have one less mouth to feed.
Unsurprisingly, maternal malnutrition affects one
third of Syrian mothers. And women’s mental health
is another serious casualty of the situation. Adolescent
girls are forced into adulthood and motherhood far too
early. Confronted by a range of protection issues, they
are the real forgotten victims of the crisis.
Syria must not be condemned to a deeper
humanitarian catastrophe than we are witnessing
today. The Council has the authority to take practical
steps that will help Syrians begin to turn the tables.
We trust that its decision will be based on the needs on
the ground and that it will stand by the Syrian people
during this hour of greatest need.
The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
6/28

23/06/2021

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I make this statement on
behalf of the co-penholders on the Syrian humanitarian
file, namely, Norway and Ireland.
We would like to thank the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres; Acting Under-Secretary-General
for Humanitarian Affairs, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham;
and the Country Director of CARE, Turkey, Ms. Sherine
Ibrahim, for the briefings we just heard.
This year, we marked 10 years of conflict in
Syria — one that has caused enormous suffering for
the Syrian people and created a deeply embedded
humanitarian crisis that continues to worsen. The facts
are stark and shocking. At present, 13.4 million people
in Syria are in need of humanitarian assistance — a
20 per cent increase from last year.
The Syrian people continue to bear the brunt of the
ongoing conflict. We condemn the attacks on 12 June
on Al-Shifa hospital in the city of Afrin, which killed
and injured civilians, including health-care workers.
We underline once again the obligation on all parties
to conflict to respect international humanitarian law.
The impact of the reduced water levels in the
Euphrates River further underlines the ongoing
vulnerability in the north-east, where critical irrigation
of crops and essential power supply to hospitals has
been interrupted.
On 10 July, the humanitarian aid delivery
mechanism renewed by resolution 2533 (2020) will
expire. In the coming two weeks, Ireland and Norway,
as co-penholders, will work with all members of the
Security Council for the renewal of that humanitarian
resolution. We must show our strong and united support
for Syria’s most vulnerable people.
Let me be clear. After 10 years of conflict and
rising humanitarian needs in 2021, cross-border access
is as essential today as it has ever been. In fact, the
situation on the ground has worsened since last July,
when the Security Council adopted resolution 2553
(2020). An additional 2.4 million people in Syria are in
need of humanitarian assistance. Food insecurity has
risen by 50 per cent — let me repeat, 50 per cent. In
addition, the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has put
enormous pressure on what was already a very fragile
health system. When it comes to delivering life-saving
aid to people in need across Syria, we need to use all
channels, both cross-line and cross-border modalities.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

As we have made clear over the past six months,
the approach of Ireland and Norway as co-penholders
for this resolution is guided solely by the humanitarian
need and the suffering of the people of Syria. Their
needs are our overwhelming concern.
In the north-west, the number of people in need
increased by over 20 percent in 2021. Each winter,
freezing temperatures and flooding cause further
hardships for the 1.6 million people living in camps and
informal settlements.
In the north-east, humanitarian needs also remain
high, and the situation has worsened since the closure of
the Al-Yarubiyah crossing. While cross-line deliveries
to that area have been scaled up, they have not been
adequate to meet growing needs. As the SecretaryGeneral’s most recent report (S/2021/583) emphasizes,
humanitarian organizations in the north-east continue
to report limited capacity of health-care facilities and
imminent stockouts of medical supplies, including
critical medicines, such as insulin and cardiovascular
and antibacterial medicines. With more crossings and
more funds, the United Nations could do more to help
the increasing number of people in need.
We have consulted broadly with Security Council
members and civil society, and indeed listened carefully
to the United Nations, including the Secretary-General,
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs and the United Nations agencies delivering
the humanitarian response in Syria. The message has
been very clear. A failure to renew the cross-border
resolution would halt the delivery of life-saving aid to
millions of people in desperate need, increasing civilian
suffering in north-west Syria to levels unprecedented in
a decade of conflict.
Without a renewal, the COVID-19 vaccine rollout in the north-west would be severely disrupted. A
closure would have a detrimental effect on health, food
security, water, sanitation, protection and other services
provided by non-governmental organizations that rely
on United Nations support in logistics, financing and
procurement. Put simply, a failure to renew would cause
a humanitarian catastrophe in the north-west of Syria.
Humanitarian access must be facilitated to
reach all civilians in need, using all possible means,
including through cross-line operations. However, even
if deployed regularly, we know that cross-line convoys
in the north-west could not come close to replicating
the size and scope of the cross-border operations. It is

S/PV. 8803

worth noting here the critical role of the United Nations
Monitoring Mechanism in ensuring the cross-border
operation in the north-west is one of the most heavily
scrutinized and monitored aid operations in the world,
ensuring the humanitarian nature of all shipments in
the north-west.
That brings us to the role and responsibility of the
members of the Security Council to ensure that all
channels for delivering life-saving aid to people in need
in Syria should be made and kept available. In the coming
days, Ireland and Norway, as co-penholders, will be
circulating to Council members a draft resolution that
will renew and expand the humanitarian aid delivery
mechanism in response to the pressing humanitarian
needs. Asco- penholders, our approach will continue to
be informed by the words of the Secretary-General, that
a large-scale cross-border response for an additional
12 months remains essential to saving lives. We will
remain in close contact with all members of the Council
in the weeks to come in ensuring that the humanitarian
needs of the people of Syria are met.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his briefing and for his most recent report on
the humanitarian situation in Syria (S/2021/583). I
would also thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Sherine
Ibrahim, Country Director of CARE, Turkey, for their
briefings. I welcome the vital and noble role of the
United Nations and its executive partners, including
in the Syrian Arab Republic. I also welcome the
representatives of Syria, Turkey and Iran, who are
participating in this meeting.
Tunisia reiterates its staunch position that there is
no sustainable alternative to an accelerated political
settlement, in accordance with resolution 2254 (2015),
to put an end to the suffering of our Syrian brothers
and put Syria permanently on the path to achieving
security, peace and development. In the meantime, it is
essential to increase humanitarian and medical aid in
order to meet the growing needs of Syrians and address
the risks and vulnerability they have been facing
throughout a decade of violence and terrorism, and now
the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Today’s briefings confirm the deterioration of the
humanitarian, economic and social crisis. We can see

21-164957/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

the complex consequences of it, with stronger impact
on children, women and displaced persons.
We are deeply concerned about the worsening
living situation of millions of Syrians, namely, in
terms of food, medicines, fuel, vital infrastructure and
essential items. It has been difficult to lead a dignified
life in Syria. The shortages in basic services, such as
water and electricity, could have a long-term impact on
food security, health care and ways of subsistence.
We are concerned about the recent increase in
violations and insecurity in Syria. Tunisia reiterates the
importance of a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire
throughout the country, in response to the appeal of
the Secretary-General. We call on all parties to comply
with international humanitarian law and to protect
civilians and civilian facilities, along with medical and
humanitarian staff. We also stress the need to combat
terrorist organizations, which have been particularly
active recently targeting security and stability in Syria.
Tunisia calls once again for increased humanitarian
relief and medical efforts in line with the principles for
the provision of humanitarian assistance. That aid must
reach all needy Syrians quickly and without obstruction
through all available means, including on the front
lines and borders, while fully respecting international
law and international humanitarian law.
We welcome the delivery and distribution of
several doses of coronavirus disease vaccines in both
the north-east and north-west of Syria in recent weeks.
We urge that the distribution of vaccines should take
place quickly and fairly in all parts of Syria in order to
save lives and enhance relief efforts.
Tunisia hopes for a negotiated, consensus solution
in the days to come that contributes to the relaunching
of aid delivery across the Syrian border. We stress the
importance of providing more aid through cross-line
operations in a way that reflects the collective will of
the Council, with a view to achieving the necessary
solutions and giving priority to humanitarian needs
over political considerations. That would fulfil the
basic needs of and provide services to Syrians, and
effectively address the coronavirus disease pandemic
while ensuring sustainable funding and a predictable
humanitarian response from donors, the United Nations
and local organizations.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): Kenya thanks the
Secretary-General for his remarks and commitment
8/28

23/06/2021

to the people of Syria. I also thank the Acting UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs, Ramesh
Rajasingham, and the Country Director for CARE,
Turkey, Sherine Ibrahim, for their briefings. We also
welcome the representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey.
As we draw closer to the expiry of Bab al-Hawa as
the only humanitarian aid border crossing authorized
by resolution 2533 (2020), the urgent need for consensus
to ensure that assistance continues to reach millions of
Syrian nationals in need cannot be overstated. Kenya
stands with the Syrian people and underscores that the
Council’s decision should be underpinned primarily by
their needs and the practicalities of ensuring that those
needs are met.
As we heard from the Secretary-General, the
humanitarian situation in Syria is worse now than ever
before. Against that backdrop, Kenya is persuaded that
the cross-border and cross-line mechanisms should
coexist and, indeed, complement each other, with a
view to ensuring continued principled humanitarian
aid, including the delivery of the coronavirus disease
vaccines to the millions in need, especially in north-west
and north-east Syria. We encourage the Government of
Syria to continue intensifying cross-line deliveries of
aid, especially in north-west Syria.
Kenya is gravely concerned by the heightened
insecurity across Syria. We are disturbed by the
frequent improvised-explosive-device attacks, targeted
killings and air strikes, which have led to fatalities,
including among women and children. We find those
quite unsettling. We condemn those senseless attacks,
including the latest missile attack in Afrin on Al-Shifa
Hospital, which resulted in 19 deaths. We also condemn
the violation of critical civilian infrastructure such as
hospitals and schools, especially during this time of the
pandemic when there is a greater need for medical care.
We reiterate the imperative for all parties to honour
the nationwide ceasefire. It is equally critical that all
those responsible for these heinous attacks be fully
investigated and held accountable.
The reduced water levels in the Euphrates and
the Allouk water station should be addressed. If that
situation continues unchecked, it could exacerbate food
insecurity, shortages of drinking water and loss of
electricity, among other things, further worsening the
humanitarian situation.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Kenya notes that unilateral coercive measures
have adversely impacted the Syrian economy and
undermined the Government’s efforts to provide for the
vulnerable members of society. We call for the lifting
of such measures.
In closing, I would like to reiterate that the Council’s
decision on the humanitarian situation, including
the issue of cross-border and cross-line mechanisms,
should be informed by the enormity of the needs and the
access challenges. The matter is too sensitive and too
critical to be politicized. We should bear in mind that
the only solution to the conflict in Syria is a political
process that should be inclusive, Syrian-led and Syrianowned. Kenya will continue to support such a process,
fully aware that a political solution would lead to a
significant improvement in the humanitarian situation.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
the Secretary-General and the Acting Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs for their briefings. I
also welcome the efforts made by CARE, Turkey, as
presented by Ms. Ibrahim.
France condemns the bombings that took place on
12 June against the city of Afrin and Al-Shifa Hospital,
which led to a number of civilian victims, including
medical staff. Once again we are looking at a war
crime; all possible light must be shed on this issue, and
justice must be done.
Hostilities are ongoing in Syria, as we can see from
the attacks regularly carried out by the regime against
Idlib. Every effort must be made to establish a general
ceasefire under the auspices of the United Nations
as well as a humanitarian pause, in accordance with
resolutions 2532 (2020) and 2254 (2015), as well as the
appeal made by the Secretary-General.
Respect for international humanitarian law remains
an obligation for all. Protecting civilians remains an
absolute priority. Humanitarian and medical needs have
increased by 20 per cent in the country over the past
year and by 38 per cent in the north-east. More than
half of the Syrian population is facing food insecurity.
There is a shortage of water in the north-east, and water
may soon be in short supply throughout the remainder
of the country. The economic crisis, which stems from
corruption and disastrous management, also explains
the situation.
The coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic
has led to a sharp increase in the need for medical

S/PV. 8803

aid. All parties, in particular the Syrian regime, must
guarantee full humanitarian access. The cross-border
humanitarian assistance mechanism is more than ever
necessary, both in the north-west and the north-east.
Cross-line aid from Damascus is far from meeting
current needs and in any event cannot replace crossborder aid.
As made clear in the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/583), only half of the authorizations requested
by the United Nations are granted by the regime. The
cross-border mechanism will be needed so long as
humanitarian assistance is not reaching all people
in need throughout the territory, on the basis of an
objective needs assessment. And yet the Syrian regime
continues to politicize aid, hold the Syrian people
hostage and interfere with the work of humanitarian
personnel. A renewal of the cross-border mechanism
for at least 12 months is therefore absolutely necessary,
as requested by the Secretary-General, United Nations
agencies and all other humanitarian actors.
I therefore call on all members of the Council to
show unity and responsibility and to take decisions
based solely on humanitarian considerations. We have
a moral duty: that of saving lives, countering the threat
of famine and facilitating COVID-19 vaccination
campaigns. That should lead us to authorize the use
of the three crossing points: Bab al-Hawa and Bab
al-Salam, in the north-west, and Al-Yarubiyah, in the
north-east.
Finally, only a political solution in line with
resolution 2254 (2015) can put an end of this
humanitarian tragedy and ensure lasting stability
throughout the country. Our priority today is to address
the urgent situation and meet the humanitarian needs.
We are contributing to that across the country. I recall
that 92 per cent of the humanitarian funding pledged
for 2021 comes from the European Union, its member
States, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada,
Japan and Norway. Until a credible political process is
firmly under way, France and the European Union will
not fund the reconstruction.
Finally, those present know our positions on the
lifting of sanctions and normalization, which remain
unchanged. The use of the sanctions issue to conceal
the regime’s overwhelming responsibility deceives
no one.
I

Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency

21-164959/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

23/06/2021

Mr. António Guterres, the Acting Under-SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Emergency
Relief Coordinator, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, and
Ms. Sherine Ibrahim for their briefings.

electricity. A sustainable solution to safeguard lives
and livelihoods must be pursued. On that point, we
recall that water and water systems should never
be weaponized.

After 10 years of war, a political solution to the
Syrian conflict is still absent and the Syrian people
continue to pay the highest price with their untold
suffering. Their despair is further deepened by the
severe socioeconomic decline, which has precipitated
commodity shortages and acute food insecurity.
Furthermore, the continued application of unilateral
coercive measures has had an indirect adverse impact
on life-saving humanitarian operations and has
hindered the country’s overall socioeconomic recovery.
That remains a primary concern, and we reiterate our
appeal for the lifting of those sanctions for the benefit
of the Syrian people.

Civilians are forced to endure the consequences
of the continued hostilities across Syria. Regrettably,
death, displacement and the destruction of essential
civilian infrastructure are an everyday occurrence. A
nationwide ceasefire is therefore immediately needed
for the protection of civilians and to guarantee the
uninterrupted delivery of humanitarian aid. Attacks on
civilians and civilian infrastructure, in violation of the
fundamental principles of international law, must be
met with condemnation, and the perpetrators of those
indefensible acts must be held accountable.

Syria’s arduous road to recovery is also highly
reliant on the international community’s goodwill
in providing reconstruction aid, without which
millions will be deprived of vital social services and
safe and dignified living conditions. Support for the
rehabilitation of the country’s basic infrastructure is
therefore urgently needed.
Unquestionably, Syria is one of the worst
humanitarian crises of our time. Needs are steadily
rising across the country, and women and children
are disproportionately affected. Addressing the
multidimensional and complex challenges requires
continued constructive engagement with the Syrian
Government and international humanitarian agencies.
It further demands the preservation and the scaling-up
of both the cross-border mechanism and the cross-line
modality. There remains no alternative to ensuring
timely, safe, sustained and unimpeded humanitarian
access, in line with the humanitarian principles, to those
desperately in need in Syria. Failure to reauthorize
the mechanism not only will put an end to the critical
lifeline of aid to millions but also will create disruptions
in the distribution of the much-needed coronavirus
disease vaccines. It is imperative that humanitarian
assistance not be politicized and that the Syrian people
be prioritized.
We are deeply concerned by the worsening
situation in the Euphrates River basin. Drought and
other troubling factors have led to alarmingly low water
levels. Millions are dependent on its supply for drinking
water, the irrigation of crops and the generation of
10/28

Also on civilian protection, the deteriorating
security situation in displacement camps, particularly
in Al-Hol, is disturbing. Civilians residing and working
in those camps must be afforded safety and access to
basic services. That necessitates immediate action.
As has been said many times in this Chamber,
there is no military solution to the Syrian conflict. A
Syrian-led and Syrian-owned political process, in line
with resolution 2254 (2015), is the only viable path to
peace, stability and the protection and prosperity of the
Syrian people.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Secretary-General Guterres for his
briefing and for joining us today. I also wish to thank
Mr. Rajasingham and Ms. Ibrahim for their briefings.
Today the Security Council is being confronted
with a critical decision: what we communicate to
millions of Syrians about the dire situation that they are
in and whether we plan to continue to provide crucial
humanitarian aid cross-border. Three weeks ago, I
travelled to the Turkish-Syrian border and I visited Bab
Al-Hawa. There I met with United Nations front-line
workers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and
refugees, who shared devastating stories about what
they faced after a decade of conflict. I went because
I wanted the Syrian people to know that they are not
forgotten and because I wanted to see with my own
eyes how the cross-border mechanism works so that I
could speak first-hand about it.
We all agree that, after 10 years of war, Syria is
among the world’s worst humanitarian disasters. The
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) has only made the
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

situation worse. As I shared with Members earlier,
when I spoke to one humanitarian worker, who told
me that for Syrian refugees COVID-19 was “another
reason to die”. For millions of Syrians, Bab Al-Hawa is
a literal lifeline. As we have heard, every month 1,000
trucks carry food, nutritional assistance, clean water
and medical supplies to people living in desperate need.
The Syrian refugees and courageous United Nations
humanitarian workers with whom I met on the border
warned me over and over again that, without crossborder access, thousands of children will be denied
food and be permanently stunted in their growth and
cognitive development. Others will die because health
facilities will no longer have supplies. Millions of
people will have reduced access to clean water, medical
supplies and, of course, vaccines.
They are terrified that that is the choice the Security
Council will make. Tragically, their fears are not
unfounded because that is exactly what the Council has
done to them before. As we all know, there used to be four
crossings for humanitarian aid into Syria. Now there is
only one. The most recent closures constricted aid at
precisely the moment that COVID-19 exacerbated the
humanitarian needs on the ground. When Al-Yarubiyah
closed, hospitals and NGOs were cut off from supplies.
It took months for medical supplies to be re-routed. By
the time they reached the people in need nearly a year
later, medicines and vaccines had expired, and medical
kits had been ransacked of their contents along the way.
The NGOs I spoke with told me that anything less than
a 12-month renewal of Bab Al-Hawa would once again
upend their operations outright.
We also benefit from robust United Nations
monitoring, which those present heard about today.
The rigour and professionalism that I saw at the
border crossing is the same gold standard that I have
seen from the United Nations throughout my four
decades evaluating humanitarian missions as a United
States diplomat. At Bab Al-Hawa I saw first-hand
how the teams confirmed the contents of the boxes
and sealed up the trucks. I saw how they have four
points of verification: the border, the warehouse in
Syria, the distribution centre and after- distribution to
beneficiaries. We need to strengthen as well as expand
this operation. We are committed to maximizing
humanitarian relief to the Syrian people, which is why
we support renewing and expanding this mandate with
all modalities of assistance — and to do so with urgency.

S/PV. 8803

Syria’s economic woes are the result of the Al-Assad
regime’s gross corruption and mismanagement of the
Syrian economy. With respect to cross-line aid, it can
be part of the equation, but it is completely insufficient
to meet the needs of millions of desperate people inside
of Syria today.
Now we have made clear we are willing to work
with our partners to expand all forms of assistance to
Syrians in need — cross-border as well as cross-line.
We are open to it, as are others. But hard truth is that,
right now, this is a hypothetical solution with more than
a few practical limitations. And ultimately, it is not our
choice to make here today.
Here is our choice. Do we ensure our humanitarian
aid continues to be monitored from start to finish? Do
we follow through with our commitment to end the
coronavirus-disease pandemic? Do we help Syrians
in desperate need? Without cross-border access,
more Syrians will die, and we know that. Front-line
United Nations workers know it. Non-governmental
organizations know it. Al-Assad knows it. Syrian
refugees and internally displaced people know it as
well. Everybody knows this. That is why the Council
has a duty to reauthorize Bab Al-Hawa, as well as Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah. It does not take much: a
technical rollover for 12 months for three crossings.
We should do it now, and not leave mothers and fathers
wondering if they will be able to feed their children on
11 July.
Our mandate in the Security Council is to maintain
peace and security. We will undermine that mandate
and the credibility of this organ if we are responsible
for cutting off millions of people from the food, water
and medical assistance they need to survive. We have
an obligation to extend the mandate. We must vote for
a renewal.
Mr. Gupta (India): Let me begin by thanking
Secretary-General António Guterres for his briefing.
I also thank Acting Under-Secretary-General Ramesh
Rajasingham for his update on the humanitarian
situation in Syria. I thank Ms. Sherine Ibrahim of CARE
for providing us with insights into the challenges from
the perspective of civil society based in Damascus.
As we hear these briefings regularly, it is
abundantly clear that the decade-long violence and
terror has caused devastating impact on the lives of
Syrians. More than 11 million people across Syria
are in dire need of humanitarian assistance in one

21-1649511/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

form or another. Syrian women, children and elderly
persons have been impacted in disproportionate ways.
The displaced population and those who have chosen
to return to their homes are facing a grim situation
across all of Syria. The worsening exchange rate, the
increasing cost of food and fuel shortages are affecting
both the population and humanitarian operations alike.
The presence of foreign forces and external support to
armed groups are only making the situation worse.
The unfolding pandemic and the adverse impact
of sanctions on health facilities and humanitarian
operations have further exacerbated the situation.
Both the Secretary-General and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs have repeatedly
spoken about the impact of sanctions on humanitarian
operations. These measures need to be reviewed so
as to ensure that the country’s capacity to access and
absorb humanitarian assistance and medical support
is not hindered. We are encouraged by the ongoing
technical dialogue between relevant Member States and
humanitarian actors on this issue.
We have consistently been calling for enhanced
and effective humanitarian assistance to all Syrians
throughout the country without any discrimination,
politicization or preconditions. What we need
immediately is active engagement that is consistent
with the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of Syria and that addresses the urgency of the
humanitarian issues to alleviate the suffering of the
Syrian people. We need concrete steps to address hurdles
that are obstructing the functioning of both cross-border
and cross-line operations, especially as we are barely
a few weeks away from the mandate-renewal deadline
for the humanitarian aid-mechanism resolution.
While the Council’s attention is focused on
mandate renewal, terrorist groups such as Hayat
Tahrir Al-Shams and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant are attacking civilians in rural Idlib and Hama
and in the north-east of Syria. The infighting among
armed groups in the region has continued to endanger
civilians. The fighting along the front lines in the northwest is threatening the lives of civilians and hospitals.
India strongly condemns the attacks of 12 June on the
Al-Shifa hospital in the city of Afrin, in northern Syria.
Moreover, we cannot turn a blind eye to the issue
of presence of the almost 8,800 third-country nationals,
including women and children, in Al-Hol camp. This
issue also needs to be addressed with all seriousness.
12/28

23/06/2021

On the positive side, we are happy to note deliveries
of vaccines from the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access
(COVAX) Facility to Syria, including in the north-west.
The supplies from COVAX should cover around one
fifth of the population. Although grossly inadequate,
this is still a vital first step to protect medical workers
and the most vulnerable.
We note that some countries in Europe and the
Middle East have started to re-establish their diplomatic
presence in Syria. We welcome re-establishing formal
channels of communication. That will help to bring
the dire humanitarian situation into sharper focus,
especially for the international donor community.
We would also like to flag the need for undertaking
rehabilitation and reconstruction measures as well.
On the bilateral front, India has extended development
assistance and human resource-development support to
Syria through the provision of lines of credit for industrial
and infrastructure projects, the supply of medicine and
food, the organization of artificial limb-fitment camps
and capacity-building training programmes.
In conclusion, India reiterates its steadfast
commitment to supporting the people of Syria in these
difficult times.
Mr. Pham (Viet Nam): I thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and Acting Under-Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham for their remarks. I also thank
Ms. Sherine Ibrahim for sharing her insights. I welcome
the participation of the representatives of Syria, Turkey
and Iran in today’s meeting.
Let me start by expressing our grave concern over
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Syria.
It has been getting worse due to the economic crisis and
the impacts of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19).
Food insecurity, shortages of fuel and basic goods,
as well as the severity of the ongoing pandemic,
continue to aggravate the predicament of the Syrian
people throughout the country. The number of people
in need has been on the rise, especially in the past year.
It is now around 13.4 million people — over 20 per cent
higher than in 2020.
Water insecurity relating to the Euphrates River in
the north-east is causing serious challenges in terms of
water supply for 5 million people and electricity supply
for another 3 million. The issues concerning the Allouk
water station and various internally displaced person
camps remain unsettled.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

In the meantime, protection concerns continue to
be highlighted. Even though this might be the calmest
period of the crisis, instability continues to claim
civilian lives. Civilian infrastructure and humanitarian
work are being affected by violence, including the most
recent incident at Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin.
My delegation therefore calls on all parties to refrain
from actions that could cause further deterioration
in the situation. Efforts to combat terrorist groups
designated by the Security Council should continue.
At the same time, well-coordinated actions are needed
to best ensure respect for international law, including
international humanitarian law and relevant Security
Council resolutions.
While there is no end in sight to the humanitarian
crisis, safe and unimpeded and sustained humanitarian
access should be maintained in order to enhance the
humanitarian response. All efforts and all appropriate
channels need to be explored and employed, as
appropriate, to meet the needs of the people.
We take note with encouragement of the fact that
measures to prevent COVID-19 are no longer considered
a significant impediment to humanitarian activities. We
are pleased to see that no major operational challenges to
the World Health Organization deliveries in the northeast were recorded in April and May. However, given
the high demand for medical supplies, coordination
among parties in control must be enhanced, and
procedures to further facilitate shipments to this area
must be simplified.
The situation in north-west remains dire. Some
3.4 million people are in need of assistance, most of
whom are internally displaced persons. One of every
three children of under the age of five is affected by
chronic malnutrition. A great number of civilians
are depending on the delivery of life-saving aid. The
continued operation of the humanitarian system for
people in this area through appropriate consultation
with relevant parties is critical. For that reason, it is
important that the Council reach consensus in finding a
solution to this issue.
Meanwhile we call for dialogue among parties to
reach agreement on the modality of cross-line delivery
to the north-west.
As the COVID-19 situation worsens, the
distribution of vaccines and other medical goods is
crucial. We call for continued support for the Syrian

S/PV. 8803

fight against the pandemic. Our delegation also
supports the Secretary-General’s appeal for a waiver
of sanctions that hinder the humanitarian response
to the pandemic. We commend the efforts of United
Nations humanitarian and health-care workers on the
ground and welcome the commitments of international
partners to supporting Syria.
In conclusion, my delegation calls for the
continuation of vital support for the Syrian people
during this challenging time. It is essential that
international efforts be coordinated to achieve the
desired result. In the long run, we believe that the only
viable way out of this humanitarian crisis is through a
comprehensive political solution that is led and owned
by the Syrians, in line with resolution 2254 (2015) and
is in full accordance with international law.
Mr. Abarry (Niger) (spoke in French): Through
you, Mr. President, I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his introductory remarks and his tireless
commitment to humanitarian action in Syria. My
thanks also go to Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting
Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs
and Emergency Relief Coordinator, and Ms. Sherine
Ibrahim for their very inspiring briefings. I also
welcome the participation of the representatives of
Iran, Syria and Turkey in this meeting.
Let me commend the daily efforts of humanitarian
organizations that continue unflaggingly to assist
Syrian populations in need throughout their country.
The humanitarian situation in Syria remains worrying
and has even significantly deteriorated in the last year.
The sharp drop in the value of the Syrian pound, as
a result of the embargo and other unilateral coercive
measures, has worsened the daily lives of Syrians,
which have already been weakened by a decade of
conflict. In this context, we call for the easing or
suspension of unilateral economic sanctions, which
may also undermine Syria’s ability to deal with the
coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19).
Further, from the detailed and factual briefings we
received this afternoon, it is clear that the humanitarian
aid provided in Syria falls far short of the real needs of
the affected populations. The number of food-insecure
people in Syria has reached worrying proportions. For
millions of people, including women and children,
United Nations assistance remains their only recourse
in trying to meet their most basic food, water and
sanitation needs. A substantial improvement in the

21-1649513/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

delivery mechanism for this assistance is therefore
sorely needed throughout the country. We would
also like to see the assessments of the humanitarian
situation done by the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs reflect the direct or even indirect
impact of unilateral sanctions against Syria.
The Niger notes with concern the increase in the rate
of COVID-19 spread in Syria, particularly in the northwest and north-east. The weakened health infrastructure
and continued insecurity make it difficult to support
the effective roll-out of vaccination against the virus
across the country. In this regard, it is important to
heed the calls of humanitarian organizations working
on the ground for increased humanitarian assistance to
the millions of Syrians in destitution and distress.
The Niger supports the continuation of the
mechanism for the delivery of aid through border
crossings and across the lines of contact and remains
ready to support any formula or modality to accelerate
the delivery of humanitarian aid, including medical
supplies and equipment, which the Syrian health system
badly needs to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.
My delegation regrets that, despite the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a ceasefire in March 2020, hostilities
persist in Syria, with nearly 186 incidents cited in the
report under review (S/2021/583), resulting in dozens of
deaths and injuries, including of women and children.
We reiterate our appeal to all parties to respect their
obligations to protect civilians and allow rapid, safe
and unhindered access to all humanitarian workers and
assistance to those in need throughout the Syrian Arab
Republic.
In conclusion, Niger believes that reaching the
needy in Syria is not a political choice but a humanitarian
imperative. The Security Council must not abandon
these vulnerable populations, some of whom have been
repeatedly displaced by the continuing violence in the
country. It remains clear, of course, that, as has been
constantly reiterated this afternoon, only a political
solution can have a positive impact on all aspects of
the crisis, including its humanitarian dimension. It is
our hope that the Security Council will regain its unity
during the process of renewing the mandate of the
mechanism in the coming days.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks Secretary-General Guterres, Acting UnderSecretary-General Rajasingham, of the Office for the
14/28

23/06/2021

Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), and
Ms. Ibrahim for their briefings.
We also welcome the participation of the
representatives of Syria, Iran and Turkey in
today’s meeting.
China has carefully studied the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2021/583). The humanitarian
situation in Syria is facing multiple challenges. A
declining economy, sharp depreciation of its currency,
severe food insecurity, rapid transmission of the
coronavirus disease and oil shortages have affected
both agricultural production and humanitarian relief
operations.
Improving the Syrian humanitarian situation
requires joint global efforts and a holistic approach.
It is important to have the Syrian Government fully
play its leading role and continue to scale up cross-line
humanitarian relief operations.
China appreciates the humanitarian assistance
provided by the World Food Programme. UNICEF,
the United Nations Population Fund and the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), which has been delivered to millions of
people every month through cross-line operations.
During April this year, the World Health Organization
provided from within Syria 348,000 instances of
medical services to civilians in north-eastern Syria,
which fully proves the effectiveness and feasibility of
cross-line assistance and also points to room for further
expansion. Early on, the Syrian Government approved
cross-line humanitarian aid operations into northwest Syria, and relevant international humanitarian
organizations are also making efforts in this regard.
The United Nations should strengthen cooperation
with the International Committee of the Red Cross and
other relevant humanitarian agencies and make every
effort to open up the cross-line access from Damascus
to Idlib. When considering a draft resolution on
humanitarian issues in Syria, the Council should put
forward specific requirements for scaling up cross-line
humanitarian assistance.
Unilateral sanctions and economic blockades must
be lifted immediately to help Syria restore normal
order. Years of illegal sanctions have severely damaged
Syria’s economic and social development, exacerbated
its humanitarian crisis and weakened its ability to
respond to the coronavirus disease pandemic. Many
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian agencies have shared their observations
that humanitarian relief funds often cannot be remitted
within Syria owing to financial institutions trying to
avoid the risk of being sanctioned.
Syrian infrastructure, such as water stations,
hospitals and schools, are often unable to function,
owing to the lack of equipment resulting from sanctions,
such as power generators. The so-called humanitarian
exemption, frankly speaking, is nothing but a placebo
for the conscience and a hypocritical cover up. As
unilateral sanctions remain in place, the humanitarian
situation in Syria will not improve in any meaningful
way. Secretary-General Guterres, the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs have repeatedly expressed their concern about
the humanitarian consequences of unilateral sanctions
and called for the lifting of relevant measures. That has
garnered the support of the overwhelming majority of
Member States.
The Secretary General, in both his briefing today and
in his report submitted to the Council (S/2021/583), once
again laid out in detail the humanitarian consequences
of the sanctions and expressed his concern. The Council
should uphold justice, face up to the issue and provide a
definitive answer to the Syrian people and the broader
membership. As we have repeatedly said, we care for
the people of Syria. Such loving care should not be an
empty political declaration.
It is necessary to continue to rely on dialogue
and consultations to properly resolve differences on
the renewal of the authorization for the cross-border
mechanism. China’s consistent position is that the
international community should deliver humanitarian
assistance to Syria based on respect for its sovereignty
and territorial integrity. We have always been
concerned about the problems arising from the crossborder mechanism. At the same time, China takes note
of the United Nations humanitarian operations under
way in the north-western part of Syria through the
cross-border mechanism.
The Council should specify clear requirements
for cross-border humanitarian, assistance, monitor the
entire process, demonstrate neutrality and transparency
and ensure that the aid is not used for other purposes. It
is necessary to perform regular reviews of the relevant
monitoring mechanisms by the Council and require that

S/PV. 8803

the mechanisms provide more detailed updates to prevent
inadequate monitoring and inaccurate information.
In the past two years with regard to the Syrian
issue, the Council has been majorly divided on several
occasions. That not only hampers problem-solving
but also damages mutual trust among all parties and
undermines the authority and image of the Council.
The Council should solve problems in a more pragmatic
way, focus on specific goals and push all parties to
find compromise solutions through dialogue and
negotiations to avoid serious confrontation.
China has always maintained that the Syrian issue
should be dealt with through a comprehensive and
integrated approach, taking into account, political,
counter-terrorism, security and humanitarian aspects.
We urge all parties to step up dialogue and consultations,
actively promote the Syrian-led and -owned political
process and work together towards a peaceful, just
and appropriate settlement of the Syrian issue as soon
as possible.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
thank the Secretary-General and our briefers today.
As we start deliberations on the cross-border
mechanism, humanitarian need should be front and
centre of our decision-making; 13.4 million people
are in need of humanitarian assistance across Syria,
which is more than the entire population of London
or Moscow.
Seven years ago, we came together to adopt
resolution 2165 (2014), authorizing the cross-border
mechanism. As we heard from Sonia Khush, Director of
Save the Children, in February (see S/2021/206, annex
II) and Amani Ballour in March (see S/2021/315, annex
III), that created a vital system whereby humanitarian
assistance could reach all Syrians, wherever they lived.
Earlier this week, 27 non-governmental agencies
operating in Syria wrote to the Security Council
asking for an expansion of the mandate to ensure the
continued delivery of food, shelter, protection and other
life-saving services. The United Nations has repeatedly
outlined the implications of non-renewal. The United
Nations vaccination programme would cease. The
provision of food assistance to 1.4 million people a
month would end, and critical medical items, which
supported 10 million treatments in 2020, would stop.
Ending the cross-border mandate would cut off the

21-1649515/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

last lifeline into the country for millions of vulnerable
Syrians in the north-west.
The issue of cross-line access continues to
be debated. Let me be clear: the United Kingdom
supports all efforts to improve cross-line assistance.
But we should recognize the impact of the loss of
the Al-Yarubiyah crossing in the north-east, where
needs have risen by 38 per cent since January 2020.
Health-care facilities now face chronic shortages of
medications such as insulin, painkillers and drugs used
to treat chronic diseases.
The loss of the Bab Al-Salam crossing, in the
north-west, has had a similarly huge impact. Assistance
now travels across lines of control and multiple
checkpoints. Air strikes in areas facing conflict have
damaged warehouses and destroyed trucks carrying
humanitarian supplies. If deliveries are able to make it
through undamaged, there are persistent delays, often
lasting up to three weeks.
Without expansion, therefore, we cannot tackle
the growing food crisis or overcome the impact of
the coronavirus disease pandemic and fulfil the
requirements of resolution 2565 (2021) to ensure
equitable access to vaccines. That is why we continue
to insist that we should approach this mandate and issue
on the basis on humanitarian need, renew the mandate
for Bab Al-Hawa and re-authorize the crossings at Bab
Al-Salam and Al-Yarubiyah. Anything less would be
a dereliction of our responsibility to the 13.4 million
Syrian people who remain in need of assistance.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): I thank the Secretary-General for his
remarks. I also thank Acting Under-Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham and Ms. Sherine Ibrahim for
their briefings. I also welcome the representatives of
Syria, Turkey and Iran to today’s meeting.
Regrettably, as we heard in today’s briefings, the
humanitarian situation for the people of Syria remains
critical. Armed conf licts, air attacks and the use of
improvised explosive devices are ongoing, to mention
only a few of the violent incidents that in turn hinder
the delivery and distribution of humanitarian aid of
all kinds.
Despite calls from the Security Council, civilian
infrastructure remains a target of attacks. As others
have done, we strongly condemn the attack on the
Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin on 12 July, in which at least
16/28

23/06/2021

19 people died, including children and humanitarian
and health-care staff. Such acts are at variance with
international humanitarian law and are inexcusable.
They must be investigated and those responsible must
be punished.
The Security Council must take prompt decisions.
The authorization for the Bab Al-Hawa border crossing
will expire shortly. As we heard, nearly 3.4 million
people in the north-west of the country are in need
of humanitarian aid. Therefore, it is not only vital to
maintain current access but we must also streamline
operations so as to reduce shortages and relieve the
suffering of the population.
As the Secretary-General and humanitarian
agencies have reiterated, the Bab Al-Hawa crossing is
essential for the people living in the north-west of Syria
to obtain food, medical attention and education. Without
the renewal of its authorization, one of many critical
issues will be exacerbated — childhood malnutrition.
It is estimated that one in every three children under
the age of five in that area already suffers from chronic
malnutrition, and the interruption of food aid will
worsen that dire situation.
Other essential services — such as health and
education — will also be affected if the authorization
for the crossing is not renewed. Medicine, surgical
supplies and coronavirus disease vaccines pass through
Bab Al-Hawa. As we heard, the vaccine roll-out
began only a few weeks ago; we cannot interrupt that
process. The cross-border mechanism also allows for
the payment of teaching staff and the costs of teaching
material. Education in the region depends on the border
crossing. It is clear that unfettered humanitarian access
is essential.
The difficult situation on the other side of the
country has also worsened in recent months, and
conditions in the Al-Hol camp, including medicine
shortages, are worrisome. Since the closure of the
Al-Yarubiyah crossing in January 2020 and despite
efforts to increase cross-line operations, it has not been
possible to replace the aid received through that border
crossing, in particular in the context of the fight against
the pandemic. We would like to hear from the Acting
Under-Secretary-General about other ways the region
has been affected due to the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah
border crossing.
In short, 10 years of conflict have led to serious
humanitarian consequences. We hope that the Council
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

can explore, without bias, all options to facilitate
humanitarian access for Syria. It would be indefensible
to cut off options for the delivery of humanitarian aid
even as the needs of the people are increasing.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to make it clear that I will be
unable to facilitate the President’s request. In any event,
it is more a recommendation than a request, according
to note S/2017/507 by the President of the Security
Council, to speak for no longer than five minutes when
taking the floor in the Security Council. There are at
least three reasons for that. First and foremost, it is
a mere recommendation. Secondly, we believe that
discussion on today’s issue should not be limited with a
stopwatch. We also believe that many delegations would
like to hear what we have to say today. Thirdly, we also
have questions for both briefers and look forward to
hearing responses to them. I promise not to disappoint.
What we have to say will be interesting.
First, we thank Secretary-General Guterres for
his introductory remarks. We also thank Mr. Ramesh
Rajasingham and Ms. Sherine Ibrahim for their briefings.
The distressing remarks made by colleagues in the
Council today paint a black-and-white picture of Syria’s
humanitarian landscape. Western countries present
themselves as forces for good in the dispute on the
future of the cross-border mechanism for humanitarian
assistance in Syria, as they continually express their
concern about the people, in particular the children, of
Idlib. At the same time, Russia and Syria are presented
as evil incarnate, indifferent to the suffering of the
most deprived and ready to cut off the last supply route
for meeting their basic needs.
But is that true? Let us be frank. Back in 2014,
when the Security Council adopted resolution 2165
(2014), which opened four Syrian border crossings to
ensure United Nations humanitarian assistance, Russia
agreed to that plan — even though it violated Syria’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity — for only one
reason. The Syrian Arab Republic was being torn apart
by terrorists and Syrian statehood itself was under
threat. At the time, refugees and internally displaced
persons were in urgent need of humanitarian assistance.
Since then, with the support of Russian air forces
who arrived in Syria at the request of its legitimate
Government, Damascus has pushed back the terrorists,
liberated nearly 90 per cent its territory and made
great efforts to improve the life of the Syrian people.

S/PV. 8803

In such conditions, the cross-border mechanism is an
anachronism. However, our Western partners are acting
as if nothing has changed. They insist on disregarding
the fact that it is possible and sometimes even easier
to provide assistance to the remaining refugees from
within Syria.
Last year, when the Council adopted resolution
2533 (2020), we agreed to preserve the cross-border
mechanism until 10 July, having clearly indicated
the importance of developing sustainable cross-line
humanitarian deliveries to Idlib. We stated that the
future of the cross-border mechanism would depend on
whether or not opportunities would be used to provide
deliveries from within Syria. While we acknowledge
that it is not easy to agree on such deliveries, we
relied on the goodwill of our colleagues. However,
even the United Nations-Syrian Arab Red CrescentInternational Committee of the Red Cross convoy that
received clearance from Damascus in April last year
never got under way. No Council member has acted to
make that happen.
Over the past year, thanks to the goodwill of the
parties, there has been plenty of time and opportunity
to achieve a painless and constructive solution and
find the optimal formula for supplying Idlib via both
the Bab Al-Hawa crossing and intra-Syrian channels.
Yet not a single attempt has been made in that regard,
and all that we have heard is that the cross-border
mechanism would have to be extended. That is not a
constructive approach.
I was surprised by some of the remarks made by
today’s briefers. For example, Mr. Rajasingham said
that cross-line deliveries were a vital addition to crossborder assistance — and therefore complementary to,
but not a replacement for, the cross-border mechanism.
It is strange to hear such a statement by a high-ranking
representative of the United Nations, namely, the
Acting Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, who is clearly familiar with the provisions of
General Assembly resolution 46/182, on humanitarian
assistance.
We were equally surprised to hear the SecretaryGeneral say in his opening remarks that cross-line
delivery will never be able to replace the crossborder mechanism in its current capacity. How are we
supposed to interpret that? Does that mean that the
mechanism will remain the same? I cannot interpret it
any other way.

21-1649517/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

There is one more question I would like to ask.
Has anyone asked the country on whose territory
humanitarian assistance is being provided what it
thinks about the cross-border mechanism? Do the
words spoken here today about our commitment to
Syria’s sovereignty mean nothing?
It is ridiculous to say that deliveries across the
contact lines are ineffective or impossible. United
Nations representatives in Syria clearly acknowledge
that a well-managed mechanism for the cross-line
delivery of aid, following the closure of the Al-Yarubiyah
crossing point, has allowed them to achieve better
results beyond the Euphrates River than through the
cross-border mechanism. The coverage of humanitarian
needs in the north-east has increased from 35 per cent
to 45 per cent, and there is every possibility to further
build up operations.
To compensate for the closure of Al-Yarubiyah,
we have had to increase humanitarian assistance in the
north-east. As I mentioned, that has been acknowledged
by United Nations personnel themselves. In that regard,
I have heard on many occasions that assistance in the
north-east following the closure of Al-Yarubiyah is
in fact in a worse state than when the crossing was
still open.
It has been reported that the World Food Programme
has already reached an agreement with Damascus and
is seeking approval from other parties to bring food
into Syria through its warehouse in Sarmada, in the
de-escalation zone in the north-west. Where is the
unwillingness to cooperate on Syria’s part? If we are
talking about how to make the delivery of supplies to
Idlib more efficient, then we have only to look at the
map — the logistics from Aleppo are much easier. It
is not a matter only of logistics but also of oversight
of the aid being sent. The United Nations Monitoring
Mechanism has received much praise, given that in its
absence the enclave would apparently be flooded with
unmonitored deliveries.
At the same time, there has been silence about the
fact that the levels of smuggling and United Nations
humanitarian aid deliveries through the cross-border
mechanism have long been equivalent. Mr. Lowcock
himself recently admitted that the volume of United
Nations supplies through the Bab Al-Hawa crossing did
not exceed 50 per cent. In other words, United Nations
channels are being openly used for dubious schemes
for the benefit of terrorists in Idlib. Is that really what
18/28

23/06/2021

the Council considers to be the optimal way to provide
humanitarian assistance?
All resolutions related to the delivery of crossborder assistance request that the Secretary-General
include in his reports detailed information on the
humanitarian assistance delivered through United
Nations
humanitarian
cross-border
operations,
including on the number of beneficiaries, the locations
of aid deliveries at the district level and the volume
and nature of items delivered. Yet nothing has been
done to improve the transparency of cargo flows in the
seven years that the cross-border mechanism has been
in operation. The reason for that is clear: there is no
United Nations presence in Idlib. The United Nations is
simply not capable of reliably distributing those goods.
Why is it that, for seven years now, we have been
asked to take the word of unnamed non-governmental
organizations, many of which make no secret of their
affiliation with Hayat Tahrir Al-Sham fighters? Why
is it that, on the basis of their more than questionable
reports, we have come to the conclusion that there is
no alternative to the cross-border mechanism? I would
like to hear just one reason to justify that, given that
no effort whatsoever has been made to deploy supplies
across the contact lines.
As for the accusations against the Syrians regarding
their alleged obstruction of the work of the United
Nations on Government-controlled territory, including
in the context of the alleged non-issuance of permits for
humanitarian operations, we are dealing with a trivial
manipulation of the facts. The three latest reports of
the Secretary-General (S/2021/160, S/2021/390 and
S/2021/583) track both the number of permits issued
and the coverage of the recipients of humanitarian aid.
In particular, they highlight the trend that Syrians have
issued fewer and fewer United Nations humanitarian
assistance authorizations with each reporting period:
257 from December 2020 to January 2021, 167 from
February to March 2021 and 93 from April to May 2021.
However, reports over the same periods confirm that the
number of recipients of aid from within Syria remains
at the same level — approximately 3.5 million people.
Unfortunately, no one at the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) has
taken the trouble to analyse the situation. Had they done
so, the reports would have shown that the effectiveness
of United Nations humanitarian operations is actually
increasing. There are fewer requests for operations
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

for the same level of assistance. According to United
Nations personnel working on the ground, there are no
complaints against the Syrian authorities. The issue is
now a different one and the realities have long changed.
The effectiveness of humanitarian operations should
be evaluated not by the number of convoys or the
volume of deliveries — we are not dealing with one-off
actions, as was previously the case — but by the ability
of humanitarian personnel to be constantly present
where needed.
We cannot consider the issue of the extension of
the cross-border mechanism in isolation from the
situation in Idlib. The enclave has long been a safe
haven for terrorists in Syria. In addition to the spread
of unvanquished fighters from Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams
and Huras Al-Din, the north-west has been receiving
new jihadists fleeing from Al-Hol and elsewhere.
The terrorists radicalizing Idlib are using ordinary
Syrians as human shields, establishing total control
over the population. Those wishing to leave that hotbed
of instability are not allowed to enter Government
territories, and exceptions are not even being made to
allow schoolchildren to take their exams.
We can only guess at the morals imposed by the
interim rulers of Idlib. Just recently, the so-called
University of Idlib showed its true colours by banning
male and female students from belonging to the same
groups on social networks and messaging services
used by students to communicate on academic matters.
Moreover, Idlib has seen an increase in child marriages
and under-age marriages. Nonetheless, those and other
egregious facts are being overlooked by women’s and
children’s advocates in the Security Council.
Moreover, we are witnessing consistent attempts by
a number of States to paint a picture of Hayat Tahrir
Al-Shams as a moderate political force that governs
the enclave effectively and impartially, in contrast
to the infamous so-called Al-Assad regime. We have
not heard a single word from our colleagues in the
Security Council. It appears that the status quo suits
them, as they do not appear embarrassed by the blatant
misappropriation of the United Nations humanitarian
assistance, for which their taxpayers are paying tens or
hundreds of millions of dollars. It is difficult to see that
as anything but criminal hypocrisy.
By suggesting that we should not only keep the Bab
Al-Hawa crossing point but also open new ones, our
Western colleagues have reached new levels of cynicism.

S/PV. 8803

We will not accept such methods. We believe that it is the
duty of all Security Council members to make efforts to
restore the territorial integrity of Syria and strengthen
its sovereignty, improve its socioeconomic situation
and comply with the principles for the provision of
humanitarian assistance, which have been complied
with everywhere in all humanitarian operations except
the one in Syria. Cross-line assistance is not merely
a part of the situation, as our American colleagues
said today, it is the only legitimate way of delivering
humanitarian assistance in any operation.
Over the past year, our opponents have been moving
in the opposite direction and are doing everything
they can to worsen the problems faced by Syrians in
the Government-controlled territories. We need only
think of the unlawful unilateral sanctions imposed in
circumvention of the Security Council, which place a
heavy burden on every citizen of the country. They talk
about humanitarian assistance while pretending that
the problem of Syria being overwhelmed by sanctions
does not exist.
For example, in April and May United Nations
agencies were not able to complete a number of planned
and approved missions because of a lack of fuel. Why
was that the case? That was the result of the sanctions
that had been imposed. It took a year for the voices
of international non-governmental organizations to
be heard and the problem of sanctions to finally be
reflected in the reports of the Secretary-General. We
call on OCHA to not shy away from that topic and to
continue to keep the Security Council informed about
this matter.
Separately, I would like to underscore the knowhow of our American colleagues — the so-called
Caesar Act, without the removal of which any attempts
to loosen sanction regimes will be ineffective and
will continue to hinder the independent development
of Syria.
We have taken note of the attempts by Washington
to reduce sanctions pressure. I mean the United States
Department of the Treasury’s General License 21 of
17 June, which sets forth a broadening of American
humanitarian exemptions for Syria in order to simply
the delivery of goods and services in the country to
fight the pandemic. Only time will tell if that will
be effective, because the humanitarian exemptions,
which are effective only on paper, already existed. We
believe that our colleagues from the European Union

21-1649519/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

also should think about the ineffective humanitarian
exemptions and take the necessary measures.
Our Western colleagues continue to demonstratively
ignore the task of rebuilding the country’s infrastructure.
Today my French colleague said that more than half of
the citizens in Syria are experiencing food insecurity.
Did he ask why? Is that because of a lack of humanitarian
access, or because of the destroyed infrastructure in
the country following its destruction by a war against
terrorism and because of the sanctions imposed against
a sovereign State?
With regard to rebuilding the infrastructure, I
understand what he is talking about, my dear friend.
Rebuilding infrastructure is a requirement for the
return of refugees, and therefore for the relaunching of
the economy. That is simple logic, which at the end of
the day will lead to a reduced burden on donors. At the
same time, sponsoring projects in Idlib, the majority of
which are misappropriated by international terrorists,
is something that co-sponsors are ready to do. Only
such a distorted reality can lead to the creation of the
draft document on the cross-border mechanism that our
colleagues will clearly present to us soon.
We cannot ignore the man-made environmental
catastrophe in the north-east of Syria. The fight against
its consequences, much like the efforts on the ground
to provide medical assistance to the people, is a longterm priority and requires funding. I would also like to
note that we are increasingly concerned about what is
happening beyond the Euphrates River and the ongoing
attempts aimed at violent demographic engineering.
The situation in Al-Hol camp threatens to spiral out of
control. According to information we have received, the
residents are being actively radicalized. A worrisome
picture is also being painted in the Al-Tanf region. I
recall once again that the responsibility for what is
happening there lies with the occupying Powers. There
is a solution to the serious humanitarian situation in
Syria, and it does not lie with the extension of the crossborder mechanism. The argument that humanitarian
workers find it easier to work within its framework
does not convince us. We are convinced that respecting
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Syria, which
we are always defending in words, should be complied
with — not only with words but with actions. With
regard to the closing of the Al-Yarubiyah crossing, if
the will is there, all of those questions can be overcome.
Until our colleagues have demonstrated with their
words and actions that they are committed to that task,
20/28

23/06/2021

discussion of extending the transborder mechanism has
little meaning. There is still time before the deadline. I
hope we will not waste that time.
I would like to pose some questions to our briefers.
I hope that they will be able to respond to them at
this meeting.
First, I would like to pose some questions to
Mr. Rajasingham.
According to United Nations data, every year
about $300 million is provided across the cross-border
mechanism. Why is that massive sum suddenly barely
enough to provide vital goods and services to people.
Why is the situation in Idlib in terms of food insecurity?
According to the report of the Secretary-General, the
situation of food insecurity is getting worse every
month. As we understand it, the amount of deliveries
through the World Food Programme is at about 80 per
cent. There has been no fighting in Idlib for a long time
now. We are hearing from different sources that the
so-called local administration supposedly enjoys the
respect not only of some donor countries, but also of
humanitarian agencies on the ground. There is no new
influx of internally displaced persons into this enclave.
On the contrary, people are still trying in vain to leave.
What is happening with food security there?
Secondly, as an experienced and high-ranking
humanitarian worker, could he inform us what needs
to be done to unlock cross-line deliveries in Idlib? How
can the United Nations organize that process, and what
problems are being encountered?
Thirdly, why cannot the United Nations Monitoring
Mission be relocated to Government-controlled
territory and why cannot humanitarian convoys access
Idlib on inter-Syrian routes?
Fourthly, the Al-Qaida Taliban Monitoring Team
reported that this area is being used by Hayat Tahrir
Al-Shams for money-laundering. Their montly income
across the Bab Al-Hawa is about $4 million. In addition,
they receive a large amount of money as proceeds
from all cross-border activities and trade within the
enclave itself, which is completely under their control.
Obviously, Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams is also actively
engaged in United Nations humanitarian operations. I
would like to hear his comments on that as well.
I will now pose some questions to Ms. Ibrahim.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

How can one guarantee that humanitarian
assistance goes to the end-users? How does that happen
specifically? Who are her partners on the ground?
Secondly, armed groups in Idlib signed, under the
aegis of OCHA, a so-called declaration of commitment
of compliance with international humanitarian law
and humanitarian assistance. What does she, as a
direct beneficiary of that declaration, know about that
document, and how has the working situation on the
ground changed since it was signed?
Thirdly, in her view, how are cross-line deliveries
worse than cross-border mechanisms, given that
deliveries from Damascus would be better controlled?
What exactly is preventing her non-governmental
organization, whose primary goal is just to help
people in need, from actively advocating for cross-line
deliveries?
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as representative of Estonia.
I thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and
Acting Under-Secretary Rajasingham for the very
detailed overview of the humanitarian situation in
Syria. We also appreciate the insightful comments of
Ms. Ibrahim.
I extend my gratitude to humanitarian workers on
the front lines, who continue to provide aid to millions
of people. Their work continues under dangerous
circumstances. Estonia condemns the attack on
Al-Shifa hospital in the beginning of the month, which
killed 19 civilians, including two hospital workers.
Despite some calm, the war is far from over in
Syria. The most recent report of the Secretary-General
(S/2021/583) points out that in April and May there were
186 different security incidents. At least 150 people
were killed, including 36 children.
Serious challenges such as violent clashes and
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic have
exacerbated the humanitarian situation. In that light,
the Security Council must uphold its responsibilities
and support the Syrian people, especially the most
vulnerable groups. Safe, sustained and unimpeded
humanitarian access remains vital. To address
the enormous humanitarian needs, extending and
expanding cross-border aid deliveries in July is the only
responsible approach.

S/PV. 8803

Estonia calls for the reauthorization of the Bab
al-Hawa crossing for one year and to reopen the
crossings of Bab al-Salam, in Idlib, and Al-Yarubiyah,
in the north-east, for the same period. We give our
support to the penholders Ireland and Norway to have
an early renewal of the mandate.
A sustainable humanitarian response must be
predicated on enabling access to all parts of Syria. We
need to ensure the availability of COVID-19 vaccines
to everyone in Syria.
At the same time, we acknowledge the importance
of cross-line aid. However, those deliveries remain
sporadic and limited. As the violence continues in the
north-west of Syria, no reliable agreement has been
reached between humanitarian organizations and the
parties on the ground to bring much-needed help to
Idlib over the front lines. Humanitarian access to the
north-east also remains limited.
I do not believe that, as we just heard, that everyone
is wrong, the Secretary-General is wrong, the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs is wrong,
aid organizations are wrong, other Member States
are wrong, and so on. The European Union (EU),
together with its member States, is the largest donor of
humanitarian aid to Syria and the region. Restrictive
EU measures do not in any way impede the provision
of humanitarian assistance in Syria, especially food
and medical supplies. Those sanctions target only those
who have committed crimes against the Syrian people.
Sanctions will remain in place until a genuine political
transition is firmly under way in Syria, in line with the
relevant Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham to respond to
comments made and questions raised.
Mr. Rajasingham: I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for this opportunity to respond to some
of these questions.
The first question is, why is it that with record
deliveries in north-west Syria, it is also the place where
there is the highest number of starving people? Where
has all the aid gone?
There is no systematic diversion of aid in northwest Syria. We know that because the cross-border
operations are among the most closely scrutinized

21-1649521/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

humanitarian operations in the world. The reason that
people in north-west Syria continue to suffer is not
that aid has been stolen or diverted. It is that there has
not been nearly enough aid to meet the massive needs,
because they have no other lifeline.
We track cross-border aid deliveries at every step,
from when they are dispatched to when they cross the
border, to when they arrive at warehouses, to when
they reach distribution centres and people in need.
Those rigorous monitoring and oversight measures are
outlined in the report of the Secretary-General dated
14 May 2020 to the Council reviewing cross-line and
cross-border operation (S/2020/401).
The other question is, does cross-border aid go
directly to the people who need it most? The fact that
aid is being delivered to the places where needs are the
highest indicates that assessment and prioritization are
working as they should. The United Nations partners
reach 2.4 million people on average each month through
cross-border operations, yet needs are so great in northwest Syria that more assistance is needed. That is why
we are calling for urgent increases in funding and for
all channels to reach people in need to be kept available.
With respect to the impact of the Al-Yarubiyah
closing, I should like to say a few words about the
needs in north-east Syria, previously supported by the
Al-Yarubiyah crossing. An estimated 1.8 million people
require assistance in areas of north-east Syria outside of
the control of the Government. More than 70 per cent of
them are considered to be in extreme need, well above
the national average. From Damascus most agencies
have regular access to north-east Syria for non-health
items, in cross-line operations by the Tabaqah crossing
to warehouses in Qamishli for onward distribution to
people in need. Trucks depart with aid every few days
from areas controlled by the Government of Syria.
On health items, though, in 2020 the World Health
Organization completed six road shipments in northeast Syria in addition to 13 airlifts.
Some medical supplies provided by WHO were
delivered to 15 hospitals and 106 primary health-care
centres cross-line. However, as the Secretary-General
has noted, that represents a modest proportion of total
needs, and many facilities remain short of staff, supplies
and equipment. Overall, though, there is not enough aid
of all sorts reaching north-east Syria.
Humanitarian organizations operating in the
north-east reported limited functionality and capacity
22/28

23/06/2021

of health-care facilities, a lack of adequately trained
medical staff and imminent stockouts of medical
supplies, including critical medicine such as insulin
and cardiovascular and antibacterial medicines.
Humanitarian operations in the north-east were
left vulnerable to such supply shortages with the loss
of United Nations supply-chain support, when the
Security Council’s authorization for the United Nations
use of the Al-Yarubiyah border crossing expired.
Our non-governmental organization (NGO)
colleagues continue to remind us of the challenges that
the loss of United Nations access has resulted in. One
NGO informed us that it had seen stockouts of as many
as 40 per cent of critical medicines in NGO-supported
facilities in the north-east. They also reported that
at Al-Hol camp, 30 per cent of patients with chronic
diseases cannot be covered through the medications
available, and similar shortages are reported in other
camps.
I think that I have answered the questions that were
asked. We were not sure about the third question that
was asked, by the Russian representative.
However, there is one last question in terms of Hayat
Tahrir Al-Shams using that area for money-laundering
and that income at Bab al-Hawa is very high. The
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
is not, obviously, in a position to speak about moneylaundering, and, as I said, we do know where our aid is
going. It is going to the civilians in need. The United
Nations tracks its cross-border deliveries at every step,
as I mentioned, from where they are dispatched to where
they cross the border. So perhaps, I think, with respect
to the cross-border operation, the mechanisms that
we have put in place and the investments that we have
made allow us to be perhaps one of the most rigorously
tracked humanitarian operations that we have around
the globe.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for the
clarifications he provided.
I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim to respond to
the comments made and questions raised.
Ms. Ibrahim: Allow me to address the first
question that was posed.
We ensure that there are several modalities in which
we check and audit the work that we do to ensure that
beneficiaries receive the aid that they deserve. Much of
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

this relies heavily on information that we triangulate in
vetting all our due-diligence and managing processes.
We also do a lot of remote management, including the
use of technology and third-party monitoring. We have
the support capacity of our local partners, which are the
best and most reassuring of monitors in terms of both
delivery and the oversight of the delivery process.
Last but not least, as an international development
organization, we adhere to and promote the
humanitarian safeguards to ensure that those whom
we serve receive the service that we have committed to
providing to them. There are vetting and due-diligence
processes and monitoring mechanisms in place, and we
are governed by the core humanitarian principles that
all aid actors follow. We are therefore quite confident
that when — and it does happen — there are questions
about the inability to reach those who are eligible for
aid, those questions are always escalated to our donors
and our supporters, and we undertake the appropriate
investigations to ensure that there is no diversion of
the aid.
I am sorry; I think I missed the second question.
But I will try to answer the third question posed. As I
understood it, the question was: How do we at CARE
know that cross-border is better than cross-line? If I
understood the question correctly, we do not know.
CARE does not have an operating presence in Syria.
The President: There are some technical issues with
the video-teleconference connection to Ms. Ibrahim.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): While we
are waiting, I will perhaps repeat the questions that
Mr. Rajasingham missed. The second and third
questions were: In his opinion, what is needed to
unblock cross-line deliveries to Idlib, and how should
that process be done so that such aid is delivered
cross-line? Where are the problems? Why could the
United Nations monitoring mission not be located in
Government territory to monitor the convoys that are
going to Idlib?
The President: I now give the floor to
Mr. Rajasingham to respond to the questions raised.
Mr. Rajasingham: I thank the Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation for clarifying
those questions.

S/PV. 8803

At this point, we are registered across the region.
However, the mission cannot proceed without the
agreement of all the relevant parties. As is known,
security is the key issue for the delivery and
distribution of humanitarian assistance. We have been
working very hard to secure such an agreement for
over a year. A revised concept of operations has been
discussed with the parties, and we hope that they will
reach an agreement on all the operational details of the
first mission.
However, even if the cross-line convoy does
proceed and they can be deployed regularly, at this
point the mechanism is not large enough in scale and
scope to replace the cross-border operation. What we
would like to do, as we do in all other humanitarian
operations, is to be able to operate in an impartial,
neutral and independent manner. If we can have the
freedom to do so from all the parties involved, both on
the Syrian Government side and on the north-western
Syria side, I think that we will then be able to do it.
But, at this point, we need first to get it off the ground,
and at the same time at this point it cannot replace the
cross-border operation in terms of scale and scope.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for the
clarifications he has provided.
I again give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim to continue
responding to the questions raised.
Ms. Ibrahim: I ask that the Council please accept
my apologies; I got disconnected. I hope that I was able
to give an adequate response to the first question. I will
attempt the third question, which, as I understand it, is
about comparing cross-border and cross-line deliveries.
CARE does not operate out of Syria; our operations
are primarily cross-border from Turkey. As such, I do
not have a comparative analysis of which modality is
better. As I heard today, and as CARE’s position, we
maintain that all access points at the current time need
to be opened and should be allowed to operate so that
we can meet the extensive humanitarian needs across
all Syria.
Once again, we do not have a direct operation. We
do not have a statement on whether or not one is better
than the other, but we know that the extensive needs
require all border crossings and all options to be on
the table.

21-1649523/28

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.8803

Again, I would like a clarification regarding the
second question that was posed, because I did not fully
capture it. If that is possible, I would appreciate it.
The President: I thank Ms. Ibrahim for the
clarifications she provided.
The representative of the Russian Federation has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation): I will perhaps
forfeit the second question, but I will give a small
clarification of the first one. The question was also how
CARE’s assistance technically moves into Idlib and
who its partners are on the ground there in Idlib where
it delivers its assistance.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Ibrahim
to respond to the question raised.
Ms. Ibrahim: Like several other international
organizations operating in the north-west, we have a
diversity of partnerships. I would not want to mention
all of them right now. We are obviously focused on
partners that can provide a multiplicity of services
across the multiplicity of sectors and across multiple
geographies. They have grown in strength. They
operate by having community acceptance and the
infrastructure, the staff and the capacity to receive the
aid that we provide to them through funding for aid and
humanitarian supplies, which either they purchase from
inside Syria or we have transferred across the border
from Turkey. As such, many of those organizations
have the capacity and the infrastructure required to
withstand a significant amount of funding provided by
us. We therefore rely on them for the delivery of aid and
the monitoring, reporting and building of community
acceptance around all that we do in support of Syrian
internally displaced persons inside Syria.
The President:
those clarifications.

I

thank

Ms.

Ibrahim

for

Before we move forward, even though we heard
that it is only a recommendation — and that is true — I
would still like to remind speakers of paragraph 22 of
note S/2017/507 by the President of the Security Council,
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): After listening to the statements of certain
24/28

23/06/2021

States today, it has become apparent that they still
persist in exploiting the Security Council and using it
as a platform to politicize the humanitarian work being
conducted in my country, practise political hypocrisy
and promote a misleading approach to divert our
discussion from its main topic so as to serve their goal
of prolonging the humanitarian crisis in Syria.
Today we are once again witnessing the insistence of
those Western countries on claiming that extending and
strengthening the so-called cross-border mechanism for
the delivery of aid will ensure the improvement of the
humanitarian situation in Syria. That is a very shortsighted and highly selective view that discriminates
against Syrians and obscures the facts and the main
reasons for the deterioration of the humanitarian
situation in Syria, in particular the crimes of occupation,
aggression and terrorism, including economic terrorism
manifested in the unilateral coercive measures.
In that context, my delegation reaffirms its
principled position of rejecting that politicized
mechanism. It was an exceptional temporary measure.
The reasons and conditions that led to its adoption no
longer exist. My delegation stresses that the practical
implementation of the mechanism has proven what
Syria had been warning about, namely, the serious
violations the have dominated its work. It violates
Syrian sovereignty and serves the interests of the
Turkish occupation and terrorist organizations loyal to
it, notably the Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams/Al-Nusra Front,
which controls Idlib and its surroundings.
In addition, there are major flaws committed by this
mechanism, such as not coordinating with the Syrian
Government, the lack of transparency of its supervision
procedures and measures and the final destination of
the aid, most of which ends up in the hands of terrorist
organizations that control the Bab Al-Hawa crossing
and is then used, as has been stated time and again,
to finance criminal activities, win loyalties and recruit
new terrorists.
The question here for those who defend the
extension of the work of the mechanism is: how do they
justify allowing the use of a crossing that is controlled
by an organization designated as a terrorist organization
by the Council — Hayat Tahrir Al-Shams — to deliver
aid across the border?
The representatives of Western countries claim that
they are concerned about the humanitarian situation
of the Syrian people. That contradicts the unilateral,
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

coercive and destructive measures imposed by their
countries, which have led to humanitarian suffering as
a result of acute shortages of food, medication, medical
supplies, water and basic services. In addition, those
measures have affected the delivery of humanitarian
and relief assistance. Their purported concerns
contradict their policies, which aim to cover up the
crimes of the terrorist organizations and secessionist
militias they sponsor. They remain silent about the
practices of United States occupation forces in the
north-east and the Al-Tanf area and their looting and
stealing of the resources of the Syrian people and of
their oil, agricultural crops and cultural artefacts.
What is most outrageous is that the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2021/583) praises the Turkish side,
while the practices of the Turkish regime have been one
of the most serious and dangerous causes of the crisis in
Syria. Turkish forces are occupying Syrian territory in
the north and north-west. They are committing crimes
against humanity against the Syrian people, including
by using water as a weapon of war against civilians.
The Turkish regime continues to deprive more than
1 million citizens in Al-Hasakah governorate and its
surroundings of drinking water by cutting off water
supply for the twenty-fourth time from the Allouk
water station.
The Turkish regime is also violating bilateral
agreements between the two countries and international
relevant treaties by reducing the flow of the Euphrates
River. That has severely affected water reserves and
drinking and irrigation water supplies in Syria. It
has also resulted in the cutting off of the electricity
supply to the north and the east as hydroelectric power
generation through the Tishrin and Tabaqah dams has
been halted.
The crimes of the Turkish occupation and its
proxy terrorist groups have gone so far as to prevent
more than 2,600 students from Idlib governorate from
travelling to Hama governorate to sit primary and
secondary education examinations. They confiscated
the students’ bags, identification cards and personal
belongings and attacked the bus drivers who were
supposed to transport the students. Our request to the
Secretariat has not succeeded in dissuading the Turkish
regime from its position, which threatens the future of
Syrian children by preventing them from pursuing their
education.

S/PV. 8803

My Government calls on the Security Council to
intervene immediately and decisively stop the crimes
of the Turkish regime, which are exacerbating the
humanitarian suffering of millions of Syrians. The
Council must ensure that the Allouk water station is not
used for political purposes and is operated by employees
of the Al-Hasakah Drinking Water Corporation. The
existing irregularities affecting electricity lines that
feed water stations must be removed, and the water flow
of the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers must be ensured.
The report claims that the extension of the
cross-border mechanism will contribute to making
coronavirus disease (COVID-19) vaccines available.
That is incorrect. The report acknowledges that the
vaccines made available to Syrians in Governmentcontrolled areas to date have only covered 0.5 per cent
of the population. At the same time, we find it surprising
that the report fails to mention that secessionist militias
in the north-east, acting as a proxy for United States
forces, recently obstructed a COVID-19 vaccination
campaign undertaken by Ministry of Health teams in
Deir ez-Zor governorate. They prevented those mobile
teams from entering camps in Al-Hasakah governorate.
They spread false rumours about the safety of vaccines
and, as a result, people have become less willing to get
vaccinated, and that has affected our ability to reach
the desired objective.
The humanitarian situation in Syria cannot be
improved through empty words and pretence but will
require the following.
First, it will require supporting the efforts of the
Syrian Government to combat terrorism and eradicate
the threat of the terrorist groups Da’esh, the Al-Nusra
Front and associated entities.
Secondly, it will require putting an end to the illegal
foreign military presence of the United States and
Turkey on the territory of the Syrian Arab Republic and
their hostile practices and looting of national resources.
Thirdly, it will require the immediate lifting
of the unilateral coercive measures imposed on the
Syrian people.
Fourthly, it will require putting an end to the
politicization of humanitarian action and refraining
from linking humanitarian action to conditions,
loyalties and dictates that run counter to the principles
of humanitarian action.

21-1649525/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

Fifthly, it will require supporting the efforts of
Syrian State institutions to alleviate suffering and
provide support and services to the Syrian people,
including by supporting development goals and
rehabilitating damaged infrastructure to ensure the
safe, dignified and voluntary return of refugees and
displaced persons.
The key and most effective United Nations
humanitarian relief operations in Syria have been
mounted from within Syrian territory, in coordination
and cooperation with the Syrian Government and
humanitarian partners. That mechanism is the most
viable, is in the fullest compliance with international
law and is the most respectful of the sovereignty, unity
and territorial integrity of the Syrian Arab Republic,
as provided for in all United Nations resolutions on the
situation in Syria. Those who question that mechanism
are seeking to promote their ways of delivering aid
across our borders.
In conclusion, my country renews its commitment
to doing its utmost to improve the humanitarian
situation of the Syrian people and alleviating their
suffering, which has resulted from the defective policies
and hostile practices of some countries. We stress that
we will continue to facilitate the work of the United
Nations and our humanitarian partners to ensure the
timely delivery of assistance to those who are really
in need. We also stress that the Syrian Government
is committed to ensuring the safety and security of
humanitarian convoys and workers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Ms. Ershadi (Islamic Republic of Iran): For well
over 10 years, the Syrian people have been suffering
gravely from the conflict, and in recent years the
economy has deteriorated further, mostly due to
unilateral sanctions, which also negatively impact the
delivery of humanitarian aid to people in need. As a
country that has been subjected to unjust unilateral
sanctions for decades, Iran condemns weaponizing
food and medicine through sanctions, as they are
irresponsible, immoral and unlawful, and, in the
context of Syria, only prolong the suffering of people,
delay the return of refugees and displaced persons, and
hamper reconstruction efforts. The complete removal
of unilateral sanctions must therefore be a substantive
element of any discussion on the humanitarian aspects
of the Syrian conflict.
26/28

23/06/2021

While under the current circumstances the delivery
of humanitarian assistance to Syria is essential, it must
nevertheless be based on the principle of full respect for
the sovereignty, territorial integrity and national unity
of Syria, which has been reaffirmed by the Council in all
its resolutions. We also recall other guiding principles
of humanitarian assistance reaffirmed by numerous
resolutions of the General Assembly, according to
which humanitarian assistance should be provided
with the consent of the affected country and delivered,
in principle, on the basis of an appeal by the affected
country. Likewise, according to such principles, the
affected State has the primary role in the initiation,
organization, coordination and implementation of
humanitarian assistance within its territory.
Taking into account such guiding principles,
we share the view that the cross-border aid-delivery
mechanism has been an exceptional temporary measure
imposed by certain circumstances that no longer exist,
and, accordingly, the aid to people in need must now
be delivered in cooperation and coordination with
the Syrian Government and from within the Syrian
territory, which can ensure, inter alia, that aid is not
delivered to terrorist groups. The full cooperation of
the Syrian Government with the United Nations and
numerous humanitarian organizations active in crossline aid delivery in Syria proves that this is approach is
reliable and in line with international law.
We once again call for the depoliticization of the
Syrian humanitarian file in the Security Council.
The international community must focus on those
humanitarian measures in Syria that can actually
and quickly alleviate the suffering of people in need,
provide conditions for the earliest return of refugees
and displaced persons, and contribute to the long-term
stability of the country.
Reiterating our commitment to the peaceful
resolution of the Syrian crisis and the restoration of the
unity and territorial integrity of Syria, we call for an end
to the occupation of parts of its territory, withdrawal of
all uninvited foreign forces from the country, cessation
of support for any separatist tendency or illegitimate
self-rule initiatives, and prevention of the violation of
Syrian sovereignty, particularly by acts of aggression
by the Israeli regime, which Iran strongly condemns.
We will continue our efforts aimed at assisting the
people and the Government of Syria to overcome the
enormous challenges they face.
21-16495

23/06/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I thank the SecretaryGeneral for his remarks. I also thank Acting UnderSecretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Emergency Relief Coordinator, Ramesh Rajasingham,
and Ms. Sherine Ibrahim of CARE for their briefings.
We must heed their warnings that failing to extend the
United Nations cross-border humanitarian mechanism
in Syria will be most harmful.
I also acknowledge the concern of the majority of
Council members, who have recognized the critical
need for the continuation of lifeline aid operations
to alleviate the dire humanitarian situation in Syria.
Let us not forget the conditions that led the Security
Council to authorize the United Nations cross-border
humanitarian operations in 2014. The Al-Assad regime
was ruthlessly killing its own people and deliberately
targeting critical humanitarian infrastructure. Syrians
fled their homeland at a rate of 8,000 to 14,000 per
day. In response, the Security Council established a
cross-border mechanism to ensure safe and sustained
humanitarian access to the internally displaced people
within Syria (resolution 2165 (2014)). The United
Nations has assumed the leading role in providing aid
to the most vulnerable Syrians through the most direct
routes in the most rapid way.
Al-Assad and his forces committed a series of
war crimes and crimes against humanity, and, in the
subsequent years, these criminals have only become
more present and more shameless. The destructive war
Al-Assad has waged against his own people has become
increasingly brutal. Today, millions of vulnerable
people in north-west Syria are still faced with collective
punishment. They are struggling to survive in an active
war zone. Their only hope for survival is aid delivered
by the United Nations.
With half of its population displaced, the entire
country is in ruins. The Al-Assad regime, the terrorist
organization Kurdistan Workers’ Party/ People’s
Protection Units (PKK/YPG) and its Syrian offshoot,
the so-called Syrian Democratic Forces, continue their
systematic violations against civilians. In March, the
Al-Assad regime attacked the Al-Atareb hospital. Just
last week the Al-Shifa hospital in Afrin was targeted
by PKK/YPG terrorists. To put this into context,
Al-Atareb and Al-Shifa hospitals were among the
largest health-care facilities in the region, and their

S/PV. 8803

coordinates had been shared with relevant parties
within the United Nations de-confliction mechanism.
We strongly condemn these attacks and remind
members of the Security Council that the Council is
entrusted with the obligation to investigate these grave
violations of international humanitarian law and hold
perpetrators accountable.
With regard to the humanitarian implications of the
low water level in the Euphrates River, let me be clear:
we attach great importance to needs on the ground, and
we keep raising challenges to the water and electricity
disruptions by the regime in Al-Bab and by the terrorist
organization PKK/YPG in Allouk. Like other countries
in the region, we may be witnessing the adverse impacts
of climate change on our water resources. As of May
2021, Keban dam, the upstream dam on the Euphrates
River, which stands between our borders, has seen the
second lowest dam lake level since the completion of
its filling. However, despite this alarming hydrological
and climatic reality, the average amount of water we
released from the Euphrates downstream in the first
half of the year has been over 500 cubic metres per
second, which is our contractual obligation. We expect
the United Nations to support downstream countries
in addressing water challenges with better water
management and agricultural practices.
Stopping the cross-border mechanism would simply
permit the Syrian regime and terrorist organizations to
increase their campaign of murder to an even greater
scale. An immediate halt in the delivery of United
Nations food assistance, critical medical supplies and
other life-saving assistance would threaten the lives of
the 4 million people who rely on us to keep them alive.
Furthermore, without the cross-border mechanism,
Syrians will not receive their vaccinations against the
coronavirus disease. Without this mechanism, United
Nations agencies will no longer have a mandate to
assist non-governmental organizations on the ground
and financially.
Tell me, Mr. President, are you willing to allow the
United Nations, as the largest actor in the humanitarian
response in Syria, to disappear on your watch? There
is no country or entity that has the capacity to emulate
such a sophisticated system to monitor aid delivery.
Those who consistently fabricate aid-diversion lies and
advocate General Assembly resolution 46/182 must
understand this point. In the absence of the mechanism,
humanitarian operations will become less transparent,
less accountable and less effective. They will therefore

21-1649527/28

S/PV.8803

The situation in the Middle East

be in contradiction with that very same resolution.
Please also keep in mind that the absence of the crossborder mechanism will undermine the prospects for
a political solution, for it will not be possible to fully
implement resolution 2254 (2015).
Again today we heard from those who are
promoting cross-line access only. I would remind you,
Mr. President, that one of the reasons the Council adopted
resolution 2165 (2014) was the Syrian regime’s constant
obstruction of the delivery of critical humanitarian
supplies in many parts of the country. Reporting by
the United Nations and several non-governmental
organizations has detailed the conditions and highly
restricted humanitarian space following the closure
of the Al Yarubiyah crossing point in the north-east,
an area that is supposed to be reached through crossline access.
Let me set the record straight once again: crossline assistance can in no way replace cross-border
operations, even if we are ready to be helpful in

28/28

23/06/2021

ensuring its application. That is a complementary
modality — nothing more. There is no alternative to the
cross-border modality, particularly in the north-west.
The Council must heed the Secretary-General’s
advice and the joint appeal made by the Heads of
United Nations agencies last week. I also refer the
membership to the joint letter from a cross-regional
group of countries addressed to the President of the
Security Council yesterday. The world is watching. I
urge the members of the Council to do what is right
and preserve this indispensable mechanism for at least
another 12 months, with additional crossing points.
With regard to the hallucinatory statement made
by the representative of the Syrian regime, I will
repeat once again that I do not consider him to be my
legitimate counterpart. His presence here is an affront
to the millions of Syrians who have suffered countless
crimes at the hands of the regime. I will therefore not
dignify his delusional accusations with a response.
The meeting rose at 5.40 p.m.

21-16495
