A /69/PV.71

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

71st plenary meeting

Friday, 12 December 2014, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Antoine
(Grenada), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Agenda item 31 (continued)
The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict
Note verbale from the Permanent Mission of
China transmitting the report of the Kimberley
Process (A/69/622)
Draft resolution (A/69/L.39)
Mr. Scott (Australia): Australia warmly thanks the
People’s Republic of China for its leadership as Chair
of the Kimberley Process in 2014, and we are pleased
to sponsor the draft resolution (A/69/L.39) it is putting
forward today. We also congratulate Angola as it takes
the Chair of the Kimberley Process in 2015.
Australia has long been a strong supporter of
the Kimberley Process and has actively contributed
to the important work of its Working Groups on
Monitoring and of Diamond Experts, of its Committee
on Participation and Chairmanship and on other related
issues, such as statistics and internet trading.
The Kimberley Process has been phenomenally
successful in achieving its principal objective.
Uncertified diamonds now represent less than
1 per cent of world trade. As a member of the Security
Council, Australia has supported the Council’s ongoing
engagement with the Kimberley Process on a number of
situations on the Council’s agenda. That cooperation is

a critical element in the Council’s support for Liberia,
Côte d’Ivoire and the Central African Republic.
The Kimberley Process has also brought valuable
transparency to the diamond trade through its statistics
function and has acted as a facilitator for sharing best
practices in broader mining and governance practices.
Australia is a major diamond producer — currently
the world’s sixth largest by both volume and value — with
strong expertise in mining and a proud record of sharing
that expertise. Through our development partnerships,
in particular our Australia-Africa Partnership Facility,
we have worked to assist countries in harnessing the
wealth from their natural resources. We are also proud
supporters, in that respect, of the African Minerals
Development Centre. Our partnerships have provided
training on a wide range of important topics for the
diamond industry, including beneficiation, artisanal
production, cadastral systems and mining regulation,
to name a few.
The Kimberley Process should continue to create
opportunities for sharing best practices. Certainly the
appetite is there, as can be seen in the commitment
by the Mano River countries to the West Africa
harmonization project, which is developing and sharing
best practices in Kimberley Process compliance in Côte
d’Ivoire, Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone. Australia
was pleased to support that project.
The appetite was also evident in the great interest
and enthusiasm for the study tour Australia hosted for
participants from Africa and Asia in September 2014,
which contributed to building a new cadre of people

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

14-69221 (E)

*1469221*

A/69/PV.71

from a broader range of diamond-producing countries
to undertake Kimberley Process review visits. The
participants also expanded their knowledge of mining
best practices, which can be both used in their own
countries and shared with others. The study tour group
is also developing guidance materials that can be used
as tools for future visit teams.
For that reason, we support Angola’s focus on
implementing the Moscow and Washington, D.C.,
declarations through facilitating knowledge-sharing
between peers and opportunities for training. We
also applaud the World Diamond Council’s initiative
for training for new officials, which is long overdue.
Australia will work collaboratively with all parties
to bring that initiative to fruition. We also welcome
Angola’s focus on the Voluntary Principles on Security
and Human Rights. Australia is a member of that
initiative, given the importance of assisting mining
companies and Governments in preventing mine-site
conflict and the ensuing human and economic costs.
Civil society continues to be critical to the
operational effectiveness and international legitimacy
of the Kimberley Process. The civil-society coalition
has done much to support best practices in mining,
and we encourage them to continue that positive work.
They are also our early-warning system. In an industry
that is so reliant on the reputation of our product, we
are wise to seriously consider any issues brought to our
attention.
Australia believes we can build on the strengths
of the Kimberley Process, and that underpins our
decision to nominate ourselves to be Vice-Chair of
the Kimberley Process for 2015 and Chair in 2016.
Regardless of our role, we look forward to working
together to improve our systems and get the best out
of the diamond industry. That in turn will safeguard
the reputation of the diamond industry, thus ensuring
that diamonds are a source of wealth and progress for
the people, communities and countries that mine, trade,
polish and enjoy them.
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.39. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.39,
entitled “The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict:
breaking the link between the illicit transaction of
rough diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution
to prevention and settlement of conflicts”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.39?
2/9

12/12/2014

Draft resolution A/69/L.39 was adopted (resolution
69/136).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 31?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 7 (continued)
Organization of work, adoption of the agenda and
allocation of items
The Acting President: Members will recall
that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September, the
General Assembly decided to allocate sub-item (b) of
agenda item 22 to the Second Committee. To enable
the General Assembly to take action expeditiously on
the draft resolution, may I take it that the Assembly
wishes to consider sub-item (b) of agenda item 22
directly in plenary meeting and proceed immediately
to its consideration?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 22
Groups of countries in special situations
(b) Follow-up to the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries
Draft resolution (A/69/L.28)
The Acting President: We shall now proceed to
consider draft resolution A/69/L.28. The Assembly
will now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.28,
entitled “Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024”.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft
resolution A/69/L.28?
Draft resolution A/69/L.28 was adopted (resolution
69/137).
The Acting President: I now call on those
delegations that wish to make statements after the
adoption of the resolution.
Mrs. Chanda (Zambia): On behalf of the
32 landlocked developing countries (LLDCs), I would
like to express gratitude to the President of the General
Assembly for this occasion and the consideration of
the resolution to endorse the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024, adopted by our Heads of State and
14-69221

12/12/2014

Government and their representatives at the second
United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries, held in Vienna from 3 to 5 November.
I wish to thank the Government and the people of
Austria for their generosity and hospitality and further
congratulate them for successfully hosting the important
conference. I thank all the delegations that sat and
worked with us for their commitment and dedication
in the negotiations, and for their magnanimity and
flexibility, which resulted in the successful adoption
of the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries for the Decade 2014-2024 and
its related Political Declaration (resolution 69/137,
annexes I and II).
The newly adopted Vienna Programme of Action
for LLDCs demonstrates a deeper understanding
of the challenges faced by LLDCs and draws upon
lessons learned, gaps and experiences from the Almaty
Programme of Action, including the context of the
Millennium Development Goals. This document, which
has just been adopted, seeks to promote economic
and trade competitiveness for sustained and inclusive
growth. The ambitious Programme further contains
specific, realistic yet time-bound objectives and targets
aimed at addressing the special development needs and
challenges that arise from landlockedness, remoteness
and geographical constraints faced by LLDCs in a more
coherent, comprehensive and integrated manner.
The Vienna Programme of Action is premised on
the fact that LLDCs continue to face unacceptably high
transit costs, with delayed transit times, as compared
to their maritime neighbours. The Vienna Programme
of Action gives cognizance to new and emerging
challenges, such as climate change, external shocks and
increasing economic structural constraints, such as low
productivity and lack of competitiveness.
The Vienna Programme of Action incorporates
concrete actions for the next decade that have been
premised on six key priority areas and on genuine
partnerships involving LLDCs, transit developing
countries and their development partners, including
multilateral institutions. The six priority areas are
fundamental transit policy issues, infrastructure
development and maintenance, international trade and
trade facilitation, regional integration and cooperation,
structural economic transformation and the means of
implementation.

A/69/PV.71

We are aware that the LLDC agenda is taking place
at a time when the global community is engaged in other
parallel but complementary processes. We are expectant
and confident that the concerns of our countries will be
meaningfully reflected in the post-2015 development
agenda, as well as in the Financing for Development
discussions. It is worth underscoring that the Vienna
Programme of Action is only complementary to these
important global dialogues, and as such it is our desire
that all these interrelated processes be integrated to
harness synergy and to deliver as one.
I take this opportunity to stress that, in following up
the second United Nations Conference on LLDCs, there
is also a need to further elaborate on concrete measures
and a road map for the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action in order to guide the LLDCs,
transit developing countries and their development
partners, as well as other stakeholders, on the path
of coordinated and effective implementation of the
Conference outcome. In this regard, the Government
of the Republic of Zambia, in its capacity as Chair
of the LLDCs group, announced the follow-up highlevel meeting to the Conference, which will be held in
Livingstone, Zambia, in June 2015. I wish to appeal for
the collective support of Member States to participate
in this meeting.
The successful implementation of the new
Programme of Action is dependent on the depth and
reach of the many important partnerships that we have
forged and continue to forge. I would like to thank our
partners for their willingness to lend their support in
addressing challenges related to landlockedness. I also
thank our transit neighbours, which make it possible
for our countries to have a deeper and meaningful
engagement in international trade. We are grateful for
the financial and technical support extended to us by
our development partners in the context of South-South,
North-South and triangular cooperation. We also count
on their continued support and the continued support
of the private-sector players, as well as multilateral
institutions, in the development of our productive
capacities and transport infrastructure, among others.
Lastly, I wish to emphasize the critical role that the
United Nations system plays, particularly the specialized
agencies and regional economic commissions. In this
context, I draw attention to the great need for a new
and expanded mandate and capacity of the Office
of the High Representative for Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and

14-692213/9

A/69/PV.71

Small Island Developing States in order to ably support
the demanding requirements of the implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action. It is our expectation
that adequate resources will be given to this Office to
adequately support the implementation, monitoring,
review and reporting of the activities of the Vienna
Programme of Action, as called for in the new mandate.
I look forward to the continued support of
all Member States and to the full and successful
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia):
It is an honour to see you, Sir, presiding over this
important meeting.
I have the honour to deliver this statement on behalf
of the Group of 77 and China.
The Group would like to express its profound
gratitude to the Government and the people of the
Republic of Austria for hosting the second United
Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries, from 3 to 5 November, and for providing all
the necessary support for the successful conclusion of
the meeting.
As the General Assembly adopts the outcome of
the second Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries (resolution 69/137), the Group of 77
and China would like to reiterate and stress the
importance of the implementation of the commitments
that have been agreed in the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024 in its six priority areas, namely,
fundamental transit policy issues, infrastructure
development and maintenance, international trade and
trade facilitation, regional integration and cooperation,
structural economic transformation and the means of
implementation at all levels in a coordinated, coherent
and expeditious manner.
The Group underlines the importance of the
successful implementation, follow-up and review
of the Vienna Programme of Action at the national,
subregional, regional and global levels. Further, we call
upon our development partners to integrate the Vienna
Programme of Action into their respective national
cooperation policy frameworks, programmes and
activities to provide targeted technical and financial
support towards the implementation of the specific
actions listed in the Programme of Action.

4/9

12/12/2014

Guided by the spirit of solidarity, we as the developing
countries are also engaged in providing support for the
effective implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action in mutually agreed areas of cooperation within
the framework of South-South cooperation, which
is a complement to, but not a substitute for, NorthSouth cooperation. The Group will also call upon
the organizations and bodies of the United Nations
system, relevant international organizations, regional
economic integration organizations and other relevant
regional and subregional organizations to integrate the
Vienna Programme of Action into their programme of
work, and to provide greater support to the landlocked
developing countries for the implementation of this
Programme of Action.
The Group reiterates once again its strong support to
the LLDCs group and hopes that the Vienna Programme
of Action give rise to a strengthened partnership aimed
at meeting those countries’ needs and overcoming the
challenges facing them. The Group believes that the
only way to achieve the ambitious result that will truly
address the special challenges faced by LLDCs and will
let them overcome their geographical disadvantages,
unlock their potential and become active and successful
participants in the international economy is through the
genuine and strong engagement and cooperation of all
of the international community.
Mr. Beviglia Zampetti (European Union): The
European Union and its member States are pleased
to join the consensus on the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024 (resolution 69/137, annex II).
We want to thank all representatives for their
constructive engagement throughout out the negotiations,
as well as the Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for its
support. We want to thank specifically Ambassador
Khiane Phansourivong of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and Ambassador Per Thöresson of Sweden
for their leadership in the process. We also wish to
express our sincere gratitude to the Government and
people of Austria for hosting the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries and
for providing all the necessary support.
With landlocked developing countries in the lead,
we are determined to support them in core policy
areas aimed at addressing the serious constraints on

14-69221

12/12/2014

their sustainable development due to remoteness, lack
of territorial access to the sea and limited access to
world markets. This means, notably, concentrating
our efforts in the areas of trade facilitation, transit,
transport infrastructure and regional integration and
cooperation. Our current and future cooperation with
landlocked developing countries, both bilateral and
regional, is geared towards these areas to ensure that
our partnership translates into transformational policies
and programmes on the ground.
We were encouraged by the broad participation
of many stakeholders during the Vienna Conference,
notably of businesses. The private-sector contribution
will be fundamental. The creation of an enabling
environment to increase investment and foster inclusive
and sustainable growth remains crucial. We look
forward to working with the landlocked developing
countries, the United Nations system and all partners
in the implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action.
Mrs. Adhikari (Nepal): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Government of Nepal in support of
resolution 69/137, submitted under agenda item 22 (b),
“Groups of countries in special situations: Follow-up to
the second United Nations Conference on landlocked
developing countries”.
My delegation is grateful to the President of the
General Assembly for submitting this resolution and
commends the Assembly for its unanimous adoption
today. By adopting this resolution, the Assembly
endorsed the Vienna Programme of Action for
Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024, as adopted at the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries held
in Vienna last month.
The landlocked developing countries (LLDCs)
constitute one of the most vulnerable groups of
countries, as has been duly recognized by the
international community. Structural weakness, limited
productive capacity and low resilience to shocks expose
these countries to the severe negative impacts of
climate change and other ongoing and emerging crises.
In addition to that, the perennial trade and transit issues
owing to lack of direct access to the sea, long distance
from major international markets, cumbersome transit
procedures, inadequate transport infrastructure and the
resulting prohibitively high-cost economy continue to
be the major challenges for LLDCs.

A/69/PV.71

It is imperative therefore to address the specific
needs and challenges of LLDCs concerning structural
transformation, productive capacity-building and
value addition, each of which demand targeted
actions in a concerted and coordinated manner on a
priority basis with enhanced and predictable means
of implementation. In this context, while pledging its
utmost efforts at all levels, for the implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action from the national
perspective, Nepal underscores the importance of
fulfilling the commitments from all development
partners and strongly calls on all for the speedy and
full implementation of the new Programme of Action.
In the same vein, my delegation emphasizes that
the specific needs and challenges of LLDCs should
be accorded due priority both in the elaboration and
implementation of the post-2015 development agenda.
To that end, we call for the full integration of the Vienna
Programme of Action into the new global development
framework. Together, the full implementation of the
Istanbul Programme of Action and other internationally
agreed programmes of action would create a greater
synergy for development, especially for those
countries that are doubly disadvantaged, being both
landlocked and least developed. The implementation
of all these instruments will directly contribute to
eradicating extreme poverty and promoting sustainable
development.
In this regard, my delegation is grateful to
Mr. Kutesa for his personal participation at the second
United Nations Conference on LLDCs in Vienna last
month in his capacity as President of the General
Assembly, and I am confident that the cause of LLDCs
will continue to be a top priority under his watch.
I wish to conclude by placing on record my
delegation’s sincere compliments and gratitude to the
Government and the people of Austria for hosting the
LLDCs conference; to the Ambassador of Austria for
his important role on behalf of the host and also as
President of the Economic and Social Council; to the
Ambassador of Zambia, as the Chair of the LLDCs
group, and her team; and to the Ambassador of the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic and the Ambassador of
Sweden as co-Chairs of the Conference’s Preparatory
Committee. Our sincere thanks go also to the Office
of the High Representative for the Least Developed
Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and
Small Island Developing States and all other actors for
their invaluable efforts to make the Conference fruitful.

14-692215/9

A/69/PV.71

My delegation is confident that all their commitment
will continue as we work for the implementation of the
Conference’s outcome ahead.
Mr. Carrillo Gómez (Paraguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Paraguay considers the adoption of the
Vienna Declaration and the Vienna Programme of
Action for Landlocked Developing Countries for the
Decade 2014-2024 (resolution 69/137, annexes I and
II) to be a step forward in the strengthening of the
rights of landlocked developing countries, such as
freedom of transit, trade facilitation and their effective
participation in international trade under favourable
conditions.
Paraguay would like to thank the Government
and the people of Austria for their generosity and
hospitality as hosts of the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.
Indeed, the delegation of Paraguay underscores the
praiseworthy work undertaken by the Office of the
High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island
Developing States, which enabled the success of the
Vienna Conference in November.
The comprehensive and pragmatic focus of the new
Programme of Action will facilitate the realization of
freedom of transit for landlocked developing countries.
For Paraguay, given its geographic location and its
nature as a natural hub between the Atlantic and
the Pacific Oceans, the new Programme of Action
contributes to the realization of international standards
that guarantee freedom of transit along the ParaguayParaná route. This is crucial not only for the Republic of
Paraguay, but also for the continent’s regions that lack
access to the sea. Its also provides tools to increase our
competitiveness, make headway in combating poverty
and improve our people’s standards of living.
Paraguay believes that the renewed and bolstered
alliance between landlocked developing countries,
transit countries and other partners for development that
form the basis of the Vienna Programme of Action will
soon be complemented by the full implementation and
entry into force of the Agreement on Trade Facilitation
reached in Bali to be implemented by the members of
the World Trade Organization, and in particular by
transit countries with regard to measures pertaining to
freedom of transit. In that regard, Paraguay emphasizes
that the Vienna Programme of Action envisions
relations between landlocked developing countries and
transit countries to be mutually beneficial.
6/9

12/12/2014

Paraguay believes that the implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action will promote the
role of trade as an engine for development and will
bring together the necessary conditions to mobilize
the needed investments in landlocked developing
countries. Furthermore, the implementation of the new
Programme of Action will be key for the development and
maintenance of infrastructure for development. Along
those lines, the emphasis on South-South cooperation,
which is a complement to, but not a substitute for,
North-South cooperation, and the promotion of
private-public partnerships in the Programme augur
well for overcoming the plethora of structural gaps and
budget limitations of the Governments of landlocked
developing countries.
In conclusion, Paraguay appreciates the particular
recognition of the specific needs and difficulties of
landlocked developing countries established in the
Vienna Programme of Action for the elaboration of
the post-2015 development agenda, as well as in the
framework of international processes. The Republic of
Paraguay and other landlocked developing countries
truly hope to benefit from a shared, but differentiated,
treatment, including differentiated treatment in
unilateral systems, such as the general preferential
trade arrangements, and the necessary recognition of
our condition in a programme of work of the World
Trade Organization.
Mrs. Cizare (Ethiopia): At the outset, allow me
once again to congratulate the people and Government
of Austria for hosting a very successful United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries. We
also commend the leadership and efforts of Zambia, as
Chair of the Group of Landlocked Developing Countries.
Our gratitude also extends to the co-Chairs, Sweden and
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, which played an
instrumental role during the negotiation process.
Ethiopia aligns itself with the statements delivered
by the representative of the Plurinational State of
Bolivia on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and
the representative of Zambia on behalf of the Group of
Landlocked Developing Countries, respectively.
In spite of the progress achieved in addressing the
challenges of landlockedness, landlocked developing
countries (LLDCs) still experience gaps in the
implementation of Almaty Programme of Action. That is
why the Vienna Programme of Action (resolution 69/137,
annex II) aims to resolve this by drawing on lessons
from the past 10 years. In this regard, the Programme
14-69221

12/12/2014

of Action reaffirms the special needs of LLDCs and
underscores the importance of considering in a holistic
manner the unique challenges that LLDCs face due
to their geographical disadvantage. It also underlines
the importance of improving trade, promoting greater
integration of LLDCs into international markets and
addressing supply constraints through structural
economic transformation and diversification of their
economies.
In this context, it is important to undertake
measures that could promote structural economic
transformation capable of reducing the negative
impact of our geographical disadvantages and external
shocks, creating jobs and ultimately leading to poverty
eradication and inclusive and sustainable growth and
development. Increased value addition and economic
diversification are key to such structural economic
transformation. The Vienna Programme of Action
is a concise, focused and action-oriented document
that provides a road map and implementable specific
objectives and is therefore a first step. The question now
is how we can effectively implement the Programme
of Action and deliver on the commitments made to
LLDCs.
Partnership based on mutual trust and accountability
is indeed vital to support the implementation of our
concrete priorities and specific objectives. Effective
implementation requires sufficient and predictable
means, including financing, institutional capacitybuilding, technology transfer and technical cooperation.
In this context, we stress the importance of including
LLDCs’ priorities in the discussions and future outcome
of the third International Conference on Financing for
Development, which will be one of the important inputs
regarding the means of implementation of the post-2015
development agenda.
We also need a robust global monitoring system that
strengthens accountability at all levels in following up
on the implementation of the Programme of Action. In
this regard, we believe the review of the United Nations
system support to LLDCs agreed in Vienna will most
certainly contribute to improving accountability and
the delivery of commitments. We look forward to the
work of the Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States, in
collaboration with other relevant stakeholders, on
developing relevant indicators and measuring the

A/69/PV.71

progress on implementing the Programme of Action in
landlocked developing countries.
In conclusion, we would like to once again underline
the necessity of integrating the needs and priorities of
countries in special situations, such as LLDCs, into
the post-2015 development agenda and other relevant
United Nations system processes.
Mr. Choeda (Bhutan): Bhutan aligns itself with the
statements made by the representatives of Bolivia on
behalf of the Group of 77 and China, and of Zambia on
behalf of the landlocked developing countries (LLDCs).
Bhutan is pleased to join others in welcoming the
adoption of resolution 69/137, which formally endorses
the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked
Developing Countries, by the Assembly. Let me also
join others in thanking the Government and the people
of Austria for hosting a successful United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries in
Vienna. The Vienna Programme of Action is the result
of constructive engagement and positive contributions
by all Member States. We thank all delegations for their
solidarity with and support for the Group of LLDCs.
I wish to also thank Ambassador Per Thöresson of
Sweden and Ambassador Khiane Phansourivong of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic for facilitating the
negotiations on the Vienna Programme of Action with
great tact and diligence.
The Vienna Programme of Action provides not
only a renewed vision, but also a road map to address
the special development needs and problems of LLDCs
in the coming decade. We welcome the fact that it is a
more holistic and comprehensive Programme of Action
as it seeks to build on the Almaty Programme of Action
and includes additional priority areas that would enable
LLDCs to pursue robust economic growth. In this
regard, issues of structural economic transformation
and infrastructure development are imperative to
enabling LLDCs to diversify their economy and enhance
their productive capacity. We remain confident that the
successful implementation of the Vienna Programme of
Action will help further our national development goals
and objectives.
It is propitious that the adoption of the Vienna
Programme of Action should come before the start
of intergovernmental negotiations on the post2015 development agenda. In our view, the Vienna
Programme of Action provides a good basis for the
international community to take on board priorities that

14-692217/9

A/69/PV.71

are important for LLDCs in the post-2015 development
agenda. Going forward, the focus must now shift to the
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.
Towards this end, the utilization of the full range of
partnerships available — partnerships with our transit
neighbours, development partners, the United Nations
system and the private sector — will be indispensable.
Much of the success in our national development
efforts in the next decade will depend on how far we
have been able to successfully implement the Vienna
Programme of Action. We therefore look forward to
working closely with all our development partners
and count on their support to implement the Vienna
Programme of Action to further advance economic
progress and prosperity in landlocked developing
countries in the next decade.
Mr. Phansourivong (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic): At the outset, my delegation wishes to
associate itself with the statements made earlier by
the representative of the Plurinational State of Bolivia
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China and by the
representative of China on behalf of the group of
Landlocked Developing Countries, respectively.
My delegation would like to join other delegations
in expressing our sincere thanks and deep appreciation
to the Government and the people of Austria for
their generosity and successful hosting of the second
United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries from 3 to 5 November 2014 in Vienna.
The adoption of the Vienna Programme of Action
for Landlocked Developing Countries for the Decade
2014-2024 (resolution 69/137, annex II) was the
result of many months of hard work by all relevant
stakeholders. This has demonstrated the goodwill and
spirit of genuine partnership and commitment of the
international community to support the development of
landlocked developing countries (LLDCs). As co-Chair
of the Preparatory Committee of the Conference
with Ambassador Per Thöresson, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, I wish to take this
opportunity to express my heartfelt thanks to Member
States and the Office of the High Representative for the
Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States for
their excellent contributions made in the process of
negotiations.
The task before us now is the need for effective
implementation of the Vienna Programme of Action.

8/9

12/12/2014

I therefore call upon the international community to
support the implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action so that the special needs and challenges
arising from the landlockedness and development
needs being faced by LLDCs are addressed. I also
wish to thank transit countries, development partners,
United Nations agencies and others for their valuable
support and assistance to LLDCs, and hope they will
continue to support the implementation of the Vienna
Programme of Action.
Mr. Sekiguchi (Japan): At the outset, let me extend
my gratitude to the co-Chairs of the Preparatory
Committee, Ambassador Phansourivong, Permanent
Representative of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
and Ambassador Per Thöresson, Deputy Permanent
Representative of Sweden, who also worked as a
facilitator of the Committee for the whole of the second
United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing
Countries, for their robust efforts in coordinating the
outcome document (resolution 69/137). I would also
like to extend my gratitude to the Austrian Government
for its dedicated efforts in hosting the Conference.
Japan is pleased to join the consensus on the
outcome document of the second United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries.
Japan is committed to supporting the efforts of
landlocked developing countries (LLDCs) in achieving
sustainable development, including through the
effective implementation of the Vienna Programme
of Action. Japan has worked hand in hand with the
LLDCs over the years, such as through the introduction
of one-stop border posts in 14 locations on national
borders in Africa and the Japan-Mekong Cooperation
for enhancing regional connectivity, as well as economic
development towards building the community of the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, based on the
Tokyo Strategy 2012.
Infrastructure development and trade facilitation,
which were identified as priority areas in the new
Vienna Programme of Action, are areas in which Japan
holds its greatest expertise. Increased articulation with
the global value chain through development in those
areas would provide many benefits to LLDCs, such as
the creation of new jobs and more highly developed
industries, and could therefore act as an effective means
of growth. Japan will continue to coordinate with
LLDCs, transit developing countries and development
partners in order to improve a comprehensive logistic

14-69221

12/12/2014

environment through both infrastructure and human
resource development.
Japan will continue to be a dynamic and dependable
partner for LLDCs in the future. This Programme of
Action is the beginning of a new decade towards a bright
future for LLDCs. We will continue to work together
with LLDCs towards their growth and development.
Mr. Seksenbay (Kazakhstan): We are indeed
happy to note the overwhelming endorsement of the
outcome (resolution 69/137) of the second Conference
on Landlocked Developing Countries held in Vienna
last month. My delegation wholeheartedly accepts and
supports the Vienna Programme of Action, the second
major milestone, as a sequel to the one adopted in
Almaty in 2003, providing landlocked countries with a
new trajectory for development.
The Governments of all landlocked developing
countries (LLDCs) and transit partners expressed
their political will to implement the Programme of
Action in conjunction with other global platforms and
processes that will shape the post-2015 phase. The
Vienna document will be an important and integral
part of this global movement. The challenge now is to
integrate and synthesize these parallel actions into the
interconnected stream of development and to deliver as
one. This will take place in the context of promoting
infrastructure development, economic diversification,
structural transformation, connectivity to global value
chains and regional coordination.
In this regard, the follow-up conference in Zambia
next year will provide an opportunity to deliberate
on how to assess and monitor the implementation of
the Vienna Programme of Action and to propose the
appropriate tools and mechanisms. It will also provide
a forum to analyse the extent of the partnerships that
have been forged, including with the private sector and
other multilateral institutions.

A/69/PV.71

Following up on the final culmination of the
Almaty Programme of Action and, in anticipation of the
Vienna Conference, my country had already taken into
consideration measures to work towards overcoming the
geographical disadvantages of landlockedness through
the Path to the Future policy, which we call Nurly Zhol.
This road map was delivered by the President of the
Republic of Kazakhstan earlier last month in his address
to the nation. It is a well-conceived approach to every
aspect of national development: raising national income,
as well as economic and industrial growth, import and
export flows, with adequate trade regulations, and
upgrading and expanding the infrastructure of roads,
all forms of transport, communications and technology,
and renewable sources of energy, to mention a few. At
the same time, Nurly Zhol reflects a very people-centred
development based on the principles of the United
Nations. We will be pleased to share our lessons learned
and gain also from the strategies of other landlocked
countries, since we all share similar challenges.
The primary responsibility to implement the Vienna
Programme of Action lies with national Governments,
but, as in the case of all items on the United Nations
agenda, the support of development partners is critical
for LLDCs to reach their objectives. This calls for
global solidarity and multilateral action under the
leadership of the Office of the High Representative for
the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing
Countries and Small Island Developing States and the
United Nations system as a whole.
The Vienna Programme of Action is holistic,
forward-looking and action-oriented. We must all
embrace it fully and move forward with it if the LLDCs
are to make their special mark on the world stage.
The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
sub-item (b) of agenda item 22.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

14-692219/9
