S/PV.7412

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7412th meeting

Tuesday, 24 March 2015, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Lucas
Mr. Gombo
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Hmoud
Mr. Baublys
Mrs. Adnin
Mrs. Schwalger
Mr. Laro
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi
Mr. Wilson
Mr. Pressman
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006)

15-08179 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1508179*

S/PV.7412

Non-proliferation

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Briefing by the Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006)
The President (spoke in French): At this
meeting, the Security Council will hear a briefing by
Ambassador Mr. Román Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, in his capacity as Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006).
I now give the floor to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi.
Mr. Oyarzun Marchesi (Spain) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to present the report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), in accordance with paragraph 18 (h) of the same
resolution. The present report covers the period from
18 December 2014 to 23 March 2015, during which
time the Committee held one informal meeting, on
4 February, and conducted additional work using the
no-objection procedure envisioned by paragraph 15 of
the guidelines for the conduct of its work.
In view of the recent developments relating to the
Joint Plan of Action, the Committee welcomes the
commitment of all parties to pursuing negotiations
towards a comprehensive agreement.
I would like to emphasize that the measures
imposed by the Security Council through resolutions
1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and 1929 (2010)
remain in full effect as negotiations between the P5+1
and the Islamic Republic of Iran continue, and that
Member States remain obliged to duly implement
them. The Committee remains fully committed to the
implementation of all relevant resolutions and stands
ready to provide guidance to Member States that
request assistance.
In that respect, while no new incidents have been
reported to the Committee during the current reporting
period, I would recall that the Committee reached out
to the Islamic Republic of Iran for comment on several
occasions in relation to incidents investigated by the
Panel of Experts. The Islamic Republic of Iran has not

2/11

24/03/2015

yet provided a response and the Committee continues
to call on Iran to do so.
The Committee continues to assist States and
international organizations in implementing the
relevant Security Council measures and has finalized
its deliberations on a number of such requests. This
includes considering requests for guidance covering
a range of issues, including whether proposals for
technical assistance to the Islamic Republic of Iran in
the fields of energy efficiency, refuelling services for
aircrafts, and mine action, as well as other cooperation
proposals, are permitted by the sanctions measures. The
Committee welcomes such collaboration on matters of
implementation and compliance, and encourages parties
to continue to seek guidance from the Committee on
the application of the Council’s measures.
The Committee also received two notifications
from Member States in accordance with the relevant
resolutions. Paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007) allow
for payments owed by a designated entity under a
contract entered into force prior to its designation to
be made from that entity’s frozen funds, subject to
prior notification to the Committee. The Committee
received such a notification from a Member State in
accordance with paragraph 15 of resolution 1737 (2006)
and paragraph 4 of resolution 1747 (2007). Similarly, a
Member State notified the Committee of its delivery of
equipment intended for use in a light-water reactor to
the Bushehr nuclear power plant, in accordance with
paragraph 5 of resolution 1737 (2006).
In view of actions taken by Member States to
implement the relevant Security Council measures,
the Committee encourages States that have not yet
submitted reports to do so as soon as possible in
recognition that national implementation reports are an
important means of promoting the implementation of
the sanctions measures.
In connection with the Panel of Experts, I am
pleased to report that the Committee concluded its
consideration of the recommendations contained in the
2014 final report of the Panel of Experts (S/2014/394)
on 31 December 2014, in particular in view of any
follow-up action by the Committee. The Committee
took note of the recommendations and finalized its
deliberations on additional information regarding
designated individuals, in particular bio-identifiers,
in the Committee’s sanctions list. All updates have

15-08179

24/03/2015

Non-proliferation

been made available on the Committee website. The
Committee decided that, In the event of a comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue, it would revert at
the appropriate time to the Panel’s recommendation
to provide specific guidance to Member States on
possible implications for the relevant Security Council
measures, once an outcome was known.
The Committee received an informal briefing
of the Panel’s investigative and outreach activities
during its informal consultations on 4 February. As
to the activities undertaken by the Panel over the past
three months, I note that the Panel has participated in
a number of events that are listed in the annex to the
report, which has been distributed in the Chamber.
Finally, while recalling that the primary
responsibility for implementing the provisions of
resolutions 1737 (2006), 1747 (2007), 1803 (2008) and
1929 (2010) rests with Member States, the Committee
stands ready to facilitate the implementation of these
measures.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi, Permanent
Representative of Spain, for his briefing and for
his efforts to promote the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) since the
beginning of his chairmanship.
China has always attached great importance to
and actively participated in the work of the Committee
and hopes that, together with the other members of the
Committee, we shall continue our good work in a steady,
practical and balanced manner. China believes that
sanctions in and of themselves are not the purpose of
the relevant Council resolution, and that the tightening
of sanctions is not the appropriate criterion by which to
assess the Committee’s work.
The Iranian nuclear talks currently fact a precious
historic opportunity. Although the negotiations face
many difficulties, the entire international community
hopes to see a comprehensive agreement reached by
the deadline. This would represent a positive trend
and serve the common and long-term interests of
all parties. The Committee and the Panel of Experts
should therefore discharge their duties in a steady

S/PV.7412

and orderly way, contribute to international efforts to
negotiate a solution to this issue, and refrain from any
move contrary to the spirit of the resolution that may
disrupt the negotiating process. China notes that the
Panel is drafting its final report for the current term.
We hope that the Panel will act in accordance with the
aforementioned principles and work objectively and
impartially to produce a good report.
Resolving the Iranian nuclear issue through
diplomatic negotiations will safeguard the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime, contribute to peace
and tranquillity in the Middle East, and offer beneficial
experience in negotiating solutions to major hot-spot
issues. It is therefore of far-reaching significance. On
the other hand, the potential impact of the talks far
exceeds the talks themselves, and some twists, turns
and difficulties in the process are unavoidable.
The six parties and Iran recently held intensive
consultations and negotiations with a view to meeting
the final deadline for the negotiations. The process
is now in the final stage of the marathon, and China
believes that the negotiations are near the finish line.
We hope that the parties will seize this important
window of opportunity to strengthen their political
will, mobilize favourable factors, continue working
to meet each other half way, and make timely political
decisions so as to run the last and most difficult
kilometre side by side in order, as soon as possible,
to reach a comprehensive agreement that is equitable,
balanced and mutually beneficial. The parties should
persevere, see the process through to the very end, and
prevent last-minute failures.
China supports the ongoing positive role being
played by the International Atomic Energy Agency
in resolving this issue. We hope that the Agency will
strengthen its cooperation with Iran and gradually
resolve the relevant pending issues. China is a
responsible party to the talks, has consistently behaved
in an objective and impartial way, and has made positive
contributions to resolving the difficult key issues in
the negotiations. China will pursue its constructive
participation in the negotiations and, alongside the
other parties, finish the marathon talks on the Iranian
nuclear issue as soon as possible, so as to contribute
its wisdom and strength to achieving a comprehensive,
thorough and long-term solution to this issue.
Mr. Hmoud (Jordan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to thank the Permanent Representative
of Spain for his interesting statement and for all his

15-081793/11

S/PV.7412

Non-proliferation

efforts in leading the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006). I also thank the Panel of
Experts for their work in preparing the relevant reports.
Jordan is deeply committed to respecting the
right of all States to use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes; that is particularly so for developing countries
attempting to promote economic growth. These efforts
must be part and parcel of full and complete cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
and in accordance with the releveant legal instruments,
the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
while consistently taking into account the nature and
quality of security and safety measures applicable to
nuclear installations.
Given the emerging possibility of Iran and the P5+1
achieving an agreement on the political framework and
main elements of a comprehensive agreement on the
Iranian nuclear issue in the near future, Jordan, alongside
the rest of the international community, is eager to
receive details of the agreement and implementation
measures. If a comprehensive agreement is reached on
the Iranian nuclear issue, pursuant to the paramaters
set out by the IAEA for the peaceful production of
nuclear energy, it would represent a first step in the
right direction that we should seize upon to strengthen
regional security. We hope that such an agreement will
bolster the efforts of the international community to
address all the challenges facing the Middle East, in
particular in the field of security, and that it will not
detract from our consideration of all other dossiers in
the Arab region.
Moreover, we reiterate the need for the Committee
to continue to fully meet its responsibilities to pursue
the necessary investigations of violations that have been
committed and to maintain a positive commitment,
alongside the Iranian authorities, to clarifying all
outstanding issues related to past violations. We invite
the Iranian Government to respond to the Panel of
Experts’s requests for clarification in that respect.
Along the same lines, we encourage States that have
not yet submitted their reports on the measures taken
towards the implementation of the relevant Security
Council resolutions to do so. We also call upon them
to fully cooperate with the Panel of Experts, as the
success of the Committee very much depends on those
States submitting their reports.
In conclusion, we would like to pay tribute to the
role of the Committee, which assists Member States
and international bodies in implementing the relevant
4/11

24/03/2015

Security Council resolutions by considering requests
from Member States concerning Iran’s requests for
technical assistance with regard to the provision of
energy and aircraft services. We encourage such
assistance, as it enables Member States to ensure
that they act in conformity with the resolutions of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Schwalger (New Zealand): We thank
Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for his briefing in his
capacity as Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006). New
Zealand fully supports the mandate of the Committee.
New Zealand joins others in acknowledging the
efforts of the P5+1 and Iran in their current negotiations
on a comprehensive agreement. New Zealand fully
supports that process and hopes that negotiations will
be concluded by the agreed deadline. We appreciate
the fact that the negotiations are sensitive for the key
parties involved, but we trust that those sensitivities
will not stand in the way of a comprehensive outcome.
New Zealand was encouraged by the briefing to
the Security Council provided several weeks ago by the
High Representative of the European Union, Federica
Mogherini, in which she noted that the parties had
“never been so close to what could be a turning
point in the history of Iran’s relationship with the
West and with the region” (S/PV.7402, p. 7).
New Zealand trusts that hope will be realized. For now,
however, it is important to remember that the existing
sanctions remain in place and that, as the 90-day report
notes, States have an obligation to duly implement
them.
New Zealand is aware of the challenges involved
in implementing complex sanctions regimes such as
the one set out in resolution 1737 (2006), particularly
for small States. At the conclusion of the P5+1 talks
with Iran, there will be a need for clear communication
with Member States on the implications for the
existing sanctions regime. We look forward to working
constructively as a member of the Committee to provide
guidance to Member States at the appropriate time.
Finally, we take the opportunity afforded by today’s
briefing to encourage all parties involved in the talks to
sustain the commitment and the political will required
for a positive outcome.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We would like to thank Ambassador Oyarzun
15-08179

24/03/2015

Non-proliferation

Marchesi, Permanent Representative of Spain, for
the briefing on the work of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006), which he chairs, for the period under review.
I would also like to thank the Spanish delegation for
the skilled leadership of that subsidiary body of the
Council at this highly sensitive stage. We look forward
to further practical and constructive cooperation in the
Committee to swiftly settle the situation concerning
the Iranian nuclear programme.
On 20 March in Lausanne, the most recent full
round of talks of the sextet of international mediators
with Iranian representatives was held in order to work
out a final agreement on a comprehensive settlement of
the situation related to the Iranian nuclear programme.
The parties continued to seek compromise with regard
to solutions to the remaining unsolved issues. It was
agreed that the next round of talks would begin on
26 March. In that regard, we would like to note that
it is extremely important for all the parties to ensure
progress in moving towards a final agreement. It is
necessary to produce a document that includes all
of the basic principles, for which the parameters for
implementation will then be the subject of technical
consultations and planning work. We cannot let this
opportunity slip away.
Of course, the reaching of a settlement and the
implementation of the expected agreements will be
linked to a thorough review of the sanctions regime
currently in force. A discussion of the specific
parameters is currently being carried out in the format
of the P5+1 and Iran. Another aspect of this issue is
also important: several Members of the United Nations,
guided by a misguided interpretation of the sanctions
agreed in the Security Council are introducing
additional unilateral restrictions and limitations outside
of the Council, which have no international legal basis
to support them. We reaffirm our rejection of such a
practice.

S/PV.7412

work in supporting implementation of the Security
Council’s resolutions on Iran. I particularly welcome
Spain’s leadership on this sensitive issue.
We have made progress in recent weeks in the
negotiations on Iran’s nuclear programme. However,
a lot of complex issues remain unresolved. We remain
commited to finding a comprehensive agreement, and
still believe that is possible. But we will not agree to
a bad deal. Iran will need to show greater flexibility
and take some tough decisions in the coming days if we
are to achieve a deal when talks resume in Switzerland
later this week.
We are at an important moment in the negotiations.
If we are able to resolve the main issues, technical
work will follow to convert a political framework into
a detailed text. We will continue to work together with
our E3+3 partners to ensure a successful outcome.
We welcome the unity of purpose shown by our
fellow Council members involved in the negotiations,
and recognize the important role played by the High
Representative of the European Union in the talks.
While negotiations continue, the bulk of sanctions,
including all United Nations sanctions, and the
obligations on Member States arising from Security
Council resolutions, remain in place and fully in force.
We therefore welcome the notifications from Member
States regarding designated entities and the delivery of
equipment intended for use in a light-water reactor at
the Bushehr nuclear power plant. That report reminds
us that we must continue to report any violations
in accordance with the requirements set out in the
resolutions.
Turning to the work of the Committee, we must
continue implementation work to enforce the relevant
Security Council sanctions measures on Iran. We
welcome the Committee’s continued guidance and
assistance to Member States and to international
organizations.

For our part, we will continue to do everything in
our power to definitively and comprehensively bring
to a close the issues related to the Iranian nuclear
programme, and to relieve Tehran of the sanctions
introduced by the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council.

We remain concerned by Iran’s continued failure
to respond to previous requests for information on
various incidents, including the interdiction of a vessel
carrying a cargo of conventional arms in the Red Sea.
Once again, we urge Iran to engage with the Committee
on such incidents.

Mr. Wilson (United Kingdom): I thank the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) and the Panel of Experts for their continued

On the work of the Panel of Experts, we welcome
the range of activities carried out in 2014, and in
particularly the recommendations set out in the 2014

15-081795/11

S/PV.7412

Non-proliferation

final report (see S/2014/932) regarding designated
individuals, as well as on bioidentifiers and the updated
sanctions list.
The United Kingdom remains committed to finding
a peaceful and lasting negotiated solution to the Iran
nuclear issue, and will continue to work closely with
our E3+3 partners to achieve that goal.
Mr. Pressman (United States): I would like to
thank the Ambassador of Spain for his briefing. We
also thank Spain for its leadership of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006) in carrying forward its important work.
The Committee’s work has been an integral element
of our broader diplomacy. It has helped countries to
implement the four rounds of robust United Nations
sanctions. With the support of its Panel of Experts, the
Committee has investigated sanctions violations and
assembled an important and impressive understanding
of Iran’s proliferation networks. It has also helped
crack down on Iran’s arms smuggling, stemming the
flow of weapons in a volatile region. Through its active
engagement, the Committee has directly supported
ongoing efforts to address international concerns about
Iran’s nuclear programme. As we are all well aware, for
more than a year, the P5+1 countries have been engaged
in a serious dialogue with Iran. Secretary Kerry and our
negotiating team met last week in Switzerland with the
P5+1 and their Iranian counterparts. Those discussions
have identified serious and difficult issues.
As President Obama and Secretary Kerry have
made clear, we are working to see if we can arrive at a
political framework by the end of March that addresses
the major elements of a comprehensive deal. But let us
be clear — the only reason we are engaging in those
negotiations is to deny Iran a nuclear weapon. There are
still significant gaps and important choices that need
to be made in the negotiations. As we have said many
times, no deal is better than a bad deal. The negotiations
must find ways to advance our goal of ensuring that Iran
does not now, or ever, acquire a nuclear weapon, and
that Iran’s nuclear programme is exclusively peaceful.
The Committee must continue its essential work
monitoring and improving the enforcement of existing
sanctions. Similarly, the Panel of Experts must continue
its vital work, investigating violations and following up
on leads and clarifying sanctions obligations to Member
States. Member States must also continue reporting to
the Committee attempted illicit procurement activities

6/11

24/03/2015

in their territories in violation of therelevant Security
Council resolutions on Iran. The pace and intensity of
the Committee’s work is critical and must continue.
After all, responding effectively to violations is at the
core of the Committee’s mandate. Any breach of the
sanctions is a serious matter, violates international
law and undermines the Security Council’s credibility.
The Committee’s outreach work — advising Member
States, answering questions and ensuring that Member
States are well positioned to ensure the full and
robust implementation of the sanctions — is of great
importance.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
We would like to thank Ambassador Román Oyarzun
Marchesi for introducing the 90-day report of the work
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1737 (2006). We appreciate Spain’s approach in
presiding over the Security Council’s non-proliferation
committees, through which it has shown decisiveness
and political tact.
As noted by Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi in his
briefing, the sanctions imposed by the Security Council
under resolution 1737 (2006) and the other relevant
resolutions remain in full effect during the course of
the current negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran.
However, sanctions are not an end in themselves, but are
merely a tool used within a broader diplomatic strategy
aimed at restoring the trust between the international
community and Iran with regard to the country’s the
nuclear programme.
It is essential to maintain the positive atmosphere
that has prevailed throughout the negotiations. Council
members must contribute to this cause, as it is in
everyone’s interest to achieve a broad and substantive
agreement that allows Iran to develop nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, and the international community to
verify that the programme is not for military purposes.
Chile takes note of the 19 February report of the
Director General of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA). We appreciate the support provided by
the IAEA to the activities of monitoring and verifying
the voluntary measures referred to in the Joint Plan of
Action.
Finally, we thank the Panel of Experts for the work
it is doing, which is vital to the functioning of the
1737 Committee.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank
15-08179

24/03/2015

Non-proliferation

you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting on
the work of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1737 (2006), the report of which was
presented by Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi
in his capacity as Chair of that subsidiary body. We
would like to extend our appreciation and recognition
to Ambassador Oyarzun Marchesi for the work he is
doing. We would also like to extend our condolences
with regard to today’s plane crash, which has affected
dozens of Spanish citizens.
Venezuela welcomes the progress that has been
achieved with regard to the Joint Plan of Action and the
negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran, as well as the
commitment of all the parties to continuing the round
of negotiations aimed at achieving a broad and final
agreement. We encourage all the parties to seize this
historic opportunity to set their differences aside and
resolve the Iranian nuclear issue in a diplomatic and
peaceful manner by reaching a long-term comprehensive
solution by consensus.
We are pleased to see that the cooperation between
Iran and the International Atomic Energy Agency has
continued, as noted in the Agency’s laterst report.
Venezuela reaffirms the sovereign right of the Islamic
Republic of Iran and other developing countries to use
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in accordance
with article IV of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
We believe that the most important task in the next
stage of negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran is to
build on the positive momentum and to not give way to
the provocations of other actors and extremist views,
but rather to concentrate instead on trying to resolve
the differences on the basis of dialogue and negotiations
that will lead to the lifting once and for all of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Islamic Republic of
Iran. We also welcome the fact that the Committee’s
report indicates that there were no new incidents
reported during the period under consideration.
We hope that the diplomatic efforts undertaken
in other forums with regard to the implementation
of the safeguards related to the Iranian nuclear issue
will have a positive effect on the Committee’s work.
Venezuela attaches great importance to the efforts
undertaken by the international community in favour
of disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We affirm our full support for the
strengthening of the international system applicable to
these areas through compliance with the obligations

S/PV.7412

under those legal binding instruments. We support the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East, as exists in Latin America, in accordance
with the decisions adopted with regard to the indefinite
renewal of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. In that regard, we call upon the
Security Council to make efforts to ensure that all the
countries of the region adhere to thit legal instrument.
For my country, weapons of mass destruction
constitute a threat to international peace and security
and, therefore, their elimination is a priority issue for
humankind.
Mr. Baublys (Lithuania): I wish to thank
Ambassador Román Oyarzun Marchesi for his first
report to the Council in his capacity as Chair of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We are confident that the Committee will
benefit from his able guidance during this decisive
stage of its work.
Lithuania closely follows the intensive diplomatic
efforts by the E3+3 and Iran to find a comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue. The negotiations
have now entered a crucial stage, and we hope that the
momentum we saw developing in the past few weeks
will facilitate an agreement within the time frame set
in November 2014.
We reiterate that only Iran’s willingness to provide
verifiable guarantees to the international community
on the exclusively peaceful nature of its nuclear
programme can lead to a successful outcome of the
process. That will require flexibility and openness by
Iran in bridging the remaining gaps. For its part, the
European Union has shown significant goodwill in
extending the sanctions relief measures with regard
to Iranian crude oil, petrochemical products, gold and
precious metals, as well as increasing the thresholds for
financial transfers to and from Iran.
Iran’s cooperation with the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) is another vital element in
rebuilding the international’s community’s trust. We
welcome the IAEA’s conclusion that Iran has been
implementing its commitments under the Joint Plan of
Action. At the same time, we remain very concerned
that cooperation with the Agency under the Framework
for Cooperation appears to have stalled. Iran has yet
to provide explanations that could enable the Agency
to clarify the two practical measures outstanding, and
has not proposed further practical measures, despite

15-081797/11

S/PV.7412

Non-proliferation

the Agency’s repeated requests. We urge Iran to
cooperate fully with the IAEA on all the outstanding
issues, including those related to the possible military
dimensions of its nuclear programme, in order to
enable the Agency to provide credible assurances of the
absence of undeclared nuclear material and activities
in Iran.
Turning to the work of the Committee, Lithuania
wishes to reaffirm that the Joint Plan of Action does
not affect in any way the sanctions measures imposed
by the relevant Security Council resolutions. All
Council sanctions imposed on Iran therefore remain in
full effect, and all Member States have an obligation
to implement them. The obligation to cooperate fully
also extends to Iran, and we encourage it to engage
with the Committee to help facilitate the Committee’s
investigations. The work of the Committee’s Panel
of Experts in verifying compliance also remains
unaffected. In that regard, I would also like to take
this opportunity to thank the Panel of Experts for its
work. Lithuania looks forward to to the release of the
Panel’s final report and to subsequent discussions in the
Committee.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Lithuania’s hope
that the talks between the E3+3 and Iran will shortly
lead to a comprehensive and verifiable solution that will
strengthen international confidence in the exclusively
peaceful nature of Iran’s nuclear programme for the
long term.
Mr. Laro (Nigeria): I would like to thank the
Permanent Representative of Spain and Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1737 (2006) for his briefing and for his astute
leadership of the Committee.
Nigeria notes that no new incidents were reported to
the Committee in the period covered by the report. We
commend the Committee for its continued assistance to
States and international organizations in implementing
the relevant Security Council measures under the 1737
sanctions. Indeed, that aspect of its work remains
crucial to maintaining the integrity of the decisions
taken by the Council and ensuring that States do not
unknowingly violate the 1737 sanctions regime. We
encourage States to seek the Committee’s guidance on
proposals for technical cooperation with Iran in matters
that fall within the Committee’s purview.
Nigeria is concerned about the fact that Iran has
not responded to the Committee’s requests about two

8/11

24/03/2015

incidents investigated by the Committee’s Panel of
Experts. We urge the Iranian authorities to facilitate
the Committee’s work by responding to those requests
without delay. We commend the Panel of Experts for its
efforts, which have made a significant contribution to
the Committee’s work. We note that the Committee has
concluded its consideration of the recommendations, as
reflected in the final report of the Panel of Experts.
Nigeria has been following with keen interest the
ongoing negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran on
finding a comprehensive solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue. We support the use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. We urge the Iranian authorities to continue
to negotiate in good faith with a view to assuring the
international community of their peaceful intentions
for their nuclear programme. We look forward to the
successful outcome of the negotiations, as well as to
receiving guidance from the Committee on the possible
implications for the relevant Security Council measures
in the event that the parties reach an agreement.
Mrs. Adnin (Malaysia): We would like to thank
the Permanent Representative of Spain for his briefing
on the work of the Security Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006) during the reporting
period, as well as for his stewardship of the Committee.
Malaysia is of the view that all States must adhere
to the fundamental principles concerning the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. In order to ensure that those
principles are not abused, States must exhibit full
transparency in their nuclear programmes, subject
those programmes to the full scope of the safeguards
of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),
comply with the provisions of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and gain the
international community’s confidence and trust in
the peaceful nature of their nuclear programmes. In
that regard, Malaysia welcomes the progress in the
negotiations between the P5+1 and Iran regarding the
Joint Plan of Action. We recognize the complexity of
the discussions and the contentious issues involved. We
also commend the serious and sustained commitment
of the parties concerned to moving the process forward.
Malaysia hopes that all sides will be able to show
flexibility so that the negotiations can culminate in a
positive outcome. We look forward to a comprehensive
agreement on the basis of realistic and achievable
goals that meet the core requirements of all parties,
particularly reaching a political agreement by the
end of March and completing the technical annexes
15-08179

24/03/2015

Non-proliferation

by the 30 June deadline. Malaysia also acknowledges
the measures Iran has taken to build the international
community’s confidence through its cooperation with
the IAEA. We note that it remains engaged in dialogue
with the IAEA and has continued to provide access
to its facilities, allowing the Agency to conduct its
verification work under the Joint Programme of Action.
Against that backdrop, the 1737 Committee has
continued to conduct its work in accordance with its
mandate, as we heard in the Chair’s briefing on its recent
activities. Given that the P5+1 negotiations with Iran are
still under way, we share the view that the Committee
should remain committed to implementing all the
relevant Security Council resolutions. Accordingly,
it should continue its important role of assisting the
Member States and international organizations that
seek its guidance. We trust that it will continue its work
on implementation and compliance with a prudent and
judicious approach, based on the mandate derived from
the relevant resolutions.
At the same time, we are seeing heightened
levels of anticipation, and perhaps a certain degree
of uncertainty, among Member States and the private
sector regarding the ongoing negotiations between Iran
and the P5+1. There is clearly strong interest on the part
of various stakeholders in the immediate implications
of the Council’s sanctions on Iran, depending on the
outcome of the talks. Looking ahead, we expect there
will be a pressing demand for more clarity on the
matter in the coming weeks. We recognize the need for
greater outreach concerning the continuing validity of
the Council’s measures on Iran. At the same time, we
also feel that the Committee is reaching a stage where
it will narrow its focus in order to deal with a potential
political agreement as an outcome to the discussions
between the P5+1 and Iran. Malaysia looks forward to
working constructively within the framework of the
Committee on that important process.
I would also like to take this opportunity to briefly
touch on the work of the Panel of Experts. We are
pleased that the Panel is now back at work with a full
complement of experts, and we hope that will be useful,
given the expectations that lie ahead. We note that the
deadline for the submission of the Panel’s final report
will come a few weeks after the P5+1 and Iran are
expected to conclude their talks on a political agreement.
Given that, we hope the Panel will intensify its work
on the final report in the weeks to come by focusing
on producing a fact-based assessment and analysis that

S/PV.7412

takes into consideration the implications of the outcome
of the talks. Since the Panel’s mandate will expire in
July, we also believe that at the appropriate juncture
the Committee should consider how to approach the
renewal of its mandate in the event of a comprehensive
solution to the Iranian nuclear issue.
Malaysia, like other Committee members, and
indeed the rest of the international community,
looks forward to positive developments in the P5+1
negotiations with Iran on its nuclear programme. We
anticipate that Member States will soon be referring to
the 1737 Committee for guidance on the implementation
of the relevant resolutions, based on the outcome of the
talks. In that regard, I wish to conclude by underscoring
our confidence that the Committee will be able to
respond expeditiously and decisively to such scenarios.
Mr. Gombo (Chad) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1737 (2006), Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi, for the 90-day report that covers the
period from 18 December 2014 to 23 March 2015 on
the activities of the Committee. Chad takes note of the
report and encourages the Committee to continue its
activities.
Concerning the Iranian nuclear issue, we welcome
the talks between the Islamic Republic of Iran and the
States members of the P5+1 on the basis of the Joint
Plan of Action. We note with regret that previous
negotiations did not end in a definitive agreement.
Nevertheless, we support the negotiations and call
for all parties to be reasonable and come to a political
solution as soon as possible. Chad is a peace-loving
country and hopes that the diplomatic and political
negotiations will achieve a definitive solution. We hope
that the bilateral negotiations to be held in Lausanne,
Switzerland, through 31 March will finally enable a
solid agreement to be reached.
Chad recognizes the Islamic Republic of Iran’s
right to develop a civilian nuclear programme, and once
an agreement has been concluded, the sanctions should
be lifted. The Islamic Republic of Iran insists that its
nuclear activities are peaceful. In addition, it maintains
that it is not engaged in a nuclear arms race because,
according to Iran, such weapons are contrary to its way
of life and its philosophy.
To conclude, I would like to congratulate Mr. Roman
Oyarzun Marchesi for his leadership of the 1737
Committee and to wish him good luck over the next two

15-081799/11

S/PV.7412

Non-proliferation

years. I also hope for full success in the negotiations
under way for a peaceful and negotiated solution to the
Iranian nuclear issue with a view to lifting sanctions.
Mr. Lucas (Angola): We thank Ambassador Román
Oyarzun Marchesi for presenting the quarterly report of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006). We congratulate the Spanish delegation and the
Panel of Experts on the work done thus far.
We are pleased that no incidents have been
reported over the past three months concerning the
implementation of resolution 1737 (2006), and we
sincerely hope that there will be no setbacks in the
effective implementation of all relevant resolutions.
We welcome the joint statement of the P5+1 foreign
ministers, in which they agreed that substantial
progress had been made with Iran on key areas of the
Joint Plan of Action, and welcome the commitment of
all parties to continuing negotiations towards finding
a comprehensive agreement. We therefore hope that
all parties agree on the remaining outstanding issues
of the broad technical framework for Iran’s nuclear
programme by the deadline of the end of March.
It is undeniable that the sanctions are having a
negative effect on Iran’s economy and its people, and
we hope that a deal can be reached soon in order to
lift some of those crippling sanctions. Although Iran
has evolved its commitment to reach an agreement on a
comprehensive solution, the sanctions regime is still in
force and must be respected, as must the Committee’s
commitment to its implementation. We therefore
encourage the Iranian Government to engage with the
Committee and respond to the Committee’s requests,
which have thus far received no answers.
Angola fully supports the non-proliferation nuclear
arms regime, and we condemn any activities aiming at
the development of nuclear weapons. We will continue
to support the ongoing negotiations between the P5+1
and Iran, and we are hopeful that both sides can come
to an agreement by the deadlines that have been set. We
fully recognize Iran’s right to develop a nuclear energy
programme strictly for peaceful aims, medical research
and energy production purposes and that there will be
no pursuit of nuclear weapons capabilities, which could
have serious repercussions for the Middle East and pose
a serious threat to international peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
France.

10/11

24/03/2015

I thank the Ambassador of Spain for the briefing
he has just given us on the quarterly activities of the
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1737
(2006) on sanctions against Iran. As this is his first
briefing as Chair of the Committee to the Security
Council, I wish to congratulate him for the speed
and the seriousness with which he took charge of that
Committee, which deals with a very sensitive issue, and
wish him and his team my best wishes for success.
Since the adoption of the Joint Plan of Action in
November 2013, which was extended a year later, the
E3+3 and Iran entered intensive discussions aimed at
achieving, before the end of June 2015, a comprehensive
agreement that would establish the exclusively
peaceful purpose of Iran’s nuclear programme. The
negotiations between the six countries and Iran are now
in a decisive phase. Our position has been consistent
throughout the discussions. Iran has every right to
develop energy nuclear for civilian purposes, but under
no circumstances should it have access to nuclear
weapons. All our demands during the negotiations are
based on that principle. It is a simple position based on
our rejection of nuclear proliferation.
In past weeks, the discussions between the six and
Iran enabled progress to be made, but such progress
remains, to date, insufficient. Despite the many
proposals by the E3+3, differences with Iran remain,
in particular on research and development and the
settlement of the question of sanctions. Iran must
now make tough choices if it truly wants to restore
the confidence of the international community. With
our partners in the group of six, we are determined
to reach a good agreement, that is to say a robust and
solid agreement that would establish and guarantee in
the long term the exclusively peaceful purpose of Iran’s
nuclear programme.
Cooperation with the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) is, in this respect, an essential part
of the resolution of the proliferation crisis with Iran.
The IAEA has confirmed a few days ago that Iran is
respecting, at this stage, its obligations related to the
Joint Plan of Action of November 2013. However, the
most recent report of the IAEA General Director on
the implementation of safeguards in Iran states that,
with respect to the possible military dimensions of
Iran’s nuclear programme, cooperation with Iran is at
a standstill, having not seen any progress since August
2014. The IAEA Director General confirmed that
yesterday in Washington, D. C.

15-08179

24/03/2015

Non-proliferation

Therefore, Iran has not proposed new practical
measures, and, with respect to the existing approved
measures in the framework of cooperation of May
2014, Iran has given no explanation for the initiation
of high explosives and neutron transport calculations.
That situation is of concern. The resolution of all issues
related to the possible military dimensions of Iran’s
nuclear programme is a key element for restoring
confidence and therefore for the long-term agreement
that we all want.
Finally, the Chair’s report rightly points out that
the measures contained in the Security Council’s

S/PV.7412

resolutions regarding Iran remain in full force pending
a comprehensive settlement of the Iranian proliferation
crisis and of any changes that the Security Council may
decide on. Until then, the Sanctions Committee should
continue to fulfil its responsibilities, and I thank the
Panel of Experts for continuing to support it in that
task.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The meeting rose at 4 p.m.

15-0817911/11
