A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/54/184
29 February 2000

Fifty-fourth session
Agenda item 116 (c)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/54/605/Add.3)]
54/184. Situation of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro)
The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind all relevant resolutions on this subject, in particular Commission on Human Rights
resolution 1999/18 of 23 April 1999,1 as well as all Security Council resolutions and statements,
Bearing in mind also General Assembly resolution 54/183 of 17 December 1999 on the situation of
human rights in Kosovo,
Reaffirming the obligations of all Member States under the Charter of the United Nations and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights,2 the obligations of States parties under the International Covenants
on Human Rights3 and all other human rights instruments and the obligation of all to respect international
humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 for the protection of victims of war4

1

See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 1999, Supplement No. 3 (E/1999/23), chap. II,
sect. A.

2

Resolution 217 A (III).

3

Resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.

4

00 31442

/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 2

and the Additional Protocols thereto, of 1977,5 as well as the principles and commitments undertaken by
participating States of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Reaffirming also the territorial integrity of all States in the region, within their internationally
recognized borders, taking fully into account all relevant Security Council resolutions,
Expressing its full support for the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the annexes thereto (collectively the “Peace Agreement”),6 which, inter alia, committed the parties of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to respect human rights fully, and for the Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia,
Baranja and Western Sirmium (the “Basic Agreement”),7
Expressing its deep concern at the continuing evidence of violations of human rights and fundamental
freedoms taking place to varying degrees in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Republic of Croatia and the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and, in particular, the failure of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to follow the recommendations made in 1996 by the personal
representative of the Chairman-in-Office of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Welcoming all contributions of the Office of the High Representative, the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other parts of the United Nations, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, the Council
of Europe, the European Community Monitoring Mission, Governments and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations in the area in 1999,
1. Reiterates its call for the full and consistent implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the annexes thereto (collectively the “Peace Agreement”)6 and the
Basic Agreement on the Region of Eastern Slavonia, Baranja and Western Sirmium (the “Basic Agreement”)7
by all parties to those agreements;
2. Stresses the crucial role of human rights in the successful implementation of the Peace Agreement,
and underlines the obligations of the parties under the Peace Agreement to secure for all persons within their
jurisdiction the highest level of international norms and standards of human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
3. Also stresses the need to direct international human rights efforts in the region to the core issues
of the lack of full respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all individuals without
distinction, the rule of law and effective administration of justice at all levels of government, the freedom
and independence of the media, freedom of expression, freedom of association, including with respect to
political parties, freedom of religion and freedom of movement;

5

Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
S/1995/999; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fiftieth Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1995.
6

7

S/1995/951; see Official Records of the Security Council, Fiftieth Year, Supplement for October, November
and December 1995.
/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 3

4. Further stresses the need for enhanced international human rights efforts to foster and effect the
prompt and voluntary return of displaced persons and refugees in safety and with dignity;
5. Reiterates its call upon all parties and States in the region to ensure that the promotion and
protection of human rights and effective, functioning democratic institutions will be central elements in
developing civilian structures, as reaffirmed at the meetings of the Steering Board of the Peace
Implementation Council and the Peace Implementation Conference;
6. Urges all States and parties to the Peace Agreement that have not done so to meet their obligations
to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since
1991, as required by Security Council resolution 827 (1993) of 25 May 1993 and all subsequent relevant
resolutions, and, in particular, to comply with their obligations to arrest and transfer to the custody of the
Tribunal those indicted persons present in their territories or in territories under their control;
7. Continues to call upon all parties to the Peace Agreement to take immediate steps to determine the
identity, whereabouts and fate of missing persons in their territories, including through close cooperation
with the United Nations as well as with humanitarian organizations and independent experts, and stresses
the importance of coordination in this area;
8. Notes that varying degrees of progress have been made in the human rights situation in several
areas, but that substantial efforts remain to be made;
I. BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
9. Notes the progress made in Bosnia and Herzegovina with regard to the increase in political
pluralism and freedom of expression, through the participation of all groups and individuals, which
represents another step towards democracy in Bosnia and Herzegovina, but remains concerned that freedom
of speech and the media are still curtailed by political influence, notably through the selective and
intimidating application of slander laws;
10. Expresses its continued serious concern about continuing human rights violations within Bosnia
and Herzegovina and delays in the full implementation of the human rights provisions of the Peace
Agreement, notably the delay in bringing legislation into compliance with the human rights provisions of the
national Constitution of the country, and the failure of local authorities and groups to comply with the
obligations of the Peace Agreement;
11. Condemns in the strongest terms the complicity by local governments in the perpetration of
violence against minority refugees and internally displaced persons returning to their homes and in the
destruction of their homes, including acts of intimidation and all those acts designed to discourage the
voluntary return of refugees and internally displaced persons, and calls for the removal from office of
implicated local government officials as well as the immediate arrest and bringing to justice of those
responsible for such acts;
12. Calls upon all the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to adjudicate claims for and implement
decisions on property rights made by local authorities and/or by the Commission for Real Property Claims
of Displaced Persons and Refugees without further delay;
/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 4

13. Reiterates its demand that all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina immediately create conditions
conducive to the voluntary return, in safety and with dignity, of refugees and internally displaced persons
to their homes, with equal emphasis on the rights of persons belonging to minorities, pass immediately and
enforce legislation on property rights in conformity with recommendations made by the Office of the High
Representative and end practices of discrimination on ethnic or political grounds;
14. Notes with satisfaction the decline in violence against returning refugees and displaced persons,
while remaining concerned that all ethnic groups continue to report harassment;
15. Welcomes the adoption of a new criminal code and of codes of ethics by the judges and prosecutors
of both entities and the increased strength of the prosecutor’s office of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a result of laws imposed by the High Representative, but notes that the judicial processes still
do not sufficiently protect the rights of the accused;
16. Notes that implementation of the decisions of the Human Rights Chamber has begun, while
reminding both State- and entity-level governments to pay increased attention to decisions of the Chamber;
17. Calls upon the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina and, in particular, the authorities of the
Republika Srpska to increase their cooperation with the Commission on Human Rights for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and to intensify
their efforts in this regard;
18. Notes that police standards and protection have improved, while remaining concerned about
continuing indications among the police of unprofessional conduct, political influence and instances of
interference with the return of refugees and the use of excessive force;
19. Urges the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular those of the Republika Srpska, to
ensure full and free access to their territories for all institutions and organizations concerned with the
implementation of the present resolution, including non-governmental organizations, and to provide for the
protection of those organizations, especially those providing humanitarian assistance;
20. Stresses the importance of the implementation of the programme proposed by the High
Representative in coordination with the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Council of
Europe and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for a comprehensive judicial reform;
21. Calls upon the authorities of both entities to cooperate closely with the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in matters relating to the return of refugees and to ensure that local
authorities and groups permit and encourage the return of displaced persons to their homes of origin;
22. Calls upon the authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina urgently to consider, with a view to its early
adoption and full implementation, the draft permanent election law designed by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe to strengthen ties between constituents and representatives, strengthen democratic
accountability and encourage pluralistic, multi-ethnic political parties;
23. Notes the importance of the work of the Human Rights Ombudsman in bringing to light many cases
of human rights violations and in resolving several of them, and urges the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to implement the recommendations of the Ombudsman;

/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 5

24. Condemns recurrent instances of religious discrimination and violence and the denial to religious
minorities of their rights to reclaim and rebuild their religious sites;
25. Expresses its concern that trafficking in women is a growing problem, and calls upon the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina to act vigorously to combat this problem;
II. REPUBLIC OF CROATIA
26. Notes with interest the initiatives taken by the Republic of Croatia to improve the legislative and
economic framework for the return of refugees, in particular steps to eliminate discriminatory provisions of
Croatian laws;
27. Notes with satisfaction the cooperation between the Police Monitoring Group of the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the local police forces in Eastern Slavonia, while also noting
continued instances of ethnically based problems in Eastern Slavonia;
28. Welcomes the continuing efforts by the Republic of Croatia to train and to guarantee the
professionalism and impartiality of the Croatian police and military forces, and notes, in particular, the
commitment on the part of the Ministry of the Interior to maintain an ethnically diverse police force in the
Danube region;
29. Also welcomes the actions of the Government of the Republic of Croatia related to the return of
significant numbers of persons to their places of origin since 1995 and the steps being taken by the
Government to eliminate discriminatory provisions of Croatian laws, while noting that the pace of minority
returns from third countries has been disappointing, and expresses concern that protection of the rights of
persons belonging to minorities has not met the level of Croatia’s legal obligations;
30. Notes that the Government of the Republic of Croatia has continued its efforts to codify democratic
norms, including the independence of its judiciary and freedom of association and assembly, while also
noting that the application by the Government of those laws and principles has lagged behind its stated
intentions;
31. Expresses deep concern about the fact that commitments by the Government to improve the
freedom of the press have remained unfulfilled, and reaffirms the need for free and independent media and
the need to provide to all political parties equal access to all forms of media during the forthcoming electoral
campaign;
32. Notes the passage of a new telecommunications law as a positive step, but urges the Government
of the Republic of Croatia to comply with international recommendations, in particular those of the mission
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe in the areas of electoral and media reform,
regrets that until now those recommendations have been only partially fulfilled, and stresses the importance
of the full application of the citizenship law of 1991;
33. Expresses deep concern about the reported extensive campaign of wiretapping against the
independent media and opposition political figures, and calls upon the Government of the Republic of
Croatia to ensure that the media and opposition political figures and parties are not harassed or hindered in

/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 6

their actions or intimidated by actions of the Government and are guaranteed the same protections as
representatives of the media or political establishment who are favourable to the Government;
34. Welcomes the signing on 10 May 1999 by the Government of the Republic of Croatia of the
programme of technical assistance of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights, with a view to building national human rights capacity and human rights education, and looks
forward to the implementation of the programme in December 1999;
35. Notes the efforts of the Republic of Croatia to codify and incorporate the impartial application of
the law, but urges the swift and complete implementation of judicial decisions for all citizens, irrespective
of ethnicity, religion or political affiliation, while noting with concern that due process, the rule of law, the
treatment of ethnic minorities and press freedoms fall short of the standards of the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, notably that lengthy judicial processes plague the Croatian judiciary and that
cases of interest to the ruling party are processed more expeditiously than others;
36. Also notes the formal steps taken by the Republic of Croatia to guarantee the rights of persons
belonging to minorities and the ratification of the Framework Convention for the Protection of National
Minorities8 and the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages,9 but continues to remind the
Government of its primary responsibility to restore the multi-ethnic character of Croatia, in fact as well as
in law, including the pledge to guarantee the representation of national minorities, including Serbs, at various
levels of local, regional and national government;
37. Further notes outstanding letters from the President of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia since 1991 to the Security Council, and calls upon the Republic
of Croatia to cooperate fully with the Tribunal and to comply, in particular, with its obligation to arrest and
transfer to the custody of the Tribunal those indicted persons known to be present in its territory and, when
prosecuting war crimes, to ensure that domestic prosecution complies with international standards and the
obligations of the Republic of Croatia to the Tribunal;
III. FEDERAL REPUBLIC OF YUGOSLAVIA (SERBIA AND MONTENEGRO)
38. Condemns the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) for its gross violations of
the human rights of the ethnic Albanians of Kosovo and its violent campaign to expel or deport ethnic
Albanian Kosovars from their homes and communities in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro);
39. Calls upon the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and
all authorities and representatives of ethnic groups in Kosovo to implement Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 and consequently to cooperate fully with and support the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo in the fulfilment of its mandate;

8
9

Council of Europe, European Treaty Series, No. 157.
Ibid., No. 148.
/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 7

40. Strongly condemns the presence of indicted war criminals in the hierarchy of the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and of the Government of the Republic of
Serbia or those who are fugitives in the territory of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro), and calls for them to be removed from office and transferred to the custody of the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia as one of the first steps towards reinstating the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) in the community of law-abiding States;
41. Demands that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
hand over to the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia all government officials of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) and of the Government of the Republic of Serbia indicted
as war criminals and repudiate the leadership of anyone so indicted as a first step towards establishing a
democratic government and becoming a full and respected member of the international community, and
reminds the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) of its obligations
to cooperate fully with the Tribunal;
42. Also demands that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
immediately bring to justice any persons, in particular those among its personnel, who have authorized or
engaged in breaches of international humanitarian law and violations of human rights, including summary
executions, indiscriminate attacks on civilians, indiscriminate destruction of property, mass forced
displacement of civilians, the taking of civilian hostages, torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, and, in this context, reminds the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
(Serbia and Montenegro) of its obligations to cooperate fully with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights;
43. Further demands an immediate end to illegal and/or hidden detention by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), as well as by paramilitary groups in Kosovo, and requests the Special
Rapporteur of the Commission on Human Rights on the situation of human rights in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Republic of Croatia and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to investigate any
and all allegations of hidden detentions, including detentions of ethnic Serbs, Albanians and others;
44. Demands that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
institutionalize democratic norms by holding free and fair elections at all levels of government, respecting
the rule of law and the administration of justice and fully respecting human rights and fundamental freedoms;
45. Also demands that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
promote and protect free and independent media and that the authorities of the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) repeal any law that hinders the full and free exercise of the democratic
rights of the citizens of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), cease any harassment
and hindrance of journalists, wherever within the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
they may be practising their profession, and repeal repressive laws on universities and the media which
suppress any and all internal dissent or expression of independent views, and concomitantly respect the right
of free speech;
46. Emphasizes that the subversion of the fundamental democratic rights of the citizens of the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) extends to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) as a whole, calls upon the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) to respect the rights of all persons belonging to minority groups, especially in the Sandjak and
Vojvodina, and of persons belonging to the Bulgarian minority, and supports the unconditional return of the
/...

A/RES/54/184
Page 8

long-term missions of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, as called for by the Security
Council in its resolutions;
47. Concerned by the continued grave infringements upon freedom of expression in the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro), in particular with regard to the exploitation of the crisis
in Kosovo as a means to stifle and suppress views opposing the Government in power, a violation of the basic
right of free speech;
48. Denounces the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) for
its legal and physical intimidation of peaceful political opposition and of individuals who express views that
differ from those of the Government, and demands that the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and
Montenegro) respect the fundamental rights of individuals to free assembly and free speech;
49. Insists that the Government of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro)
support the activities of the international community and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo to rebuild and facilitate the multi-ethnic society in Kosovo that the policy of ethnic cleansing,
intimidation and discrimination largely destroyed, in particular by using the influence of the Government of
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) among the local Serb representatives in Kosovo
and by working in good faith with the local Albanian representatives to that end;
50. Calls upon the authorities of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (Serbia and Montenegro) to
implement fully, with dispatch and in good faith, their obligations under the Peace Agreement, notably to
cooperate fully with the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian organizations to alleviate the suffering of refugees and internally displaced persons and to assist
in their safe and voluntary return to their homes;
51. Calls upon States to consider additional voluntary contributions to meet the pressing human rights
and humanitarian needs in the area, and underlines the need for continued coordination among States,
international organizations and non-governmental organizations of initiatives and programmes with the aim
of avoiding duplication, overlap and working at cross-purposes;
52. Decides to continue its examination of this question at its fifty-fifth session under the item entitled
“Human rights questions”.
83rd plenary meeting
17 December 1999
