United Nations

1st

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY

PLENARY MEETING

(Opening meeting)

Monday, 25 August 1980,
at 11 a.m.

ELEVENTH SPECIAL SESSION
Official Records

NEW

President: Mr. Salim Ahmed SALIM
(United Republic of Tanzania).

YORK

to those permanent representatives who are already
authorized to represent their Governments at all
sessions of the Assembly.
Scale of assessments for the apportionment
of the expenses of the United Nations

AGENDA ITEM 1

8. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: Before turning
to the next item on our agenda, and in keeping with past
practice, I wish to invite the attention of the General
Assembly to document A/S-11121, which contains a letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General informing
the Assembly that three Member States are in arrears in
the payment of their United Nations contributions
under the terms of Article 19 of the Charter.

Opening of the session by the Chairman of the
delegation of the United Republic of Tanzania
1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I declare open
the eleventh special session of the General Assembly.
AGENDA ITEM 2
Minute of silent prayer or meditation

AGENDA ITEM 4

2. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I invite representatives to stand and observe one minute of silent
prayer or meditation.
The representatives, standing, observed a minute's
silence.

Election of the President of the General Assembly
9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: I now invite the
Assembly to proceed to the election of the President of
the General Assembly.
10. The Committee of the Whole recommends in paragraph 17 of annex III to its report [ibid.] that Mr. Salim
A. Salim, President of the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session, should serve in the same capacity
at the eleventh special session. May I take it that that
recommendation is adopted by the Assembly?
It was so decided [decision S-ll 112].

AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the eleventh special
session of the General Assembly:
(a) Appointment of the members of the Credentials
Committee
3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: The Committee
of the Whole Established under General Assembly
Resolution 32/174-which was entrusted with the preparations for this special session-has made a number of
recommendations in annex IH to its report, [A IS-I111
(part IV) and Carr.1].
4. I invite members to turn their attention to the
recommendation concerning the appointment of the
Credentials Committee contained in paragraph 15 of
annex IH to the report.
5. Taking into account the practice followed at previous special sessions, the Committee recommends that
the Credentials Committee for the eleventh special session, appointed in accordance with rule 28 of the rules
of procedure of the General Assembly, should have the
same composition as the Credentials Committee for the
thirty-fourth session, namely, Belgium, China, Congo,
Ecuador, Pakistan, Panama, Senegal, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and United States of America.
6. If there is no objection, I shall consider the
Credentials Committee constituted accordingly.
It was so decided [decision S-ll Ill].
7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT: In this cOnnexion, may I invite the attention of the members of the
Assembly to a note verbale from the Secretary-General,
dated 1 August 1980, in which it was stated that credentials should be issued for all representatives to the
special session in accordance with rule 27 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly except with regard

Statement by the President
11. The PRESIDENT: Distinguished representatives,
in the light of the decision just taken, I wish at the very
outset to take this opportunity to express to you my
deep gratitude for the honour which you have again
conferred upon me to preside over this special session of
the General Assembly. Your continued confidence is
profoundly appreciated.
12. This special session is taking place in a chilling and
sombre atmosphere, a time of disjunction and uncertainty in the world economy and polity. We enter the
decade of the 1980s in a state of crisis. The international
community is experiencing the most serious economic
crisis since the great depression of the 1930s. There are
varying perceptions as to the causes, directions and
resolutions of the crisis, but there is a universal realization that this crisis is both severe and global and that it
will not go away by itself or be resolved by one
particular group of countries.
13. The developed market economy countries that
were assumed to provide the engine of growth for the
developing countries are in a steep recession. Unemployment of men and women and idleness of machines
continue unabated .and no improvement is in sight. Six
per cent of the labour force in the countries of the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development-some 18h1illion people-are today unemployed.
3

Ea
"

---4

Aa

w

General Assembly

,

Eleventh Special Session -

This persistent stagnation has been combined with relatively high rates of inflation. And, associated with
stagnation and inflation-"stagnation" -in the major
industrial economies there has been a high degree of
instabili ty in exchange rates and major structural
imbalances in external payments. Those factors have in
turn led many developed countries to strengthen their
existing protectionist measures, or introduce new ones,
against imports of low-cost resources.
14. Many of the developing countries have experienced a sharp deterioration in their terms of trade and a
deceleration of the growth of the 1970s. Owing to the
dependent structures and consequent external vulnerability of their economies, they have had to bear a disproportionate share of the global burden of adjustment to
the economic crisis.
15. The deficit in external payments of the developing
countries-excluding the major oil exporters-which
amounted to between $9 and $12 billion yearly in the
early 1970s, reached $46 billion in 1979. Current projections indicate that the payment gaps may rise from this
already high level to over $65 billion in 1980, and to
some $73 billion in 1981. Meanwhile, the developing
countries' total outstanding external debts disbursed,
which had amounted to some $50 billion in 1970, rose to
over $300 billion in 1979, with an increasing number of
countries having to meet debt service payments which
exceed 25 per cent of their export earnings. There are
other constraints on the development process of the
developing countries, the foremost of which is the fact
that the world economy has entered a period of considerable instability in which uncertainty is a major factor.
16. In the economic relations among the developed
market economy countries, there is a crisis stemming
from the dispersion among them of economic power
and a breakdown of the monetary and trading arrangements by which they attempted to harmonize their
competing interests. Between the developed and the
developing countries there are serious tensions which
origlnate from the imposed unequal development of the
developing countries and the consequent instability in
the world political process arising from this asymmetry
between the world's regions given the shift in their relative economic and political power.
17. The complexity of our world economy today is
further compounded by the intensified militarization
which not only exacerbates the danger to international
peace and security but represents also a serious impediment to the development process. The trend towards
militarization, which afflicts the very fabric of development, has accelerated massively, particularly during the
past decade, to the extent that the aggregate annual military expenditures of the world today exceed $450 billion. It should be borne in mind that while those expenditures are marking a phenomenal increase, the total
financial assistance offered to the developing countries
is at the level of $20 billion and is declining.
18. But compounding all those crises is the conflict
over resources and lifestyles. Many studies, including
that initiated by the United Nations Conference on the
Human Environment, held at Stockholm from 5 to 16
June 1972, have confirmed that current mechanisms of
development are not only impairing the harmony
between man and nature but are also undermining the
productive process itself. It has been said that the four
major biological systems sustaining human lifeoceanic fisheries, forests, grasslands and croplandsare all under severe stress. Desertification threatens one
tenth of South America, one third of Asia and Africa,
and one quarter of Australia. Devastation and pollution

cl

Plenary Meetings

are pervasive. There are, indeed, tendencies which are
eroding the balance between man, nature. and technology I thus foreclosing the efforts to sustam the process of development.
19. The gravity of the unfolding crisis cannot t~ere­
fore be underestimatc;:d, even though there IS a
tendency-regrettably-to underestimate the human
costs. But however grave the crisis, there is no reason
to despair if we are pr~pared t~ meet. the c~all~nge
before it is too late. That IS why thIS specIal sessIOn IS so
crucial and so timely. The dangers are extreme, but
exceptional too are the opportunities. The very fact,
which has now been documented by various reports of
United Nations bodies, organs and agencies, as well as
by the valuable work of such groups as the IndeIJendent Commission on International Development Issues,
known as the Brandt Commission, Interfutures of the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), the Third System project of the International Foundation For Development Alternatives
(IFDA), the Arusha initiative and numerous reports of
nongovernmental organizations and academics, that
our present course is likely to end in global disaster
should imbue us with the resolve to change it and chart a
sane course forward.
20. Yet, as the report of the Director-General for
Development and International Economic Co-operation, prepared pursuant to General Assembly resolution 33/198, informs us, negotiations to attain the
objectives of the New International Economic Order
have, in the past six years, yielded results that" fall considerably short of their initial targets or they have
shifted focus from bold changes to attempts at partial
adaptation". [See AIS-ll15, annex, para. 368.] This
has been attributed to several stumbling-blocks: the failure to integrate efforts aimed at managing the world
economy with those efforts designed to restructure the
world economy, the failure to recognize sufficiently the
organic link between the current economic difficulties
of the industrialized countries and the underlying structural disequilibrium in the existing international division
of labour and in the international financial and trading
systems, the fallure by the developing countries effectively to exert their political leverage, and the lack of
systematic co-operation regarding the supply and use of
energy. In short, there has been a failure to take cognizance of our mutual interdependence in a changing
world.
21. I am convinced that members of the Assembly will
agree that it is unacceptable that our generation, which
has had the good fortune of living in this advanced stage
of human evolution and which possesses such unprecedented access to information, knowledge and means,
should not also have the vision and commitment
required for improving human conditions now and in
the future. For I also believe that the future of mankind
is by no means predetermined; but it is also not a random occurrence, nor does it essentially obey factors outside our control.
22. The future of humanity will be a result of human
design-for better or for worse. And the future of
humanity will be one-one for the world as a whole. A
closely knit network of environmental, technological
e~onomic, socio~political a~d security interrelationship~
bmds all J!1ankmd orgamcally together, despite our
heterogeneIty and our pluralism, differences in regimes
and uneven levels of development. None of us-not
even those who at present are the strongest and richestcan disengage ourselves from the others and choose

I

i

.1st meeting -

iencies which are
nature and tech) sustain the pro-

isis cannot thereugh there is a
nate the human
here is no reason
eet the challenge
lecial session is so
are extreme, bu t
>. The very fact.
'arious reports of
;encies, as well as
; as the Indepenvelopment Issues.
Iterfutures of the
.ion and Develop:ct of the Internaent Alternatives
nerous reports of
academics, that
n global disaster
mge it and chart a

~ctor-General

for
nomic Co-operaAssembly resolums to attain the
Economic Order
Ilts that "fall conets or they have
ttempts at partial
para. 368.] This
19-blocks: the failnaging the world
to restructure the
ze sufficiently the
nomic difficulties
underlying struc:rnational division
tncial and trading
g countries effecand the lack 0 f
upply and use of
,re to take cogni'e in a changing

~

the Assembly will
generation, which
:lis advanced stage
lses such unpreceledge and means,
and commitment
idons now and in
'uture of mankind
is also not a ranT obey factors out-

a result of human
nd the future of
Irld as a whole. A
ai, technological.
interrelationships
ther, despite ou r
~rences in regimes
None of us-not
.gest and richestthers and choos e

goals or take options independent of the key imperatives
of mankind.
23. This special session is a follow-up of the sixth special session, but its agenda has been enriched by the
decision of the General Assem bly [resolution 34/207] to
adopt a new international development strategy and to
launch, following the initiative of the Sixth Conference
of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries, a round of global negotiations on international economic co-operation for development.
24. Since 1961, when the concept of a development
decade was initiated, the United Nations has prepared
two global and decennial development strategies. The
strategy which we shall consider for adoption at this session is supposed to be "new". It is new in the sense that
it draws inspiration from the long-term goal of the international community to establish a new international
economic order which entails very far-reaching changes
in world economic relations. It is based on the recognition, now broadly shared, that the present international
economic system is not efficient, that it does not distribute burdens and benefits evenly, nor does it foster
the full use of the world's productive potential.
25. The new strategy therefore cannot afford to omit,
as did previous ones, specifications for concrete
measures with respect to structural changes and the
management of the world economy. Nor can it take the
trajectory of the developed world for granted, as the
perspectives for the future are heavily shrouded in
uncertainty and as the development of the developing
countries will have a significant influence on the future
course of the developed' countries. And traditional
options for action are foredosed by the failures of the
past.
26. It is imperative to finalize the text of the new international development strategy in the light of all those
considerations. Agreement on growth and financial
targets or on relevant policies that are crucial in
implementing the strategy is essentially a normative and
hence a political undertaking. It is no less than a judgement of the extent to which Governments, developed
and developing, are prepared to make efforts and
sacrifices to advance development beyond what is otherwise possible.
27. It is my confident hope that Member States will
express here their sincere willingness, in sovereignty, to
undertake obligations and to make commitments in
order to adopt a strategy that will be both new and
effective. We should all bear in mind that nothing in the
way of fundamental change by and for the people of all
countries can be expected without sustained efforts,
setting bold targets and pursuing them within a
stipulated time-frame.
28. The new international development strategy is
concerned with providing mechanisms for the acceleration of the economic development of the developing
countries. These mechanisms require the establishment
of a restructured and properly functioning world economy that would provide the necessary environment for
the sustained growth of both the developed and the
developing countries. This is the focus of the global
negotiations. The challenge of these negotiations is to
end the drift and the uncertainties now enveloping the
world economy.
29. The global round of negotiations can be meaningful only if the various groups of countries confront,
with their commitment and undertaking, the imperative
of an evolving international economic co-operation
which recognizes the interdependence of problems in the

25 August 1980

5

fields of raw materials, energy, trade, development, and
money and finance, as stipulated in General Assembly
resolution 34/138.
30. I do not believe that there is any viable alternative
to global negotiations. A number of initiatives are currently under active consideration by Governments. They
are aimed at changing and shaping a climate that can
enlarge the prospects for global agreement. But those
initiatives can bear fruit only if this special session succeeds in infusing a dynamic of hope by launching the
global negotiations.
31. The momentous questions underlying this special
session touch the interests of everyone and the issues we
will discuss confront each one of us with historic responsibilities. What kind of world do we want to build?
What kind of future are we preparing for the coming
generations? These issues are of particular significance
to the pOOf, who constitute almost half of mankind. It
would be unwise for us not to listen to the voices of the
pOOf, the excluded and the oppressed. who have paid
the highest price for the passing, albeit lingering, order
and who can no longer be kept in convenient silence.
32. The tasks before us are immense, but with political
will and determination we can make this session proceed
on a path of significant movement forward in our common endeavours. Our objective must be to move from
the present impasse and advance to genuine international co-operation in the true spirit of interdependence.
Towards achieving this goal all must be involved. No
one should be excluded. The developed countries-both
the market economies and the centrally planned
economies-as well as the developing countries have a
vital responsibility to ensure the success of this session.
Above all, we must approach this session not as adversaries, but as partners in the cause of common concerns
and mutual interests.
33. I appeal to you all to confound the pessimists and
to give hope to a humanity that is no longer assured of
its survival by adopting a new international development strategy and launching the global round of negotiations.
34. The -Secretary-General of the United Nations
wishes to address the General Assembly at this time, and
I now call on him.

Statement by the Secretary-General
35. The SECRETARY·GENERAL: The General
Assembly is gathered today in special session to respond
to serious concerns over the present trends in the international economy and the process of development of
the developing countries. These concerns have been
accumulating in recent years from all sides. Last month,
while addressing the Economic and Social Council in
Geneva,' 1 had occasion to point out the rigorous
impact that current trends have on the weakest and the
most vulnerable. Progress in international negotiations
has not been commensurate with the challenges facing
all nations. A growing frustration and anxiety is the
result. The preparatory work for this session has itself
been disappointing. We are meeting today with many
unresolved questions regarding the main items on our
agenda.
36. This Assembly is therefore faced with a central
task. It must demonstrate the collective ability to overcome the prevailing crisis in the world economy. It must
'See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council. 1980,
Plenary Meetings, 24th meeting, paras. 7-30.

6

General Assembly -

Eleventh Special Session - Plenary Meetings

bridge the growing chasm between d.e~larations a~d
intentions on the one hand, and the realItIes of hardship
and suffering on the other. Rarely has it been so important to match words with policies and actions. Exceptional efforts are required from all parties involved.
There has to be a mt1eting of minds for concrete progress to be achieved.
37. These efforts can have great political significance
in the present cqntext of international relations. The
interaction of economic and political factors being evident, it is clear that progress in international economic
co-operation can and should contribute to the relaxation of the serious tensions which mark the present political scene. Nor should these tensions be allowed to distract the imperative international effort to create more
favourable conditions for development. What is at stake
in our discussions is peace as much as prosperity and a
decent standard of living for 'an humanity.
38. We cannot afford to let this session end in failure
or disarray or wither in half-hearted consensus on ritualistic texts. Unless we really initiate a process of
restructuring the world economy and international
economic relations, we will not have risen· to the
demands of the present situation. Indeed, we will have
failed in our duty to the coming generations.

I'

39. The years that have passed since the sixth and
seventh special sessions have been both difficult and
eventful for the world economy. They have registered
only limited progress in the implementation of the
Declaration and the Programme of Action on the
Establishment of a New International Economic Order
[resolutions 3201 (S- VI) and 3202 (S- VI)], which had
been called for and confirmed by the General Assembly
at those sessions.
40. The report before you, prepared by the DirectorGeneral for Development and International Economic
Co-operation [see A /S- J1/5] in conformity with the
relevant resolutions of the thirty-third and thirty-fourth
sessions of the General Assembly, describes the modest
steps that have been undertaken with respect to some of
the objectives of the Declaration. It underlines the fact
that in many cases negotiations to attain these objectives
have yielded results which fall considerably short of
their initial targets. Specific advances have been
achieved in areas like commodities, manufactures,
money, finance, technology,. transport and insurance.
They have consisted mainly in the creation of new institutions, such as the Common Fund for commodities, to
deal with problems of particular concern to developing
countries and in partial adjustments in the workings of
existing institutions. However, these advances have not
provided the international community with instruments
for coherent and constructive action to overcome difficulties in.areas like energy, food, industry, money and
transfers of resources. Indeed, the lack of these instruments has served to aggravate these difficulties. I think
it is fair to say that if, because of growing interdependence, all economies have paid a price for this lack of
preparation, the weaker economies have had to bear a
particularly heavy brunt. Lost opportunities might be
lost for ever, but certain lessons have been brought
home by this hesitation and reluctance to bring about
changes. Let me briefly suggest some of the conclusions
we can draw from this experience.
41. First, delays in initiating measures towards a more
rational and effective management of the world economy have worsened the current problems of inflation
and inhibited growth in developing countries.

42. Secondly, mechanisms regulating the international
economy in the trade, financial and monetary sectors
should be made more effective and responsive to the
realities and needs of the developing countries.
43. Thirdly, the problem of energy is fundamental for
all participants in the world economy. It requires for its
solution massive domestic efforts from all countries,
most urgently from the major consumers.. It also
demands a high degree of international co-operation in
order to avoid unstable supplies and prices that have
adverse effects on the world economy as a whole and to
mobilize the required investments, in particular in developing countries.
44. Fourthly, economic co-operation among developing countries should be considerably strengthened
through mutual assistance. In that context, I am glad to
note the initiatives that have been taken regarding
energy co-operation among developing countries.
45. Fifthly, long-term action. aimed at changing structures, should be complemented and supported by shortterm measures concentrating on immediate issues. The
two should be regarded as complementing each other
and not as alternatives.
46. Sixthly. it has become increasingly clear that no
country, or group of countries, is in a position to bring
about these measures unilaterally. Considering the close
interrelation of major economic issues, the search for
action needs to be collective and to enlist the active
involvement and participation of all parties concerned.
All countries would benefit from serious attempts to
tackle the major problems of the world economy.
Brighter prospects would open up for every segment of
the international community if the uncertainties that
result from the lack of common perspectives were
diminished. The accelerated development of developing
countries would be a stimulus for developed ones as
well. By the same token, all countries have to make a
contribution irrespective of their level of development
or of their economic systems.
47. The acknowledgement of these facts has been slow
in coming. Consideration of immediate costs has been
allowed to obscure longer-term benefits. However, 1
hope that some progess can be achieved in the near
future. Political vision is necessary to accept the changes
that are required; political will-and I stress this-is
indispensable to implement them at the domestic as well
as the international level.
48. I much regret that this vision and this will have not
been forthcoming in sufficient degree so far. I do not
underestimate the difficulties faced by Governments
that see restricted possibilities for action in the short
run. But the demands of the present and prospective
situations are such that both the will and the vision need
to be summoned and deployed in the fullest measure.
The developed countries have a special responsibility in
this regard in view of their favoured position in the
international systems. The North-South dialoguewhich, with a few exceptions, has been slow and
difficult-needs to be given a new impetus by this
session.
49. Further to the preparatory work accomplished so
far, the following interconnected areas of negotiation
c.all for consideration at this session: (a) a new international development strategy which will provide a framework for long-term action; (b) global negotiations that
could c?nstitute a key tool for this action; and (c) further a~tlOns to promote the development of developing
countnes.

1st meeting - 25 August 1980

50. I should like to emphasize that to regard these
objectives as complementary is a matter not of form but
of substantive and political necessity.
51. A strong and dynamic strategy providing a general
framework for international action in support of the
development of developing countries during the coming
decade would be a major contribution of this session.
The objectives of such a strategy for the growth of the
developing countries may appear to be ambitious but
they do not exceed the needs of promoting the new
international econoptic order and the social and human
development of fast-growing populations.
52. While calling for massive efforts in domestic sectors of developing countries, as well as for changes in
the structures of the developed economies themselves,
the strategy should stress the crucial importance of
changes in the international systems to achieve these
goals and objectives. I should also underline the contributions that the organizations of the United Nations
system could make through their support for global
policy formulation and through their operational activities for development which call for a growing flow of
contributions.
53. The problems which are unresolved regarding the
formulation of the strategy stem, to a large extent, from
the difficulties that arose in the preparation of the global negotiations. Since global negotiations are expected
to be an essential tool for implementing the goals and
objectives laid down by the strategy, the formulations
adopted in the strategy on such important matters as
money, development, finance and energy are bound to
have an impact on the substance of these negotiations.
54. The lack of any agreement on these questions in
global negotiations explains why it has proved difficult
to evolve a compromise on them in the strategy. This is
not a surprising situation. But the importance of the
strategy is such that it provides an additional incentive
to solve these problems and to reach an agreement on
the agenda of the global negotiations. As I have already
mentioned, no agreement has been reached so far on
this point or on questions of procedure. Needless to say,
I regret this situation.
55. However, the process of preparation of global
negotiations did manage to yield some positive results.
There was a general consensus that a simultaneous and
action-oriented round of global and sustained negotiations would contribute to the solution of international
problems. It would do so within the framework of the
restructuring of international economic relations. This
tound would support steady global economic development, in particular the development of developing countries. There was also a consensus that such negotiations
should cover both structural and current issues.
56. If this is the case, it seems to me difficult to comprehend why this session should fail to resolve questions
of agenda and procedure-at least to do that. Five
major areas for negotiations were defined by the
General Assembly at its last session: raw materials,
energy, trade, development, and money and finance. In
negotiations relevant to these five areas there are questions of crucial importance to the world economy that
will require particular attention.
57. In the first place, greater stability is needed in the
international monetary system, which has to be made
more supportive of the development of developing
countries. Given the mounting, massive and durable
payment imbalances, the process of adjustment should
be helped and spread over time by recycling more evenly
the large surpluses that are going to be accumulated.

7

Measures to protect the value and the security of the
financial assets of oil-exporting countries would offer
them an incentive to maintain their production at a level
that is adequate to the needs of the international community and the international economy. Instruments
have to be devised to ensure sustained, adequate and
predictable flows of transfers of resources in support of
the pnlcess of development.
58. Secondly, the question of energy availability for
all is a basic one, and there is no need to stress this fact.
The transition from a period in which oil was the main
source of cheap, abundant energy to one in which
energy sources will be more diversified and expensive
should be facilitated and better organized. As I said
earlier, this could be done through conservation in all
countries, especially the large consumers. It could be
done through intensified technical co-operation and
through an increase of investment in the energy field,
particularly in developing countries. More predictable
adjustments in real energy prices would also help this
transition and provide an incentive for investment.
59. Thirdly, the resumption and acceleration of
growth in poor countries depends to a large extent on
the development of agriculture and of the related infrastructure in rural areas. This makes them all the more
dependent on the availability of larger flows of development assistance on a sustained basis, as well as of a
more efficient framework for food security.
60. The agenda of the negotiations will of course have
to cover a much broader field. But I believe that the success of the negotiations will be judged on their capacity to bring forth an appropriate response to these
problems.
61. Regarding the question of procedures, I cannot
conceive that such major issues would not be discussed
in depth by a central forum under the authority of the
General Assembly with universal participation. These
issues are interconnected and call for balanced solutions
in consolidated negotiations. If agreements reflecting
political understandings were to be reached, the Governments involved would be expected to promote them
in their domestic policies and through their action in the
appropriate specialized agencies of which they are all
members. These forums would have the responsibility
to conduct the necessary further discussions and negotiations in conformity with these understandings so as to
ensure the required follow-up action in their areas of
competence. On some problems, the whole negotiating
process could, of course, be entruste~ ~o the speciali~ed
forums, with the central forum exercIsmg general gUidance. In the course of these negotiations, an appropriate balance would have to be worked out in each set
of agreed' measures that would open the way for progress in other areas.
62. In conformity with the relevant resolutions of the
thirty-fourth session of the General Assembly, a report
is submitted to this session on the situation of lowincome countries most seriously affected by the current
economic crisis. The report concludes that an increase in
official development assistance to these countries
should be on terms compatible with their situation.
Moreover, a number of developing countries are going
to be faced with serious problems in the financing of
their current account deficits in the coming monthsand I am happy that President Salim has referred to this
matter. At the last session of the Economic and Social
Council, I made some suggestions 2 on how interna21bid.

MA ,0

P

. . . . lEl_ _ a n

w

-

..

General Assembly - Eleventh Special Session -

8

tional institutions could provide support to those countries. I also pointed out the urgency of accelerating
investments in all sources of energy in developing
countries.
63. The least-developed countries may be expected to
benefit from such support. In addition, there is urgent
need to give effect to the immediate action programme
which was outlined in Manila. Actions taken or initiated
by this session to answer these problems in the course of
the next few months would be a recognition of an emergency situation-and there can be no doubt but that we
are dealing in this regard with an emergency situation.
Such actions should neither detract from the forthcoming global round nor be a substitute for the long-term
structural changes which the world economic system
needs.
64. This session is in a position to initiate processes
that can have an immense potential. They can touch the
lives of hundreds of millions of people around the
world. The efforts of the Assembly will be judged by
their results and not on the basis of rhetoric. The present situation is a difficult one and it calls for a degree of
pragmatism if practical measures are to be adopted and
dependable agreements reached. I appeal to all participants to recapture the political vision which is required
to translate into reality the principles that we agreed
upon five years ago.
65. I wish the Assembly every success in its important
deliberations.

AGENDA ITEM 5

Adoption of the agenda
66. The PRESIDENT: The draft agenda of the eleventh special session of the General Assembly appears in
document A/S-l1/15. It consists of the seven items of
the provisional agenda recommended by the Committee
of the Whole. It also includes a supplementary item,
entitled "Admission of new Members to the United
Nations", requested by the Security Council.
67. In order to expedite its work, the Assembly may
wish to adopt the agenda at this plenary meeting, without referring it to the General Committee. May I take it
that the Assembly agrees to that procedure?

It was so decided.
68. The PRESIDENT: If there is no objection, I shall
take it that the Assembly adopts the draft agenda as it
appears in document A/S-Il/ 15.
The agenda was adopted [decision 8-ll 121].
69. The PRESIDENT: We turn now to the allocation
of the items on the agenda.
70. Bearing in mind the practice of the General
Assembly, I take it that it is the wish to consider items I
to 6 and item 8 directly in plenary meeting.

It was so decided [idem].
71. The PRESIDENT: Regarding the allocation of
item 7, the Committee of the Whole recommends in
paragraph 21 of annex III to its report [A I S-ll 11
(Part IV)] that that item should be allocated to the ad
hoc committee to be established at this special session,
except that the debate on the item should take place in
the plenary meeting. May I take it that the General
Assembly approves that recommendation?

It was so decided [idem].

Plenary Meetings

AGENDA ITEM 6

n
a

Organization of the session

a

72. The PRESIDENT: I refer members first to the
recommendations of the Committee of the Whole
Established under General Assembly Resolution 32/174
regarding the General Committee, which are contained
in paragraph 19 (a) and (b) of annex III to document
A/S-ll/l (Part IV) and Corr.I.

0

e:

7
tl

73. Taking into account the practice followed at previous special sessions, the Committee of the Whole
recommends that the Chairmen of the Main Committees of the thirty-fourth session should serve in the same
capacity at the eleventh special session, on the understanding that appropriate arrangements will be made
for the replacement by a member of the same delegation
or by a member of a delegation from the same region of
those Chairmen who are unable to serve. In addition,
the Vice-Presidents should be the same as at the thirtyfourth session. That would ensure the representative
character of the General Committee.

8
tl
\l
g

a
s:

ic
SI

a
0

t1
a

74. If there is no objection, I shall take it that the
General Assembly approves those recommendations.
It was so decided [decisions 8-11113 and S-ll 1141.
75. The PRESIDENT: The Chairmen of the Main
Committees of the thirty-fourth session who are present
and who therefore will serve in the same capacity at this
special session are: Mr. Davidson L. Hepburn of the
Bahamas, for the First Committee; Mr. Costin Murgescu of Romania, for the Second Committee; Mr.
Samir I. Sobhy of Egypt, for the Third Committee; Mr.
Thomas S. Boya of Benin, for the Fourth Committee;
Mr. Andre Xavier Pirson of Belgium, for the Fifth
Committee; and Mr. Pracha Guna-Kasem of Thailand, .
for the Sixth Committee.

8
~

s:

c
ti
tl
si
b

8.
fI

A
SI
g

76. Regarding the Chairman of the Special Political
Committee, I should be grateful if the Secretariat could
be informed as soon as possible of the name of
the representative who will be replacing last year's
Chairman of that Committee.

tl
8
0

n
p
d
E

77. The Member States which held the Vice--Presidencies of the thirty-fourth session and which will serve
in the same capacity at the eleventh special session are
the following: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,
China, Costa Rica, Cyprus, Ethiopia, France, Guyana,
Iceland, Lesotho, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Singapore, Somalia, Toga, Turkey, Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Cameroon, United States of America and Yemen.

C
8,
tl

C
a
tl

78. In paragraphs 9, 10 and 19 (c) of annex III to its
report, the Committee of the Whole recommends that:

8.
ti

(a) In addition to the plenary, the General Assembly

el

should establish an Ad Hoc Committee of the Eleventh
Special Session;

ti
rl

(b) The Ad Hoc Committee should have a Chairman,
three Vice-Chairmen and a Rapporteur, elected on the
basis of equitable geographical distribution, experience
and personal competence;

8
F
C

(c) The Chairman of the Ad Hoc Committee should
be accorded, for the duration of the eleventh special
session only, full rights of membership in the General
Committee, including the right to vote;

it
8'

(d) Plenary meetings should be held. twice daily

Cl

throughout the duration of the special session;

Sf

L

1st meeting - 25 August 1980

(e) Provision should be made for the Ad Hoc Committee to hold meetings twice daily during the session;
and

the
ale
174
:led
ent

Ire,ole
nitIme
lerade
ion
lof
on.
rtylive

the
ms.
14] •

lain
lent
this
the
lurMr.
Mr.
tee;
ifth
.nd.

kal

mId
01

ar's

esi:rve
are
,lie.

na.

lew

lof

:eat

of

, its

lat:

,bly

nth
an,
the
nee

uld
:ial
:ral
lily

(f) Provision should also be made for additional plenary meetings and meetings of the Ad Hoc Committee or
other bodies that the General Assembly might wish to
establish during the special session.

79. May I take it that the General Assembly adopts
those recommendations?
It was so decided [decision S-11 /22].
80. The PRESIDENT: I now invite the Assembly to
turn to the recommendations of the Committee of the
Whole concerning meeting records (paragraph 22), languages (paragraph 24), participation by specialized
agencies and other organizations of the United Nations
system (paragraph 25), the invitation to the Latin American Economic System to participate in the eleventh
special session as an observer (paragraph 27), and
arrangements regarding facilities for non-governmental
organizations (paragraphs 28 and 29). May I take it that
the General Assembly approves those recommendations
also?
It was so decided [idem].
81. The PRESIDENT: I feel confident that members
will agree with me that, to expedite the work of the session, it would be desirable for heads of specialized agencies to report on the progress made within their respective areas of competence towards the establishment of
the new international economic order as early in the session as feasible and, as a matter of courtesy, as near the
beginning of the meeting as possible.
82. With regard to paragraph 26 of the Committee's
report, it should be noted that in his address to the
Assembly this morning the Secretary-General was
speaking on behalf of the various organs and programmes established under Article 22 of the Charter of
the United Nations.
83. I now draw the Assembly's attention to a number
of requests that the General Assembly hear in a plenary
meeting a message which His Holiness Pope John
PaullI has graciously addressed to the Assembly, to be
delivered by a special envoy of His Holiness, His
Eminence Bernardin Cardinal Gantin. I take it that the
General Assembly agrees to those requests.
It was so decided.
84. The PRESIDENT: There is also a request, contained in document A/S-Il/I8, that the SecretaryGeneral of the Organization of African Unity be given
an opportunity to address the Assembly in the course of
the debate on agenda item 7.
85. May I consider that, taking into account resolution 2011 (XX) of 11 October 1965, by which the General Assembly granted observer status to the Organization of African Unity, the Assembly accedes to that
request?
It was so decided.
86. The PRESIDENT: The President of the World
Food Council has requested to be allowed to address the
General Assembly on behalf of the Council. May I take
it that the General Assembly accedes to that request?
It was so decided.
87. The PRESIDENT: We have thus concluded our
consideration of the organization of the eleventh special
session.

9

AGENDA ITEM 8
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
88. The PRESIDENT: With the permission of the
General Assembly, I should like to proceed to consideration of agenda' item 8, in order to give the new Member
the opportunity to participate from the outset in the
work of the special session.
89. The Security Council has in document A/S-II / 10
recommended the admission of the Republic of Zimbabwe to membership in the United Nations. In this
connexion, a draft resolution has been submitted in
document A/S-Il/L.l. In addition to the countries
listed in that document, the following countries have
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Guyana, Haiti,
India, Jamaica, Maldives, Malta, Mauritius, Nicaragua,
Papua New Guinea, Qatar, Thailand and United
Republic of Cameroon.
90. May I take it that the General Assembly accepts
the recommendation of the Security Council and adopts
the draft resolution by acclamation.
The draft resolution was adopted.' [resolution S-ll /1]
91. The PRESIDENT: I declare the Republic of Zimbabwe admitted to membership in the United Nations.
The delegation of Zimbabwe was escorted to its place
in the General Assembly hall.
92. The PRESIDENT: On behalf of the General
Assembly I wish warmly to welcome Zimbabwe to membership in the United Nations. I do so with deep emotion and personal satisfaction, for this is a momentous
occasion not only for every Zimbabwean and every
African but indeed for the international community as a
whole. The entry of a new Member to our Organization
is always a cause for rejoicing. Yet I believe Zimbabwe'S
admission to the United Nations is a very special occasion for our Organization. Zimbabwe and its people
have travelled an arduous and turbulent path in gaining
their liberation and have, with their unshakable determination made this historic development possible.
Their str~ggle for freedom has been long and painful.
Their sacrifices have been enormous. In the course of
the struggle many Zimbabweans have lost their lives and
many more have been injured, som~ permanently
maimed. Material losses have also been Immense.
93. In reflecting on this bitter history of the country
whose membership in the United Nations we are proclaiming today-and I make this reflection with a deep
sense of sympathy for the people of Zimbabwe, on the
one hand and with great respect and admiration for
their indo~itable courage, on the other-I wish merely
to underscore the great challenges and responsibilities
that face the new nation of Zimb~bwe as it proc~t:ds.on
the road to national reconstructlOn and reconclltatlon
and carries out the task of healing the wounds of war.
94. The United Nations, which faithful to its principles has consistently supported th~ struggle o~ the
people of Zimbabwe for self-determmatIOn and mdependence, now has an even greater responsibility to
assist the new Zimbabwe as it confronts the new challenges before it. To that end I wish.to launch a s~lemn
appeal to the international commumty to pay partlcul~r
and urgent attention to the problems and needs of thIs
new State for more than ever before, Zimbabwe now
needs int~rnational understanding, co-operation and
all-round assistance.
95. I know I am expressing the views of the entire
membership when I extend a hearty welcome to the delegation of Zimbabwe. We are particularly happy to have

10

General Assembly - Eleventh Special Session -

in our midst as head of the delegation, the Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert Mugabe. Through him
we salute the Government and people of Zimbabwe. To
him I wish to convey our admiration of his wisdom and
the exemplary leadership which he has prov!ded and
which he will continue to provide to the new ZImbabwe
in the process of the consolidation of its independence.
His outstanding statesmanship and stewardship have
been universally acknowledged.
96. Since Zimbabwe'S accession to independence more
than four months ago, the Government and people of
Zimbabwe, under Prime Minister Mugabe's leadership,
have abundantly demonstrated that, notwithstanding
the divisions and colossal problems of the past, they are
determined to build a new and dynamic nation in the
spirit of national unity and reconciliation. In the process
Zimbabwe has confounded not only its own enemies
and detractors but also those of Africa. But, above all,
Zimbabwe has become an invaluable pillar of strength
in our collective quest for freedom and human dignity
for the whole of southern Africa.
97. It is particularly gratifying to welcome Zimbabwe
at a time when the United Nations is about to commemorate the twentieth anniversary of the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples. No occasion could have been a
more fitting tribute to the significance of that Declaration. And no development could have provided greater
inspiration or be a better reminder of the need to intensify our collective efforts to eliminate colonialism in all
its forms and manifestations.
98. I wish to take this opportunity to reiterate what I
have already stated elsewhere: that is, that Zimbabwe's
independence, brought about after a long-fought struggle, coupled with serious and successful efforts at securing a negotiated solution to the conflict, serves as an
eloquent testimony to the fact that, given the goodwill
of all concerned, it is indeed possible to solve even the
most intractable of problems. While we recognize tbat
the victory of the people of Zimbabwe was brought
about primarily by their own struggle-a struggle which
entailed supreme sacrifices on the part of the people of
Zimbabwe and was actively supported by free Africa
and the overwhelming majority of the world
community-credit must also be given to the position
adopted by the former administering Power in assuming
its resp~~sibi!ities positively as the administering Power
at a cntlcal Juncture of that country's decolonization
process.
99. I do not wish to be personal or sentimental. Yet
the Assembly will, I am confident, forgive me if I voice
my personal feelings of joy on this auspicious occasion.
For more than a decade, as Chairman of the Special
Comm!ttee on the Situati~n with regard to the ImplementatlOn of the DeclaratIOn of the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples and in
other capacities as representative of my own c~untry, it
has been. my honour ~o fol~ow closely the developments
of the ZImbabwean l.JberatlOn struggle, both within the
cor:text of t.he Orgamzation of Afriean Unity and in the
Umted NatIons. Over the years, it has been my privilege
to have been associated very closely with the Zimbabwean liberation movemef\t and with its esteemed
leaders. I therefore fully share with them this moment
of ~lory for their nation, for Africa and for the United
Nations.
100. 1 have no doubt that the admission of Zimbabwe
as the l5?~d Member of the United Nations is an invaluable ~ddlt!on to our O.rganization. The combination of
the nch hIstory of resIstance in that country, its great

Plenary Meetings

civilization, its human and other resources and its fidelity and dedication to the purposes and principles of our
Organization will no doubt enhance the effectiveness of
this great institution in its efforts towards the maintenance of world peace and security and the promotion
of international co-operation.
101. Mr. CLARK (Nigeria): Sir, permit me to say, on
behalf of the group of African States, how extremely
happy we are to see you once again presiding over the
affairs of this Assembly with so much competence and
dignity. I take the liberty to observe that you must be
full of joy and satisfaction, as are the rest of us in the
African group, that the resolution we have just adopted
by a rousing acclamation on the admission of Zimbabwe to membership in the United Nations is a crowning achievement of the United Nations in the field of
decolonization and human rights. That you, a son of
Africa from the front-line State of Tanzania, should be
the President of the General Assembly on this historic
occasion is for Africans an additional reason for selfcongratulation.
102. I also wish to take this opportunity to pay homage to His Excellency General Carlos R6mulo, Foreign
Minister of the Philippines and a founding father of the
United Nations, under whose able presidency the Security Council unanimously adopted resolu tion 477 (1980)
on Zimbabwe's application for membership in the
United Nations. I presume that when the Prime Minister
of Zimbabwe, His Excellency Mr. Robert Mugabe, in
his telegram dated 17 July 1980, submitted the application of his country for membership in this world Organization, he could hardly know that a legendary figure in
the history of the United Nations, whom we all love and
admire for his role in the drafting of Article I of the
Charter of the United Nations, would be the one to pilot
the application through that awesome Council. Nor did
he realize that we would be creating a well-deserved
precedent today by acceding to his application during a
special session of the General Assembly and on the very
eve of the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of resolution 1514 (XV) on the granting of independence to
colonial countries and peoples.
103. The independence of Zimbabwe did not come
a day too soon. Long before the celebrations on
18 April 1980 proclaiming that independence, the
natio~a~ist forces of. the Patriotic Front had already
won .It m the battlefIeld for the people of Zimbabwe.
For Independence is an affair of the spirit: once people
ref~s~ to be slaves and take up arms to defend that
deCISIon, no power on earth can deny them their
freedom.
104. The then Prime Minister of Great Britain Sir
Harold Wilson, described the unilateral declaratio'n of
independence by the racist white settlers of Southern
Rhodesia, under the satan!c leadership of Ian Smith, on
11 November 1965, as a cnme against the concept of the
rule of law and of human freedom. What the British
Pri.me Minister failed to say was that Ian Smith was a
traltor-a rebel against the British Crown-and that
once the Security Council had declared that that rebellion wa~ a t,hreat to international peace and security,
Her Majesty s Government was under obligation to support every measure, including the use of force to terminate. it. In spite ?f the. constant call by the Security
CouncI! on the Umted Kmgdom, as the administering
Power, to quell the rebellion, it was left for the
oppressed people of Zimbabwe themselves under the
!eadership of t~e Patriotic Front, to destroy'the authorJt~ of. the r.acls~ usurpers and to terminate the rebel
mmor~ty regIme m Southern Rhodesia. For the people of

Z
tt
si

m
et
iz
d,
m
A
vi

J(

th

n<

sa
th
A

ti<

in

w(

qL
re:
Se
re'
an
01
10
de
be
fai
Tt
thl
ch
re~

tUI

is I

SUI

thl
lef

m,

to

me
me

10'
tor

Na

tru
wa

me

oft

the
of
sor
re,!!
Af

IOf
lan
are

W(
pa~

ou
im
He
eff
ga'
ge1

M\
op·
pit
wo
of

1st meeting -

d its fidel)Ies of OUT
:iveness of
the main)romotion
to say, on
extremely
g over the
~tence and
u must be
f us in the
,t adopted
I of Zimsa crownle field of
, a son of
should be
lis historic
n for selfpay homo, Foreign
ther of the
,the Secu477 (1980)
Jp in the
le Minister
lugabe, in
le applicarid Organy figure in
11 love and
.e I of the
'ne to pilot
iI. Nor did
.I-deserved
n during a
In the very
In of reso:ndence to
not come
'ations on
lence, the
Id already
~imbabwe.

nce people
efend that
hem their
,ritain, Sir
aration of
. Southern
Smith, on
ceptof the
~he British
nith was a
-and that
that rebelj security.
ion to sup'ce, to ter,e Security
ninistering
't for the
under the
he authorthe rebel
~people of

Zimbabwe, a people that had never lost the passion and
the plan to fight for their independence and freedom
since Cecil Rhodes and Alfred Beit, architects of so
many heinous crimes and so much misery in our continent, had in their greed for diamonds seized and colonized the lands of their forefathers, the commitment to
defeat the Ian Smith regime and the rebellion meant
more sacrifices. But it was a task that had to be done.
And the people of Zimbabwe did it valiantly and
victoriously, not counting the cost.
105. We strongly believe that this world Organization,
the administering Power, the Commonwealth and the
non-aligned group of nations also share our special
satisfaction in welcoming Zimbabwe to membership in
the United Nations. The resolutions of the General
Assembly, the Security Council and of all the organizations I have just mentioned were frequently unanimous
in calling on all States to refrain from any action which
would assist and encourage the illegal regime. Consequently not one single country accorded that rebel
regime recognition, In spite of lack of support from
South Africa, in spite of their perfidious violation as
revealed by the Bingham Commission, the economic
and diplomatic sanctions imposed on Rhodesia by this
Organization never lacked in efficacy.
106. Those who argue to the contrary are wrongdead wrong. Those who doubted that sanctions would
be instrumental in achieving the desired result had no
faith in the purposes and principles of our Charter.
Those who put their interests above peace by advocating
the lifting of the sanctions so that they could import
chromium and so on from Rhodesia bear a heavy
responsibility for their crimes against Africa. Unfortunately, these people have not yet learnt their lesson. It
is these same people, right-wing racists, who continue to
support the racist apartheid regime in South Africa so
that the white racists in that benighted country may be
left free to practise apartheid and to oppress the African
majority at will and so that they may thereby continue
to earn vulgar dividends from their shameful investments in South Africa. The nationalist liberation movement of South Africa will again prove them wrong.
107. The United Nations stood by Zimbabwe. The victory of Zimbabwe is therefore the victory of the United
Nations. History has too many ifs and buts for it to be a
true chronicle of lost opportunities. I do not therefore
want to argue that the United Nations could have done
more to help Zimbabwe. Nor do I want to dwell on how
often this body was misled by the wrong assumptions of
the administering Power, thereby prolonging the agony
of Zimbabwe. Nor do I want to elaborate on all the lessons we have learnt for the future, particularly with
regard to the liberation struggle in Namibia and South
Africa.
108. We have a saying in Nigeria that it is easier to
lament calamities than to rej oice at good fortune. We
are here to celebrate, so we shall let bygones be bygones.
We Africans are a magnanimous people; we are a c,?mpassionate people. Hence Prime Minister Mugabe, Without bitterness and with high' statesmanship, faithfully
implemented the terms and conditions of the Lancaster
House agreement. Hence he did not need the gratuitous
efforts at blackmail by vested interests before he forgave the erstwhile white oppressors. In a monu~e.ntal
gesture of amnesty and reconciliation, Prime Mlms~er
Mugabe has welcomed his former white oppressors With
open arms as comrades and comp.atr!ots. He~ce h~ h~s
plunged himself into the task of bmdmg ~p hiS nation s
wounds without raking up the p~st to bh~h.t the fut.ure
of his country. True to our African traditIOns, Pnme

25 August 1980

]J

Minister Mugabe has shown that the African liberation
movement is not concerned with vengeance: it is a struggle, a relentless struggle, for justice and liberty, for
freedom and human dignity.
109. Mr. President, on behalf of the African group, I
wish to support the appeal you have just launched to the
international community to assist Prime Minister
Mugabe to realize his dreams for his country as a
country where all races live united, equal and free under
a system of government based on the will of the people.
We recall in this connexion that during September 1976
certain Western Powers wanted to establish an internationally financed one-billion-dollar fund to be used to
insure the holdings of white Rhodesians. Naturally, we
opposed the racist purpose of that fund. We felt at the
time that the idea of the fund should have been conceived with the interests of all the people of Zimbabwe
in mind. That fund should be launched now to assist the
young State of Zimbabwe in its tremendous task of
reconciliation and rehabilitation.
110. It is painfully sad and difficult for an African,
even on such a momentous and glorious occasion as
this, not to remember that our continent is not yet
entirely free from racism and colonialism. Namibia and
South Africa are still subjected to brutal, racist and
oppressive humiliation. Prime Minister Mugabe and his
compatriots of Zimbabwe have proved through their
heroic struggle that independence is never freely
granted, but is won. We are all powerfully affected by
their courage, their victory, their achievement and their
magnanimity. As we most gladly and heartily welcome
Zimbabwe as the 153rd Member of the United Nations,
and the fiftieth member of the African group of the
United Nations, I wish to conclude with the words of
Nelson Mandela, another courageous African nationalist who, for the past 17 years, has been in prison on
South Africa's Robben Island for opposing apartheid,
racial oppression and domination:
"There is no easy walk to freedom anywhere, and
many of us will have to pass through the valley of the
shadow of death again and again before we reach the
mountaintops of our desire."
111. Mr. MARTEN (United Kingdom): It is a very
great privilege for me to be among the first to congratulate Zimbabwe on its admission to the United Nations.
Today marks the attainment of a goal which has been
sought, for many years, that is, Zimbabwe's entry !nto
the international community as an independent natIOn.
112. For my Government, and for me personally, it
has been an honour to have been associated with the
process which led to independence. Britain's fulfilment
of its constitutional responsibilities for Rhodesia was
made possi bJe by a remarkable exercise of in~ernational,
and particularly Commonwealth, co-operatIOn.
113. A little over a year ago, the international community's hopes seemed almost unrealizable. A historic
transformation was brought about in a matter of
months. The United Nations, which has on so many
occasions over the years debated the problem of Rhodesia, today rejoices in Zimbabwe's independence and
looks forward with confidence to its future.
114. Many factors and many in fluences contributed to
the attainment of a peaceful solution in Rhodesia. Now
is not the time to analyse them. But without doubt the
greatest contribution was the determination of all the
people of Zimbabwe to forget past differences and
move forward to a better future. Without that determination, it would not have been possible to implement
the agreements reached at the Lancaster House Con-

cz--

~'

12

General Assembly - Eleventh Special Session - Ple~ary_M_e_et_ln.:=g,-s

ference) But with the political will to proceed peacefully and harmoniously to independence, within a few
short months war turned to peace and the ballot-box
replaced the bullet.
115. After many years of war, Zimbabwe came to
independence under a government freely and fairly
elected. The solution of the Southern Rhodesian problem surely can offer some hope for the peaceful settlement of other conflicts in southern Africa and elsewhere.
116. Zimbabwe's independence was an international
event of great importance. Zimbabwe became a member
of the Commonwealth, an organization that had played
a significant part in the attainment of independence. It
has since joined the Organization of African Unity and
other international organizations. Today's proceedings
represent a final act in the sincere welcome the international community has extended to the new country.
117. But the Zimbabwean Government faces formidable tasks ahead. Zimbabwe's economic, social and
political life has been severely damaged by the war and
years of national division. Determined efforts have
already been made by Mr. Mugabe's Government to
repair that damage and pave the way for economic progress and political reconciliation.
118. Mr. Mugabe's policies have done much to consolidate the settlement and to assure all Zimbabweans
that they have a contribution to make to their country's
future. And now the international community must also
play its full part.
119. We are all beneficiaries of the settlement, and we
must all now help the Government of Zimbabwe to heal
the rifts of the past and build on this year's achievements.
120. The British Government will continue to take a
dose and friendly interest in Zimbabwe's affairs. We
have, for example, pledged £75 million of aid to Zimbabwe over the next three years. Within this we have
already provided a £7 million grant for reconstruction
of community facilities in rural areas and to provide
equipment to prepare land for the new growing season.
121. In fulfilment of the undertaking we gave at Lancaster House, a high priority will be given to agricultural
development, including land settlement and we are discussing how we may best help with thi's. We shall also
help with other areas of Zimbabwe's economic and
social infrastructure.
122. My Government has also written off £22 million
of government-to-government debts as part of the settlement, and has agreed to re-schedule the remainder of
the official debts.
123. , Fina,lI.y, the Br!tish Government is providing sub~tantlal I~l1htary assistance, and our instructors are
mvolved In the key task of training members of Zimbabwe's new national army.
124. But Zimbabwe's short- and medium-term needs
are great. It is a country that is rich in human and
~aterial resourc s but it needs urgent and very substan7
tial help to repair the damage and to bring the benefits
of development to ,all its peopl~, Friendly Governments
have already proVided some assistance to Zimbabwe
and we welc~me the.r?le "Y~i~h United Nations agencie~
have played In provldmg Initial assistance, and particularly the role of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees in repatriating refugees and co-ordinating

JHeld at London between 10 September and 15 Dccember 1979,

_

rehabilitation. We look forward to Zimbabwe's accession to the Lome Convention. 4
125. But I very much hope that all that has been done
so far is only a beginning, and that all friendly Governments and international agencies will respond generously and promptly to Zimbabwe's needs.
126. Zimbabwe has already begun te make its contribution to international life. As a Member of the United
Nations it will be able to take up its rightful place in the
international community, a place which has been denied
to it by the events of the past 15 years.
127. My Government looks forward to co-operating
closely with Zimbabwe in the work of the United
Nations and on the international scene in general. I wish
Zimbabwe well in the important role it has to play in the
African context. May Zimbabwe prosper with your help
in the years ahead.
128. Mr. WAKIL (Afghanistan): On behalf of the
group of Asian States, I take great pleasure in welcoming the Republic of Zimbabwe, a young State, as a new
Member of this Organization. There is no doubt that the
Republic of Zimbabwe will become an active and influential Member of the United Nations.
129. We are especially happy to welcome here the delegation of Zimbabwe headed by His Excellency
Mr. Robert Mugabe, the Prime Minister of that country
and an outstanding fighter for its national liberation.
130. We are also gratified that, despite the stubborn
resistance of the colonialists, and their numerous
manoeuvres aimed at prolonging the existence of the
racist minority regime, the people of Zimbabwe have
brought about the establishment of their own free and
independent State. From now on the people of Zimbabwe will be on the path of independent development.
The non-aligned nations of Asia as well as of other continents haye alw~ys h~d a firm belief in the final victory
of the natIOnal lIberatIOn movement of Zimbabwe. It is
therefore not accidental that the Sixth Conference of
H.eads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countnes, held at Havana In September last year that is
before Zimbabwe gained its independence, :'warmly
congratulated the Patriotic Front on its admission
as a full member in the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries" . j
131. The admission to United Nations membership of
each new independent State that has recently cast off the
shackles of colonialism is always a memorable and
bright event. Whenever that happens, the United
Nations takes a new important step, first, towards the
complete and final elimination of colonialism in all
parts of the world in compliance with the Declaration
on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries
and Peoples, adopted by the General Assembly exactly
20 ye~rs ago and, ,secondly, towards attaining the universality of the United Nations, which is one of the fundamental conditions for enhancing the effectiveness of
this international body.
13~. It was. with great satisfaction that the group of
ASian countnes supported the recommendation of the
S~curity Council .on the admission of the Republic of
Zimbabwe to UUlted Nations membership. We believe
that the application of Zimbabwe for United Nations
membership is in full compliance with the requirements
of the Charter of the United Nations. We express our
4The ACP~EEC Convention Df Lome, signed on 28 February 1975
at Lome,
ISee A/34/542, annex. section t. para, 60,

hope tl
Nation:
Nation:

133.

j

like on<
tocong
its dele
ExcelIel
declaral
convey
prosper
life and

134.

~

Republi
should I
election
success
incumb(
135. A
Eastern
Repub!i(
Nations.
meeting
Prime N
136. TI
heroic st
which tl
Front, h
country
build a g
victory t
histOIY C
colonialii
137. A
Jiberatiol
selves. A
notewort
national,
out the w
have con
babwe ar
their soli,
tion struJ
138. Tt
importar
of the pe
dom and
struggle;
no doub
importar
139. It
become:
after the
ation on
Countrie
140. Tl
done a l!
Declarat
the last l
is one of
present c
right tha
under cl.
cation of
an end t(
are still i
the necef
and cult
present (

13

1st tneelinK -'- 25 August 1980

abwe's acces-

las been done
:ndly Govern:spond gener-

ake its contriof the United
ul place in the
is been denied

co-operating
f the United
~eneral. 1wish
; to play in the
with your help

I

behalf of the
Ire in welcom:tate, as a nc,'"
doubt that the
tive and innu-

~ here the dele-

is Excellency
)f that country
al liberation.
~ the stubborn
leir numerous
:istence of the
imbabwe have
, own free and
eople of Zimt development.
s of other conle final victory
:imbabwe. It is
Conference of
Aligned COli n. year, that is.
:nce, "warmly
its admission
f Non-Aligned

membership of
Itly cast oft' the
lemorable and
" the United
It, towards the
mialism in all
he Declaration
mial Countries
;sembly exactly
aining the unione of the fun:ffectiveness of
t the group of
ndation of the
he Republic of
lip. We believe
Jnited Nations
le requirements
Ne express our

128 February 1<}75

hope that Zimbabwe, as a new Member of the United
Nations, will make its valuable contribution to United
Nations activities.
133. Availing ourselves of this opportunity, we should
like once more, on behalf of the group of Asian States,
to congratulate sincerely the Republic of Zimbabwe and
its delegation to the Unite'd Nations, headed by His
Excellency Mr. Robert Mugabe, on the occasion of the
declaration of the independence' of Zimbabwe and to
convey to the people of that country our wishes for
prosperity and progress on the path of its independent
life and development.
134. Mr. MALTSEV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation jrom Russian): First of all, I
should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your
election to this responsible post and to wish you every
success in performing the responsible duties that are
incumbent upon you.
135. As Chairman of the group of socialist States of
Eastern Europe, I should like warmly to welcome the
Republic of Zimbabwe, a new Member of the United
Nations. We are gratified to note the presence at this
meeting of an eminent statesman, the distinguished
Prime Minister of Zimbabwe, Mr. Robert Mugabe,
136. The victory of the people of Zimbabwe in their
heroic struggle against colonialist and racist oppression,
which they won under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front, has turned a fresh page in the history of that
country and has created the necessary conditions to
build a genuinely independent and sovereign State. This
victory has written a new and resplendent page in the
history of the liberation of Africa from the fetters of
colonialism and racism.
137. A decisive contribution to the struggle for their
liberation was made by the people of Zimbabwe themselves. At the same time, we should not overlook the
noteworthy role in that victory that was played by international support offered by progressive forces throughout the world. The socialist countries of Eastern Europe
have constantly been on the side of the people of Zimbabwe and, in both word and deed, have demonstrated
their solidarity with that people's many years of liberation struggle.
138. The United Nations has adopted a number of
important resolutions in defence of the inalienable right
of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination, freedom and independence and in support of its legitimate
struggle against a minority racist regime. There ~an be
no doubt that those resolutions also played their own
important and positive part.
139. It is symbolic that Zimbabwe should have
become a Member of the United Nations just 20 years
after the General Assembly adopted the historic Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples.
140. The socialist countries of Eastern Europe have
done a great deal to ensure that the provisions of that
Declaration become reality. The problem of eliminating
the last bastions of colonialism and racism in the world
is one of the most important and acute problems of the
present day which must be resolved forthwith. It is only
right that our Organization should keep that problem
under close and constant scrutiny. Only the total eradication of the vestiges of colonialism and racism can put
an end to the sufferings of those millions of people who
are still in the throes of colonial enslavement and create
the necessary conditions for successful social, economic
and cultural development for those people who are at
present oppressed.

141. To complete the process of decolonization would
at the same time be to respond to the interests of all
mankind, since as the disgraceful, colonial and racist
blots are gradually expunged from our planet there will
be a reduction in the number of potential explosive hot
spots which represent a threat to international security.
142. The fact that the people of Zimbabwe have won
independence and that this young Republic has been
admitted to membership in the United Nations is indeed
an important step towards the final liberation of the
African continent from colonialism, racism and
apartheid.
143. We warmly congratulate the Government and
people of Zimbabwe on their admission to the United
Nations and express our willingness to co-operate
closely with that country in the name of the lofty aims
and principles of our Organization.
144. Mr. ORTIZ SANZ (Bolivia) (interpretationjram
Spanish): It is a privilege for me to express, on behalf of
the group of Latin American States at the United
Nations, the satisfaction with which we all welcome the
people of Zimbabwe to the United Nations. Freed from
colonial oppression by the heroism oJ its people, aided
in its endeavours by the desire for freedom and the
attainment of justice which sustains the spirit and action
of the international community, that nation has come to
join us.
145. In 35 years the United Nations has already welcomed in this very hall more than 70 new States which
have emerged into the light from the night of colonialism and become full Members of the United Nations.
We have already expressed many joyous welcomes; but
this one today is a special occasion because it affords us
reason for a multiple celebration.
146. First, we celebrate the final historic victory of the
people of Zimbabwe, a nation which, after having
ended a long struggle which spared neither lives nor sufferings, now enters the domain of freedom and begins
its endeavour to establish and strengthen on the foundations of hard work and harmony those economic, social
and political structures which may be most in keeping
with its dignity as a nation and with the happiness of its
people.
147. Secondly, we cele~rate the unquestionable moral
and political victory of this Organization, which, without exceptions other than those that honour us, has
from the first moments stood together with the people
of Zimbabwe; which promptly mobilized in its principal
organs those who would debate with vigour the circumstances of the problems; which recommended action
and adopted resolutions, resorting to all the means laid
down in the Charter for such a case; and which assisted
the people of Zimbabwe to resolve the differences which
arose from the heat of battle, in order to find in unity
the true path to victory.
148. Thirdly, we celebrate a lasting cultural victory, a
victory for justice and truth, which states that the criminal philosophy of racism has no place in the frame of
history; that those who think that some men are to dictate like lords while others obey like slaves on the basis
of the colour of their skin, in addition to having fallen
into disgrace, are falling into a vacuum where they have
no future.
149. On the ruins of the Great Zimbabwe, in the heart
of ancestral Africa, a small white minority, obeying
misguided leadership, tried to become a dominant
group and by their economic exploitation and monstrous political and social discrimination outraged 6 million Zimbabweans, 6 million Africans.

·'Fc*,!F m

•

14

I

I

I

I.
I
I

Elevent h S pec i a I SesSI'on

History, impelled by the force of circ~mstances,
at times will stop short before such .dl~tortlons as ~re
produced by: transnational economiC mterests whlch
traverse frontiers and which kno~ ne;> country; the.hegemonic policies of universal dommatlon, which skIlfully
undermine national character; the arrogance of the
powerful; the indifference of prosperous peoples !o the
plight of emerging nations; and the sales of arms m the
guise of peaceful undertakings. Those are some of the
retrogressive forces that at times seem to halt the course
of history.
151 But history is persistent and inexorable. It sweeps
aside, one after the other, all debasing ~i~tortion~. It ~as
already swept away slavery an~ fa~atl~lsm .. It lS domg
away, day after day, with th~ dlvldmg hnes .Imposed by
social injustice and flagrant Imbalances which s~parate
men and nations. It has already done away With t.he
notion of the weak and the strong, in order to proc1al~
the sovereign equality of States. And, as we see today In
the resplendent example of Zimbab~e, .it is en~ing the
last vestiges of racism and colomalIsm which are
entrenching themselves behind the bulwarks of moral
blindness and political suicide.
152. The inexorable course of history, in redressing
inequity in Southern Rhodesia by bringing justice to the
people of Zimbabwe, enables .us to recall so~e fundamental teachings: that the deSire for freedom IS part of
the incorruptible nature of men and peoples and that no
Power large or small can stifle it; that the international
community, which finds its exp~ession in the ~harter
and the actions of the United Nations, can contrIbute to
channelling the forces of histor~ V!ctoriously ~owar?s
justice and peace; and that colomalIsm and raCism-Its
monstrous offspring-are falling into a vacuum in
which they have no future.
153. But let us not be deceived. Despite the obvious
remedies brought about by history, important struggles
still lie ahead. The Latin American nations, for example, subjected to disgraceful colonialism throughout
the sixteenth, seventeenth and eighteenth centuries,
although they attained their political independence by
force of arms a century and a half ago, are today faced
with the challenge of new types of colonialism.
154. We have to avoid an indiscriminate exploitation
of our natural resources by alien entrepreneurs. We
have to combat the negative results of foreign economic
decisions arrived at in remote centres which determine
price structures and the opening and closing of international markets to our export products. We have to
finance our overall development through the agonizing
search for funds and the transfer of technology that will
not entail serving hegemonic systems.
155. The Latin American nations rejoice at the political victories of the anti-colonial struggle, as in the case
of Zimbabwe today; but we are disposed not to relent in
the economic aspect of that struggle, because the hard
facts of 150 years of republican existence have taught us
that political freedom, if not coupled with economic
independence, is without value or significance.
156. We have co-operated, ClS was our duty, together
with the international community, especiaUy with the
community of emerging nations, in the political struggle
of Zimbabwe for its freedom. We welcome Zimbabwe
today to our ranks as one more brother, as one more
ally, to pursue the struggle for the economic freedom of
the peoples of Asia. Africa and Latin America, who are
the owners of immense natural wealth, but whose lives
are lived on the brink of hunger and frustration.
150.

I

General Assembly

Plenary Meetings

157. Mr. GAUCI (Malta): The long awaited admission of the Republic of Z~mba~we ~s the 15~rd Sta~e
Member of the United Natlons IS ~akmg. p.lll:ce In ausp~­
cious circumstances. Our. co~l~ctlve re),?lcI~g on thiS
occasion goes beyond a Justified grat(f!Ca~l?n at the
birth of a new nation and at anothe: sl~mflcant step
towards the universality of our OrgaruzatlOn.
158. As other speakers have already p~inted out, there
are many special features abo~t the I~dependence of
Zimbabwe. On this, the twentieth anmve!"sary of the
adoption of the Declaration. on the Grantm~ ?f ~n?e­
pendence to Colonial Countnes and Peoples, It IS fIttmg
that the representative of a liberated front-lin 7 African
country should be presiding. over our de~iberatlOns. The
United Republic of Tanzama has been In the forefront
among the countries of Africa in the struggle against
colonialism. That Zimbabwe should be admitted during
the tenure of your presidency, Mr. President, is a vindication of your personal role and that of your country.
159. The admission of Zimbabwe signals the vict~ry
of reason and collective effort over what otherWise
would have been a preposterous anachronism leading to
widespread national and regional conflict. That a small
minority of inhabitants should have presumed to perpetuate an unnatural dominance over t~e indig~nous
majority in Zimbabwe ran completely agamst the tide of
contemporary philosophy. We therefore derive satisfaction from the fact that, against apparently unsurmountable odds the dawn of enlightenment has penetrated the
darkest h~ur and wiser counsel has prevailed, thanks to
the persistent efforts of many.
160. The popular will has now been unmistakably
exercised. A new chapter is about to unfold in the future
of the southern African continent.
161. Both as the representative of a small island country, an ex-British colony itself, and as the spokesman
for the group of Western European and other States on
whose behalf I am privileged to speak today, I wish to
extend a warm welcome to the Government and people
of Zimbabwe on this day when their aspirations become
official reality. Not only does the group of Western
European and other States welcome the admission of
Zimbabwe; we also recognize that, in the initial difficult
problems inherent on the attainment of independence,
our expertise and resources may be instrumental in helping to resolve the teething problems of Zimbabwe until
political independence is matched by economic viability
and social progress.
162. The people of Zimbabwe themselves, under their
Prime Minister, Mr. Mugabe, have good reason to be
proud today that their long and arduous struggle for
independence has at last been resolved. The odds
against them seemed insurmountable, but time and
righteousness were not on the side of lan Smith and his
illegal white minority regime. The details of the struggle
of the Patriotic Front, the help given and the sacrifices
endured by the front-line States, the moral and political
support given by the Organization of African Unity and
other individual countries and groups of countries are
now things of the past and have ended in a significant
victory for the self-determination of peoples.
163. It is to be hoped that the positive example of Zimbabwe will serve as an inspiration and a spur to accelerated progress on Namibia. All nations should be able to
join in a collective' effort to satisfy by peaceful change
the yearning of the Namibian people for selfdetermination.
164. The entire United Nations system, under the
leadership of our indefatigable Secretary-General, has a

right to
minatin
cial Co
Implem
Indepen
the chai
Tobago,
under. t
Nigeria
much fe
part, ye
in the
continue
165. T
Power,
Common
heartedly
negotiati
agreemen
166. I
played it
tiating a
the Britis
supervisi
time whe
acted as
Anglo-A
borne out
to be a s
From Fe
ceeded in
which cuI
electoral ~
167. As
fUlure. In
try move!
moving bi
fore requi
babwe, wl
bearing th
the cumul:
full econo
standing f
to move a
are glad te
already be
168. We
ity will re!
babwe, wt
resolute pi
dence whi
nation-bui
169. I sh
the memb
other Stal
whole-hea
the Unitec
ating with
political,
promise
constraint
170. We
of Zimbal
the goal w
freedom a
171. Mr.
Arabic): I

the Sudar
speaks in

b

1st meeting - 25 August 1980

lted admis153rd State
~e in ausping on this
tion at the
ificant step

11.

:I out, there
endence of
sary of the
Ilg of Inde, it is fitting
ine African
ations. The
le forefront
~gle against
ltted during
:, is a vindiur country_
the victory
t otherwise
n leading to
'hat a small
ned to perindigenous
t the tide of
lve satisfacnsurmountl1etrated the
I, thanks to

lmistakably
n the future

sland counspokesman
er States on
y, I wish to
and people
ons become
of Western
jmission of
tial difficult
lependence.
ntal in helpbabwe until
nic viability
under their
eason to be
struggle for
The odds
t time and
nith and his
the struggle
le sacrifices
md political
n Unity and
Juntries are
l significant
s.
Iple ofZimr to accelerd be able to
eful change
for selfunder the
neral, has a

right to rejoice over its past contribution which is culminating in this happy occasion. In particular, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, under
the chairmanship of the representative of Trinidad and
Tobago, and the Special Committee against Apartheid,
under the chairmanship of the representative of
Nigeria-who, like you, Mr. President, spoke with so
much feeling and insight today-have played their full
part, year after year, in today's major step forward
in the decolonization process, and their work will
continue.
165. The British Government as the administering
Power, the countries of the Commonwealth and the
Commonwealth Secretariat have collaborated wholeheartedly in their concerted efforts towards difficult
negotiations, which culminated in the Lancaster House
agreement.
166. I am glad to say that my own country has also
played its modest role. In the difficult stages of negotiating an agreement between the Patriotic Front and
the British and United States Governments under the
supervision of the United Nations, in February 1978 at a
time when prospects for progress seemed dim, Malta
acted as the host country to a series of talks on the
Anglo-American proposals. In our belief, which is
borne out by subsequent events, the Malta talks proved
to be a significant lurning-point in the negotiations.
From February 1978 onwards the Patriotic Front succeeded in gaining solid consolidation of its support,
which culminated in Mr. Mugabe's landslide democratic
electoral victory in March this year.
167. As we rejoice today, we must also anticipate the
future. In today's interdependent world, unless a CQun- .
try moves forward with other nations it is virtually
moving backwards. More concentrated effort is therefore required for the solution of its problems. Zimbabwe, which is still nursing the wounds of colonialism,
bearing the scars of its liberation struggle and suffering
the cumulative effect of the years lost in not utilizing its
full economic potential, will need assistance and understanding from the international community to enable it
to move ahead economically as well as politically. We
are glad to note that some significant contributions have
already been publicly announced.
168. We are confident that the international community will respond positively to the special needs of Zimbabwe which has already demonstrated to the world the
resolute political will of its leaders for genuine independence while its people are eager to face the task of
nation-building with gallant determination.
169. I should like only to reiterate, on behalf both of
the members of the group of Western European and
other States and of my own Government, that we
whole-heartedly welcome the admission of Zimbabwe to
the United Nations. We also look forward to collaborating with its delegation at the United Nations in the
political, economic, social and other fields, and we
promise our full co-operation, each within the
constraints of our respective constitutional provisions.
170. We for our pa~t are convinced that the delegation
of Zimbabwe will make its own contribution towards
the goal which we all share-justice in an era of peace,
freedom and racial harmony.
171. Mr. ABDALLA (Sudan) (interpretation from
Arabic): It is with great pleasure that the delegation of
the Sudan on behalf of the group of Arab States,
speaks in 'this Assembly at a time when the United

.15

Nations is welcoming in its midst the Republic of Zimbabwe as the 153rd Member State. Our Organization is
thus taking a step forward towards achieving our goal,
namely, universality. The Sudan, which represents the
melting-pot in which the two elements and the two civilizations, African and Arab, have met and fused, is gratified, on behalf of the group of Arab States and on its
own behalf, to bid welcome to Zimbabwe.
172. The Africans and the Arabs are linked by a common destiny and a common struggle against colonialism
and discriminatory and racist regimes and against the
policies based on ambition and expansionism that are
practised by the zionist regime in occupied Palestine and
the apartheid regime in South Africa. This common destiny and struggle is contributing in a very positive way to
the achievement of our peoples' desire for close cooperation in various fields likely to be of benefit to
everyone.
173. The revolL of the heroic people of Zimbabwe
against imperialism and their gallant struggle against the
Jan Smith regime are recognized by all militants in
Africa and throughout the world. The independence of
the people of Zimbabwe and their victory over brute
force testify to the failure of attempts aimed at installing
racist regimes based on notions of white racial superiority. We have reason lo be proud because what has been
achieved in Zimbabwe is a consecration of the principles
set forth by the United Nations and the international
community. Those principles deal mainly with fundamental human rights and the right of peoples to selfdetermination and independence without discrimination
as to race, colour or creed. The freedom and independence now enjoyed by the people of Zimbabwe are the
fruits of a long and arduous struggle during which the
sons and daughters of Zimbabwe made sacrifices in
defence of their honour and their dignity and refused to
live like aliens in their own land and allow themselves to
be led by a handful of white colonialists. The history of
the resistance of the Zimbabwean people against acts of
oppression and torture during their struggle for selfdetermination shows that the will of peoples is irresistible and that force, however brutal, remains unavailing
against all those who choose independence and freedom
as their goal and their destiny.
174. At a time when the Arab delegations are welcoming Mr. Mugabe and his colleagues to this Assembly, we wish to express our confidence in Mr. Mugabe,
in his experience and in lhat of his people, which was
acquired in the course of their long struggle. Mr.
Mugabe's experience will undoubtedly help to enhance
the work of the General Assembly and to install a new
world economic order based on justice and equity. We
wish to pay a tribute to Mr. Mugabe for the role he has
been playing since the beginning of the revolution that
led to Zimbabwe's independence. We also wish to pay
him a tribute for his efforts to unite the Patriotic Front,
for we know that the strength ofa people depends on its
remaining united. We hope that the efforts of the Zimbabwean people, under the leadership of the Patriotic
Front, will strengthen those of other peoples seeking
independence and freedom.
175. This is a propitious occasion to draw the
attention of the international community to the arbitrary actions taken against our brothers in Namibia,
South Africa and the territories still under the yoke of
colonialism and racial discrimination. We appeal to the
international community to increase its assistance to the
liberation movements in those territories in order to
support their just struggle and to allow the peoples of

16

General Assembly

Elnenth Special Session -

those territories to exercise their legitimate rights to selfdetermination, independence, freedom and peace.
176. In conclusion, with regard to ZiIObab~e, we cannot fail to express our admiration to the Afncan group
and the Organization of African Unity for all they have
done in different international forums to s~pport the
liberation cause of Zimbabwe and to establish a black
majority regime. We also wish t~ convey our thanks to
all the delegations whose co~ntrl~~ have supported .the
people of Z!mbabwe and thm l~gltlmate re~resentatlve,
the Patriotic Front, at the different ~esslOns of the
General Assembly, particularly the thirty-fourth session when this question was discussed. We appeal to all
the ~ountries and organizations that supported the c~~se
of Zimbabwe to increase their efforts so that ~amlbla,
South Africa, occupied Palestine and all occupied Arab
territories can achieve independence and freedom, and
free themselves from brute force.

i'

177. Mr. ABDULAH (Trinidad and To?ago~, Cha.irman of the Special Committee on the SituatIOn With
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Co~onial Co~ntries and
Peoples: As Chairman of the SpeCial Comm~ttee on the
Situation with regard to the ImplementatIOn of the
Declaration of the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, I have a particular sense of
satisfaction in extending today a most cordial welcome
to the new independent State of Zimbabwe and to its
Prime Minister, His Excellency Mr. Robert Mugabe,
who can look with pride at this meeting of the Gene~al
Assembly as the justly deserved investiture of the VICtory won through the toil and struggle which he and his
people have endured over the past 15 years.
178. The achievement of the objectives of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples by the people of Zimbabwe is a
source of immense satisfaction and delight to the entire
world community, and to none more than to the members of the Special Committee, who, over the years,
followed closely the often frustrating and at times even
discouraging developments taking place in that region.
179. Zimbabwe's independence clearly demonstrates
to the world that a colonial people fighting for its
freedom cannot be silenced and that, against all odds,
courage and determination will triumph. The final
victory of the people of Zimbabwe is a tribute to the
wisdom, realism, foresight and statesmanship of the
leaders of the Patriotic Front, at the negotiating table as
much as on the battlefield. It proves once again the
power of the democratic process to enforce justice and
to resolve conflicts among the most bitterly opposed
interests.
180. That lesson should not be lost. With the liberation of Zimbabwe, the situation in southern Africa, for
so long in a stalemate, has been altered irrevocably. [
am confident that a free, prosperous and united Zimbabwe will contribute in no small measure to the
strengthening of peace, co-operation and progress in
that region, as it reaffirms the positive role of the
United Nations in support of self-determination, freedom and national independence for all oppressed people. Indeed, the cause of freedom for the Namibians has
already been greatly enhanced by the attainment of
independence by Zimbabwe.
181. When I had the honour of representing the Special Committee at the official independence celebration
ceremonies which took place in Harare last April, I had

Plenary Meetings

the opportunity of conveying to the Government and,
through it, to the people of Zimbabwe th~ warmest ~on­
gratulations and best wishes of the. Sp~ctal Committee
for peace, happiness and prospenty In the yea~s to
come. But Zimbabwe needs more than the ~ood WIshes
of all nations. A tremendous effort of natlOna~ reconstruction will engage all the energies of the en~lr.e 'population, and I need not stress the grave .respons~blllty of
the international community, of the Untted .Natlons and
its family of organizations, to extend their help most
generously and to give this new nation ~dl the assistance
it needs to rebuild its economy, resettle Its refugees, take
care of its wounds and put aside the bitterness of the
past.
182. Over the years, as more and more colonialterritories on its agenda ha ve become independent, the Special Committee has taken great pride in contributing to
the enlargement of the membersh,ip ?f the Unit~d
Nations. Today, as Zimbabwe takes Its nghtful place In
our Organization, the Special Committee rejoices to s.ee
that the United Nations is coming closer to one of Its
fundamental objectives: universality.
183. In conclusion, [ wish to assure His Excellency
Prime Minister Mugabe that I and my colleagues on the
Special Committee look forwa.rd to wo.rking clo~ely in
the future with the representatives of Zimbabwe In our
common endeavours to further the aims and principles
of the United Nations.
184. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): As
Permanent Representative of t~e host .country, I ~el­
come a new Member to the Untted NatIOns: the natIOn
of Zimbabwe.
185. Zimbabwe's admission to the United Nations is a
cause for celebration. It represents the triumph of principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations:
that all persons, regardless of race, colour or creed,
have a right to participate in shaping their political des·
tinies; and that people of goodwill can find peaceful
solutions for even the most vexing problems that confront them.
186. I know that all Members of the United Nations
welcome the determined efforts of Prime Minister
Mugabe and his Government to create in Z~mbabw~ a
nation where the ideals of democracy and raCIal equahty
are translated into reality.
187. Zimbabwe's admission represents also a triumph
for many of the Members of the United Nations, particularly the United Kingdom and the front-line States of
southern Africa, whose untiring efforts in the cause of
peace facilitated the signing of the Lancaster House
accords and the election of a representative Government
in Zimbabwe.
188. When Zimbabwe applied to the Security Council
for membership in the United Nations, I said that as
"the Members of the United Nations seek solutions to
the pressing political and economic problems that confront the nations of the world, we should see Zimbabwe
as a beacon light".6 We might keep that in mind as we
embark on this special session, during which we shall
~eal with perhaps the most pressing of all international
problems: the question of economic development. As
we grapple with the difficult issues that will arise in our

6S ee q/j/cillJ Remrd.' 0) the Sec/II'IIY louf/cil, Ihil/.l'ctilih l'mr.

2244lh meeting.

debates
politica
all the I
are pleE
to join

1st meeting - 25 Augusl 1980

lernment and.
: warmest conial Committee
the years to
le good wishes
lational recon:he entire pop:sponsibilityof
~d Nations and
heir help most
I the assistance
; refugees, take
tterness of the
: colonial terrindent, the Specontributing to
of the United
'ightful place in
e rejoices to see
~r to one of its
His Excellency
l,•king
,leaguclosely
es on the
in
babwe in our
,,,and principles
,
r .,. " ,
<i,

'f

America): As
~country. 1 weliions: the nation

,ited Nations is a
triumph of prinUnited Nations:
;olour or creed,
leir political desIII find peaceful
lblems that cond Nations
Minister
mbabwe a
alequality
a triumph
ons, parlice States of
he cause of
ster House
overnment

Ilrity Council
said that as
solutions to
ems that consee Zi m babwe
in mind as we
""which we shall
~~n international
l'evelopment. As
: will arise in our

11. Thlrl.VclUih Year •

debates we will need the same qualities of patience and
political will that were employed to such good effect by
all the parties in the Lancaster House negotiations. We
are pleased that the delegation of Zimbabwe has elected
to join us for this important session. We are confident

17

that because of its unique heritage Zimbabwe will bring
to our deliberations the very qualities needed to ensure
success.

The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m.
