A/58/PV.75

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-eighth session

75th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 17 December 2003, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

The Hon. Julian R. Hunte . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Saint Lucia)

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Heydar
Alirza oglu Aliyev, late President of the Republic of
Azerbaijan
The President: Before turning to the items on
our agenda for this afternoon, may I, on behalf of all
the Members of the General Assembly, extend our
deepest sympathy and condolences to the Government
and people of Azerbaijan, for the passing of the former
President of the Republic of Azerbaijan, His
Excellency Mr. Heydar Alirza oglu Aliyev.
I give
Azerbaijan.

the

floor

to

the

representative

that at its 2nd plenary meeting, on 19 September 2003,
the General Assembly decided that the fifty-eighth
session would recess on Tuesday, 16 December 2003.
However, in view of the work that remains to be done
for this part of the session, I would like to propose to
the Assembly that it postpone the date of recess of the
current session to Monday, 22 December 2003.
If there is no objection, may I take it that the
Assembly agrees to this proposal?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 12 (continued)

of
Report of the Economic and Social Council

Mr. Aliyev (Azerbaijan): On behalf of the
delegation of Azerbaijan, I would like to express our
deep and sincere appreciation to you, Sir, for your kind
words of sympathy and compassion. Indeed, the
passing away of a great statesman, the former President
of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, is a great loss for the
entire nation. Azerbaijan has lost one of its best sons,
who devoted his whole life to serving his people and
country, as well as strengthening the cause of peace
and understanding between all the peoples of the
world.
Postponement of the date of recess
The President: Before we proceed further, I
would like to draw the attention of Members to the date
of recess of the current session. Members will recall

Draft resolution A/58/L.36
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly adopted a draft resolution under this item at
its 34th meeting, on 16 October 2003. The Assembly
held a debate on the agenda item at its 37th meeting, on
20 October. In connection with this item, the General
Assembly has before it a draft resolution issued as
document A/58/L.36.
I give the floor to the representative of Morocco
to introduce, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China,
draft resolution A/58/L.36.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): I have
the honour, on behalf of the Group of 77 and China, to
introduce draft resolution A/58/L.36 entitled, “Report
of the Committee for Development Policy”. We should

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
C-154A. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

04-20829 (E)

*
0
4
2
0
8
2
9
*

A/58/PV.75

point out that the Committee for Development Policy
in its report E/2003/33 concluded that Timor-Leste
fulfilled the necessary conditions in order to be
registered on the list of least developed countries and
recommends its registration on that list. Furthermore,
in its decision 2003/280 adopted during the substantive
session of 2003, the United Nations Economic and
Social Council ratified that recommendation and
decided to include Timor-Leste on the list of least
developed countries, provided the Government of
Timor-Leste accepts that decision. In this respect, the
draft resolution under review, A/58/L.36, confirms that
the Government of Timor-Leste has given its consent
to be included in the list of least developed countries
and otherwise endorses the recommendation of the
United Nations Economic and Social Council. The
Group of 77 and China would like draft resolution
A/58/L.36 to be adopted by consensus.
Since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following delegations have joined the list of sponsors:
Germany, Ireland, Japan, Lithuania, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, the Republic of Korea and the United States
of America.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.36, entitled,
“Report of the Committee for Development Policy”.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.36?
Draft resolution A/58/L.36
(resolution 58/112).

was

adopted

The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
12.
Agenda item 17 (continued)
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(a) Appointment of members of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions

2

Report of the Fifth Committee
(A/58/561/Add.1)
The President: I first invite members to turn
their attention to the report of the Fifth Committee on
sub-item (a) of agenda item 17 entitled, “Appointment
of members of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions”, document
A/58/561/Add.1. The Fifth Committee recommends in
paragraph 11 of its report that the General Assembly
appoint the following persons as members of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions for a three-year term of office beginning on
1 January 2004: Mr. Andrzej Abraszewski (Poland),
Mr. Manlan Narcisse Ahounou (Côte d’Ivoire),
Mr. Collen Kelapile (Botswana), Mr. Besley Maycock
(Barbados) and Mr. Murari Raj Sharma (Nepal).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the persons whom I have just mentioned as
members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions?
It was so decided (decision 58/405 B).
(b) Appointment of members of the Committee on
Contributions
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/562)
The President: In paragraph 9 of its report the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the Committee on Contributions for a three-year term
of office beginning on 1 January 2004: Mr. Kenshiro
Akimoto (Japan), Mr. Petru Dumitriu (Romania),
Mr. Haile Selassie Getachew (Ethiopia), Mr. Ihor
Humenny (Ukraine), Mr. David Leis (United States of
America) and Mr. Meshal Al-Mansour (Kuwait).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the persons I have just mentioned as
members of the Committee on Contributions?
It was so decided (decision 58/411).
The President: In paragraph 10 of the same
report the Fifth Committee recommends that the
General Assembly appoint Mr. David Dutton
(Australia) as a member of the Committee on
Contributions for a term of office beginning on 17
December 2003 and ending on 31 December 2004.

A/58/PV.75

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the person I just mentioned as a member of
the Committee on Contributions?
It was so decided (decision 58/411).
(c) Appointment of a member of the Board of
Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/563)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the First President of the Court of
Accounts of France as a member of the Board of
Auditors for a six-year term of office beginning on 1
July 2004.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
appoint the First President of the Court of Accounts of
France as a member of the Board of Auditors?
It was so decided (decision 58/412).
(d) Confirmation of the appointment of members of
the Investments Committee
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/564)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly confirm the appointment by the SecretaryGeneral of the following persons as members of the
Investments Committee for a three-year term of office
beginning on 1 January 2004: Mr. Ahmad Abdullatif
(Saudi Arabia), Mr. Fernando Chico Pardo (Mexico)
and Mr. J. Y. Pillay (Singapore).
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to confirm the appointment of the persons I
just mentioned as members of the Investments
Committee?
It was so decided (decision 58/413).
(e) Appointment of members of the United Nations
Administrative Tribunal
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/58/565)
The President: In paragraph 5 of its report the
Fifth Committee recommends that the General
Assembly appoint the following persons as members of
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal for a four-

year term of office beginning on 1 January 2004:
Mr. Julio Barboza (Argentina) and Mr. Dayendra Sena
Wijewardane (Sri Lanka).
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to appoint the persons I just mentioned as members of
the United Nations Administrative Tribunal?
It was so decided (decision 58/414).
(f) Appointment of the members of the
Consultative Committee of the United Nations
Development Fund for Women
The President: The terms of office of the present
five members of the Consultative Committee,
appointed under General Assembly decision 55/311 of
29 November 2000, expire on 31 December 2003.
Following consultations, I have appointed Canada,
Jordan, Mexico, Niger and Slovenia as members of the
Consultative Committee for a three-year term
beginning on 1 January 2004.
May I consider that the General Assembly takes
note of those appointments?
It was so decided (decision 58/415).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-items (a) to (f) of agenda item 17?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 34
Armed Israeli aggression against the Iraqi nuclear
installations and its grave consequences for the
established international system concerning the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons and international peace and
security
The President: It is my understanding that it
would be desirable to defer consideration of this item
to the fifty-ninth session of the General Assembly.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to defer consideration of this item and to include it in
the provisional agenda of the fifty-ninth session?
It was so decided (decision 58/527).
The President: That concludes our consideration
of agenda item 34.

3

A/58/PV.75

Agenda item 40 (continued)
Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian
and disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance
Draft resolution (A/58/L.47)
(a) Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the
United Nations
Draft resolution (A/58/L.39)
(b) Special economic assistance to individual
countries or regions
Draft resolutions (A/58/L.31/Rev.1, A/58/L.40,
A/58/L.41, A/58/L.42, A/58/L.45 and A/58/L.46)
(c) Strengthening of international cooperation and
coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl
disaster
Draft resolution (A/58/L.44)
(d) Participation of volunteers, “White Helmets”,
in the activities of the United Nations in the
field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
technical cooperation for development
Draft resolution (A/58/L.43)
(e) Assistance to the Palestinian people
Draft resolution (A/58/L.33/Rev.1)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly has already held a debate on agenda item 40
and its sub-items (a) to (e), and that it adopted three
resolutions under this item at its 69th meeting, on 5
December 2003.
I give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce, on behalf of the Group of African
States, draft resolutions A/58/L.31/Rev.1, A/58/L.40,
A/58/L.41 and A/58/L.45. The President respectfully
suggests that the statement of the representative of
South Africa be listened to in silence.

4

Mr. Oosthuizen (South Africa): I have the
honour, as Chairman of the Group of African States for
the month of December, to introduce for consideration
by the General Assembly the following draft
resolutions under sub-item (b) of agenda item 40,
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the
United Nations, including special economic assistance
[to individual countries or regions]”.
I will start with draft resolution A/58/L.31/Rev.1,
entitled “Special assistance for the economic recovery
and reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”. I would like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors of the text:
Luxembourg, Germany, Sweden and Ireland.
That draft resolution is being submitted under
sub-item (b) of agenda item 40, concerning the
strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and
disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special assistance to individual countries or
regions, pursuant to the report of the Secretary-General
contained in document A/58/273, which describes the
assistance to the process of the economic revival and
reconstruction in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo by the United Nations system, as well as by
other development partners, by supporting the
rehabilitation, reconstruction and reunification of the
country.
The signing of the final act of the inter-political
negotiations on 2 April 2003 in South Africa offers
encouraging prospects for a peaceful resolution of the
country’s political crisis, providing the possibility for
some activities of the United Nations system.
As Member States are aware, this draft resolution
has now been introduced for a few years. However,
despite recent positive developments, the overall
situation that necessitated this text during previous
years continues to prevail. The aftermath of armed
conflict, combined with the structural imbalances in the
economy, have kept the majority of the Congolese
people in vulnerable and difficult circumstances,
particularly regarding their humanitarian situation.
Currently, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is not in a position to meet all its challenges in, among
other things, consolidating peace, accelerating
economic activities and fighting poverty in general,
without the valuable support of the international

A/58/PV.75

community. In a nutshell, that is what the draft
resolution is trying to secure. A show of solidarity is
therefore very important. In that regard, the SecretaryGeneral rightfully stated in his report that the
encouraging developments in the national context have
created the prospect of emergence from the crisis, but
that lasting recovery will require the support of all
development partners to assist the Democratic Republic
of the Congo in its efforts to restore peace and security,
bring emergency aid to people in need and embark on
the process of economic recovery and reconstruction.
In that spirit, and as in previous years, I hope that this
draft resolution will be adopted by consensus.
I also have the honour, on behalf of the Group of
African States, to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.40,
entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief and the
economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”. This
draft resolution is sponsored by 84 Member States, and
I take this opportunity to thank them for their support. I
should also like to announce that, since the publication
of the draft resolution, the following countries have
become sponsors: Norway and Ireland.
The draft resolution under consideration
reinforces General Assembly resolution 47/160, of 18
December 1992, and subsequent relevant resolutions,
in particular resolutions 56/106, of 14 December 2001,
and 57/154, of 16 December 2002, calling for the
delivery of emergency humanitarian assistance and the
economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia.
The conditions that prompted the General
Assembly to adopt the resolutions that I just mentioned
continue to persist, and are exasperated by the lack of
peace in many areas of Somalia. Furthermore, the
recurrence of drought in Somalia, with devastating
effects, underlines the urgent need for humanitarian
and relief assistance for Somalia. Currently there is a
major drought in Somalia, with a high livestock
mortality rate of over 80 per cent and the concomitant
high risk of starvation of Somali nomads. The
prevailing drought situation places serious constraints
on the already fragile economy of Somalia. In fact,
there are very serious concerns that the current
situation may result in the collapse of the Somali
economy, which is mainly based on the export of
livestock.
As members are aware, the economy and social
infrastructure of Somalia have been severely damaged
by the long years of civil war. There is an urgent need

for assistance in the rehabilitation of the economic and
social base of Somalia. Such rehabilitation will
facilitate the delivery of much-needed services to the
Somali people, and it could also serve as a peace
dividend and enhance any transition to peace in
Somalia.
Draft resolution A/58/L.40 notes the linkage
between the search for peace and the alleviation of the
humanitarian crisis in Somalia and, in that regard,
welcomes the Secretary-General’s continuous efforts in
the search for peace, and reiterates firm support for the
ongoing peace process for Somalia being led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development. The
draft resolution further commends the United Nations
for its role in developing mechanisms for the
implementation
of
relief,
rehabilitation
and
reconstruction programmes for Somalia, and underlines
the urgent need for putting in place practical measures
aimed at eliminating the consequences of the drought.
It also urges all Somali parties to respect the safety and
security of the personnel of the United Nations and
non-governmental organizations and to guarantee their
complete freedom of movement and safe access, an
important condition for the timely delivery of
humanitarian assistance.
The draft resolution calls on the SecretaryGeneral
to
continue
mobilizing
international
humanitarian,
rehabilitation
and
reconstruction
assistance for Somalia and, in that regard, urges the
international community to continue to contribute to
the United Nations 2004 Consolidated Inter-Agency
Appeal, as well as to the United Nations Trust Fund for
Peace-Building in Somalia. Finally, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to take all necessary
measures for the implementation of the present
resolution and to report to the General Assembly at its
fifty-ninth session.
It is our wish that draft resolution A/58/L.40 be
adopted by consensus.
I also have the honour, on behalf of the Group of
African States as well on behalf of the other sponsors,
to introduce draft resolution A/58/L.41, entitled
“Economic assistance for the reconstruction and
development of Djibouti”, which provides a glimpse of
that country’s need for continued special economic
assistance.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution
notes that Djibouti is included in the list of least

5

A/58/PV.75

developed countries, that its efforts are constrained by
extreme local climatic conditions and droughts that
produce a severe shortage of potable water, all of
which place serious constraints on the fragile
economic, budgetary, social and administrative
structures of the country.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
underscores
Djibouti’s
developmental
and
humanitarian challenges that critically impact on the
country’s aspirations. It also calls for solidarity with
the Government and people of Djibouti, who, among
other difficulties, will face acute water-supply
shortages by the year 2020, as reflected in the relevant
report of the Secretary-General.
Operative paragraph 4 of the draft resolution
notes with satisfaction the implementation of reform
programmes by Djibouti and, in that context, appeals to
Governments, international financial organizations,
specialized
agencies
and
non-governmental
organizations to respond adequately to the financial
and material needs of Djibouti, in line with the poverty
reduction strategy paper. Finally, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts
to mobilize the resources necessary for an effective
programme of financial and technical material
assistance to Djibouti.
There is a clear case of a need for economic
assistance for the reconstruction and development of
Djibouti, and I therefore propose to the Assembly that
the draft resolution be adopted by consensus.
I have the further honour to announce that, since
the publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Germany and Ireland.
Finally, I have the honour to introduce the last
item on my list, namely, draft resolution A/58/L.45,
entitled “Special emergency economic assistance for
the recovery and the development of the Comoros”.
First, allow me to make the following oral
revisions, as provided by the Comorian delegation, the
drafter of the draft resolution, and agreed to by the
other partners.
Operative paragraph 1 should read as follows:
“Welcomes the signing of the Fomboni
Agreement in February 2001, which created
prospects for a peaceful resolution of the
separatist crisis”.

6

The last two operative paragraphs should be
inverted. That is to say, the current operative paragraph
9 should become new operative paragraph 10, and the
current operative paragraph 10 should become new
operative paragraph 9.
The last amendment is the deletion of the words
“the form of” contained in the fourth line of new
operative paragraph 9.
If those oral amendments are in order, I will
continue.
This draft resolution was previously introduced in
the General Assembly in 1996 and 1998.
Faced with the humanitarian needs, all the
internal and external major crisis and the unfavourable
geographic situation of the Comoros, which has been
classified as a least developed country, the Comorian
Government has requested the support of the
international community to assist the Comorian people.
The current draft resolution therefore reflects the
various developments that have negatively affected the
economic and political stability of the country, as well
as the important events that have had a positive effect
on the political stability of the Comoros. In that regard,
it should be noted that, two days from today, the
authorities of the Government of the Union of the
Comoros and the authorities of the autonomous islands
will — with the assistance of South Africa, the
countries of the region and the international
community — sign a political agreement in Moroni
that will end the six-year secessionist movement and
establish all the institutions stipulated by the new
Constitution.
Recognizing also that financial resources
available remain insufficient to deal with the basic
need to ensure the humanitarian, economic and
political recovery of the country, an appeal is made in
the draft resolution that, following the finalization of
the political processes that are currently under way,
financial and technical assistance be provided to the
most affected sectors of the population in order to
achieve reconstruction and sustainable development.
A request is also made to the Secretary-General,
in collaboration with all relevant stakeholders, to
gather relevant information and to assess the needs of
the country and possible assistance from the
international community.

A/58/PV.75

Finally, the draft resolution requests the
Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
its fifty-ninth session on the implementation of the
present draft resolution.
To conclude my introduction of this draft
resolution, I would like to thank all Member States for
their support and cooperation, particularly the
delegations of France, Japan, the United States, the
European Union and the African and Arab Groups, as
well as the Ambassador of Luxembourg, who was the
Chairperson of the informal consultations, and all the
sponsors of draft resolution A/58/L.45, which I
recommend that the General Assembly adopt by
consensus.
Allow me to also announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, Panama has also
become a sponsor of the draft resolution.
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Italy to introduce, on behalf of the
European Union, draft resolutions A/58/L.33/Rev.1 and
A/58/L.47.
Mr. Carnelos (Italy): On behalf of the European
Union and the other sponsors, I have the honour to
introduce the draft resolution entitled “Safety and
security of humanitarian personnel and protection of
United Nations personnel”, which is contained in
document A/58/L.47.
Since the publication of the draft resolution, the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Brazil, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Serbia and Montenegro,
Slovakia and Timor-Leste.
The safety of humanitarian personnel working in
the field is a key issue for the European Union and the
sponsors of the draft resolution. In view of the dangers
and risks to which humanitarian personnel are
increasingly exposed, the international community
must act jointly and decisively to strengthen the
protection of humanitarian personnel and to end the
culture of impunity for those who carry out acts of
violence against them. The atrocious attacks in
Baghdad, in particular, have had a significant impact
on the perception of safety and security, an issue that
must be dealt with promptly and effectively.
Building on the text agreed last year, this draft
resolution addresses that issue. In its preambular part,
the draft resolution expresses our grave concern and
condemns acts of violence in many parts of the world

against humanitarian personnel. It also expresses
profound regret for the deaths of all international and
national humanitarian workers, and recalls the primary
responsibility of States hosting a United Nations
mission for the protection of the personnel working in
the field.
The operative part of the draft resolution urges
States to take the necessary measures to protect
humanitarian personnel and to ensure safe and
unhindered access for such persons. It also calls upon
all States to respect their obligations under the relevant
international instruments, in particular the Convention
on the Safety of United Nations and Associated
Personnel, as well as to consider becoming parties to
that Convention and others dealing with the privileges
and immunities of United Nations staff and to the
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court. The
draft resolution further calls on the Secretary-General
to take the necessary measures in various areas to
enhance the safety and security of United Nations
personnel.
Among the new elements introduced in the draft
resolution, I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention to
the request for the Secretary-General to further
enhance
security
consciousness
within
the
Organization, while welcoming the ongoing initiative
already undertaken in that area. The draft resolution
also contains stronger language on the need to end
impunity, along the same lines of the language utilized
by the Security Council in its resolution 1502 (2003),
of last August.
While stressing the need for increased security,
the draft resolution also underlines the importance of
having the necessary presence of humanitarian and
United Nations workers in crisis situations. The
international community expects humanitarian workers
to be physically present in order for them to fulfil their
mandates. In that regard, the draft resolution invites the
United Nations and other humanitarian organizations to
strengthen their analysis of threats to safety and
security in order to minimize security risks and to
facilitate informed decisions on the maintenance of an
effective presence in the field.
I would like to thank all the delegations that
participated in the negotiations on this draft resolution
and that contributed to the text. Interested delegations
have worked hard with the European Union and last
year’s sponsors in order to update and improve the text

7

A/58/PV.75

while maintaining consensus. The European Union is
pleased that consensus came very close to being
achieved on the new elements introduced in this draft
resolution. At the end of the negotiation process,
yesterday, one delegation announced its objection to
two paragraphs that had already been adopted by
consensus last year and that had not been questioned
during the various readings of the draft resolution this
year. Those paragraphs are also highly relevant to the
draft resolution.
I wish to appeal to all delegations to refrain from
amending the text. The European Union and the
sponsors hope that the draft resolution can be adopted
without a vote, as in past years. That would allow the
General Assembly to send a strong message of support
in this critical area to our personnel working in the
field.
Allow me now to introduce the draft resolution
contained in document A/58/L.33/Rev.1. This is a draft
resolution on assistance to the Palestinian people that
reflects the outcome of constructive consultations with
interested delegations.
In its preambular paragraphs, the draft resolution,
inter alia, expresses great concern at the deterioration
in the living conditions of the Palestinian people
throughout the occupied territories, which constitutes a
mounting humanitarian crisis. It also notes the great
economic and social challenges facing the Palestinian
people and is conscious of the urgent need for
international assistance in that regard. Furthermore, it
stresses the need for the full engagement of the United
Nations in the process of building Palestinian
institutions and providing broad assistance to the
Palestinian people.
A new paragraph has been included in the
preambular part of the draft resolution that welcomes
the Security Council’s unanimous endorsement of the
road map through resolution 1515 (2003), in order to
reflect the most important political development to
occur last year. The new paragraph has also been
introduced to highlight the fact that the road map could
help relaunch the political dialogue towards
comprehensive peace, which would undoubtedly help
to improve the situation of Palestinian refugees.
In its operative paragraphs, the draft resolution
takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General and
his Personal Humanitarian Envoy on the humanitarian
conditions and needs of the Palestinian people.

8

Moreover, it urges Member States, the international
financial institutions of the United Nations system and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to extend economic and social assistance as rapidly and
as generously as possible, including emergency
assistance to counter the impact of the current crisis. In
that regard, the draft resolution calls upon the
international donor community to expedite the delivery
of pledged assistance and stresses the importance of
ensuring the free passage of aid and the free movement
of persons and goods. Finally, the draft resolution
requests the Secretary-General to submit a report to the
General Assembly at its fifty-ninth session containing
an assessment of the assistance received and the needs
that are yet to be met.
It is the hope of the sponsors that the draft
resolution will find broad support. We regret the fact
that the draft resolution will not be adopted by
consensus as in previous years.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Bulgaria, Cuba,
Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, Iceland, Japan, Lithuania,
Malta, Monaco, New Zealand, Norway, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain and Turkey.
Finally, I would like to inform members of an
oral revision to the eleventh preambular paragraph in
order to update the draft resolution vis-à-vis the latest
developments to take place on the issue of assistance to
the Palestinian people. That paragraph should read as
follows:
“Noting the convening of the Ad Hoc
Liaison Committee meeting, held in London on
18 and 19 February 2003 and in Rome on 10
December 2003, to review the state of the
Palestinian economy.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Sweden to introduce draft resolution
A/58/L.39.
Mr. Schori (Sweden): I have the honour to
introduce, on behalf of its sponsors, a draft resolution
on the strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations, which is
contained in document A/58/L.39.
I should like to announce that, since the
publication of the draft resolution before the Assembly,
the following countries have become sponsors:

A/58/PV.75

Belarus, Brazil, Estonia, India, Monaco, the Republic
of Moldova and Turkey.
The text of the draft resolution was discussed
during several informal consultations. Valuable
proposals were made for the improvement of the text,
and agreement was reached on all paragraphs. My
delegation is grateful for the contributions made by
other delegations, and would like to thank the sponsors
and other delegations for the good and constructive
spirit of cooperation and partnership in which the
consultations were held.
The draft resolution begins by recalling landmark
Assembly resolution 46/182, which still guides the
work of the United Nations in the humanitarian field. It
reaffirms the principles of neutrality, humanity and
impartiality in the provision of humanitarian assistance
and recognizes that independence is also an important
guiding principle. It expresses the General Assembly’s
grave concern about, and strongly condemns, acts of
violence against humanitarian personnel and United
Nations and associated personnel, and urges all States
to take the necessary measures to ensure their safety
and security. It also expresses grave concern about the
lack of access to victims of humanitarian emergencies
in many parts of the world and calls upon Governments
and parties in complex humanitarian emergencies to
cooperate fully with the United Nations and other
humanitarian agencies and organizations to ensure the
safe and unhindered access to affected populations. It
also reaffirms the obligations of all States and parties
to an armed conflict to protect civilians in accordance
with international humanitarian law.
The draft resolution also highlights the need to
mobilize adequate levels of financing for emergency
humanitarian assistance, and that adequate assistance
during the transition from relief to development is
important. It encourages donors to improve their
response to humanitarian emergencies through policies
and practices of good donorship and calls upon
relevant United Nations organizations to improve and
increase consistency in the way humanitarian needs are
assessed. It welcomes the appointment of the new
emergency relief coordinator, Under-Secretary-General
Mr. Jan Egeland. It emphasizes that the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) should
benefit from adequate and predictable funding and
stresses the need to increase, in an incremental way, the
share of the budget of OCHA borne by the United
Nations regular budgets.

On a final note, I would like, through you, to
express my gratitude to my colleague, Ambassador
Jean-Marc Hoscheit for his able chairmanship and
guidance during the informal consultations on this
agenda item. My delegation and the other sponsors
hope that the draft resolution contained in document
A/58/L.39 can be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Panama to introduce draft resolution
A/58/L.42.
Ms. Morgan-Moss (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
The delegation of Panama is honoured to submit under
item 40, sub-item (b) of the agenda of the General
Assembly, on behalf of Belize, Costa Rica, El
Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and
Panama,
draft
resolution
A/58/L.42
entitled,
“International assistance to and cooperation with the
Alliance for the Sustainable Development of Central
America”. I am pleased to inform you that since we
introduced this draft resolution, the following countries
have joined the list of sponsors: Afghanistan, Brazil,
Bolivia, Spain, the United States, Ireland, Greece,
Portugal and the Dominican Republic.
The preamble of this draft resolution repeats the
previous resolutions that highlight and acknowledge
the importance of support and cooperation and
international, bilateral and multilateral technical,
financial and economic assistance, in order to maintain
and consolidate peace in Central America after the
armed conflicts and natural disasters that this region
has experienced.
In general, the draft highlights the important
progress that has been made by Central American
countries in consolidating democracy and good
governance, in strengthening civilian Governments,
human rights and the rule of law, as well as in State
and economic reform and regional integration.
Likewise, it also reflects the desire of the people
of Central America to live and prosper in a climate of
peace and solidarity and points out the consolidation of
the Centre for Coordination of the Prevention of
Natural
Disasters
in
Central
America
(CEPREDENAC). In this important document, which
is the result of an acknowledgement of the
vulnerability of our poorest populations, in particular
women and children, we take into account the adoption
of the Strategic Framework for the Reduction of
Vulnerability and Disasters in Central America, which

9

A/58/PV.75

is the main instrument for the development, updating,
adaptation and the integrated management of regional
plans, as well as for conserving water resources and
preventing and controlling forest fires.
We also point out the fact that the Board of
Directors of CEPREDENAC has prepared the Mitch +5
Regional Forum in accordance with the Strategic
Framework for the Reduction of Vulnerability and
Disasters in Central America, as well as the Regional
Programme for Risk Management in Central America
(CEPREDENAC-UNDP).
As on previous occasions, this draft recognizes
the valuable and effective contribution of the bodies,
organizations and programmes of the United Nations
system, of the various Government and nongovernmental entities of the donor community, as well
as the Regional Consultative Group for the
transformation and modernization of Central America.
It also emphasizes the importance of the successful
conclusion in October 2003 of the negotiations
between the European Union and Central America for
an agreement on political dialogue and cooperation
which is designed to strengthen relations between both
regions and to promote Central American integration.
In its operative part, the draft resolution notes
that the significant reduction of non-reimbursable
cooperation, which has been seen in the last two years,
as was pointed out in the Secretary-General’s report,
contained in document A/58/286 on international
assistance to and cooperation with the Alliance for
Sustainable Development of Central America.
Nonetheless, it does mention the renewal, in
December 2002, of a commitment of multilateral and
bilateral development bodies to the Mesoamerican
Biological Corridor, which is taking place, with the
assistance of funds from the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), the Global
Environment Facility through the World Bank, the
United Nations Environment Programme, the InterAmerican Development Bank, the German Agency for
Technical Cooperation and the United States Agency
for International Development.
Furthermore, it also notes the efforts and progress
made in mine clearance in Central America and urges
the bodies of the United Nations system, as well as the
Organization of American States and the international
community, to continue providing the material and
technical and financial support that is required by the

10

Governments of Central America to complete their
mine clearance activities.
Lastly, the draft resolution requests the SecretaryGeneral to submit to the General Assembly, at its
sixtieth session, a report on the implementation of the
current resolution as part of a consolidated report under
the item entitled “The situation in Central America:
progress in fashioning a region of peace, freedom,
democracy and development”, which would contribute
to the efforts to revitalize the General Assembly, since
in its sixtieth session, we will present only one
resolution on the topic of Central America.
For all of those reasons and on behalf of the
sponsors of this draft resolution, we ask that the draft
be adopted by the Assembly.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft
resolution A/58/L.43.
Mr. García Moritán (Argentina) (spoke in
Spanish): The Argentinean delegation is honoured to
submit, on behalf of the sponsors, draft resolution
A/58/L.43 entitled, “Participation of volunteers, ‘White
Helmets’, in the activities of the United Nations in the
field of humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development”, within the framework of
sub-item (d) of agenda item 40 entitled, “Strengthening
of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief
assistance of the United Nations, including special
economic assistance”.
This draft resolution recognizes the value of
national and regional action to place at the disposal of
the United Nations system pre-identified volunteer
corps who are trained, on a standby status, both
through the United Nations Volunteers as well as
through other agencies, in order to provide specialized
human resources and to provide emergency relief as
well as rehabilitation, while preserving the nonpolitical, neutral and impartial character of
humanitarian action. Furthermore, the draft encourages
the operational partners of the United Nations system,
in particular the United Nations Volunteers and the
United Nations Development Programme to use the
experience of the White Helmet volunteers, even in
their response to chronic situations marked by hunger,
malnutrition and poverty, and acknowledges the role
that the White Helmet initiative could play in
disseminating and complying with the decisions
contained in the Millennium Declaration.

A/58/PV.75

Lastly, it requests the Secretary-General, taking
into account the 10 years since the beginning of the
White Helmet initiative, which will conclude in 2004,
and in light of the success of different coordinated
actions with United Nations agencies, to look into
possible steps and modalities to strengthen the
integration of the White Helmets initiative within the
work of the United Nations system by suggesting
appropriate mechanisms and sectors, and to report on
this matter at the sixtieth session of the General
Assembly.
The Argentinian delegation would like to thank
all of the delegations for the attention they have given
to our draft resolution and particularly the sponsors for
their constructive comments and suggestions which
will make it possible to enrich the original proposal
and to come up with a precise and balanced text.
I have the honour to announce that since the
publication of the current draft resolution A/58/L.43,
the following countries have joined the list of sponsors:
Bulgaria, Georgia, Monaco, Bangladesh, Bolivia, the
Dominican Republic, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia. The Argentinian delegation is pleased to
submit today draft resolution A/58/L.43 and trusts that
it can be adopted by consensus.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Russian Federation to introduce
draft resolution A/58/L.44.
Mr. Isakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): On behalf of Belarus, Ukraine and the
Russian Federation, as well as more than 40 other
delegations that have become sponsors, it is my honour
to introduce to the General Assembly a draft resolution
entitled, “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”,
contained in document A/58/L.44.
The draft resolution before the General Assembly
today has been agreed to as a result of a series of
informal consultations which have made it possible to
take into account a number of constructive proposals
made by our partners. We would like to thank all of the
delegations which took part in those discussions. In
particular, we would like to express our gratitude to the
sponsors of the draft resolution, whose number has
grown this year.

We are particularly pleased to report that, after
issuance of the draft resolution, Lithuania, Malta,
Monaco, Estonia and Ethiopia have also become
sponsors. International post-Chernobyl cooperation is
just as important as ever, regardless of the time which
has elapsed since the disaster. The situation in
Chernobyl and in affected regions of the Republic of
Belarus, Ukraine and the Russian Federation remain
difficult. The disaster at the nuclear power plant was
the cause of the core complex’s particular problems in
the areas of health, the use of natural resources and the
economic development of the affected regions, issues
which still are affecting a large number of people,
including children, in the hardest-hit countries. The
draft resolution is aimed at searching for the optimal
effective international response to those problems,
while preserving the important mobilizing and
coordinating role of the United Nations and is, in that
context, aimed at building a new post-Chernobyl
strategy for the United Nations. As is well known, the
strategy adopted in 2002 provides for gradually
switching the focus of interest to overcoming the
consequences of the disaster to the socio-economic
sphere, while in no way detracting from the urgent
nature of the tasks remaining in the field of health,
protection of the environment and scientific research.
In the preamble and operative parts of the draft
resolution, we stress the importance of the efforts of
the hardest-hit countries themselves in overcoming the
consequences of the catastrophe.
At the same time, we welcome practical measures
taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations
coordinator for international economic post-Chernobyl
cooperation, to strengthen coordination of international
efforts in this area and also the work being done in this
area by the agencies in the United Nations system, and
members of the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Chernobyl.
We stress the need for coordinated international
cooperation in studying the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster. As an important new step in this
direction, we welcome the launching, in June 2003, of
the International Chernobyl Research and Information
Network, whose task is to consolidate and coordinate
scientific research in this area and ensure effective
coordination for further scientific work.
We also look favourably on the creation of a
Chernobyl forum under the aegis of the International

11

A/58/PV.75

Atomic Energy Agency and the coordination of its
activity with the Inter-Agency Task Force on
Chernobyl. Questions of post-Chernobyl cooperation
still remain at the centre of attention of the heads of
States of Members States of the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS).
Of great importance in that area is the welcome
reserved by the draft resolution for the decision of the
Council of Heads of States of the CIS, proclaiming 26
April as the international day for commemorating the
victims of radiation accidents and disasters in CIS
countries, and inviting Member States of the United
Nations to observe that day and to carry out
appropriate measures to commemorate the victims of
such accidents and catastrophes, in order to enhance
public awareness of the consequences of radiation
accidents to human health and the environment
throughout the world.
Permit me to draw your attention to the fact that
draft resolution A/58/L.44, for technical reasons,
contains some insignificant departures from the text
agreed upon during the course of consultations.
Particularly, in the penultimate line of operative
paragraph 4, the word “additional” should be replaced
by “adequate”, and in the first line of operative
paragraph 9, the word “international” should be
deleted. We look forward to the draft resolution being
adopted by consensus. We are convinced that it will
serve the further enhancement of effective international
cooperation in overcoming the consequences of the
Chernobyl disaster.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Timor-Leste to introduce draft
resolution A/58/L.46.
Mr. Guterres (Timor-Leste): On behalf of the 56
delegations listed in document A/58/L.46 and the
delegations of Slovakia, Luxembourg, South Africa,
Germany, Malta, Mongolia, Sweden, Dominica, Nepal
and Azerbaijan, who have joined as sponsors, I have
the honour of introducing the draft resolution entitled,
“Assistance for humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and
development for Timor-Leste”.
The draft resolution is in line with previous
resolutions adopted by the General Assembly and takes
into account recent developments and the many
challenges ahead. It acknowledges the ongoing crucial
role of the international community, including Member
States, the United Nations, intergovernmental and non-

12

governmental organizations in support of TimorLeste’s nation-building efforts.
The draft, while acknowledging the progress
made in the transition from relief and rehabilitation to
development, identifies vulnerabilities in the capacity
of the Government of Timor-Leste to address
humanitarian emergencies. In this regard, it welcomes
the continued response of the international community
to the need for aid and assistance provided by the
United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, the World Food Programme and
all other
international
and
non-governmental
organizations during the recent floods and drought.
It especially urges the international community
and the United Nations system with these programmes
to continue to support the Government and the people
of Timor-Leste in addressing its development needs
and challenges, especially in its health infrastructure,
and the judicial, law enforcement and public
administration sectors.
The draft welcomes the growing participation of
the women of Timor-Leste in all aspects of society, and
encourages further efforts to address gender issues. It
welcomes the continuing efforts of the Commission for
Reception, Truth and Reconciliation in facilitating
national reconciliation and the return of refugees to
Timor-Leste. It welcomes the second meeting of the
Joint Ministerial Commission for Bilateral Cooperation
between Indonesia and Timor-Leste, held in Dili in
September 2003, which reiterated a commitment of
both Governments to strengthen their cooperation in
areas of common interest.
Finally, we have a correction to operative
paragraph 3. The last part should read as follows:
“reconciliation and the voluntary return of remaining
refugees, and sustainable development”.
I also would like to announce that the delegations
of Indonesia and France also have joined the list of
sponsors. It is our hope that this draft resolution will be
adopted by consensus, as was the case in previous
years.
The President: Before we proceed further, I
should like to consult the Assembly with a view to
proceeding with the consideration today of the draft
resolution contained in document A/58/L.47. In this
connection, since the draft resolution has only been
circulated today, it would be necessary to waive the

A/58/PV.75

relevant provision of rule 78 of the rules of procedure,
which reads as follows:
“As a general rule, no proposal shall be discussed
or put to the vote at any meeting of the General
Assembly unless copies of it have been circulated
to all delegations not later than the day preceding
the meeting.”
Unless I hear any objections, I shall take it that
the Assembly agrees with this proposal.
It was so decided.
We shall now proceed to consider draft
resolutions A/58/L.31/Rev.1; A/58/L.33/Rev.1, as
orally revised; A/58/L.39; A/58/L.40; A/58/L.41;
A/58/L.42; A/58/L.43; A/58/L.44, as orally corrected;
A/58/L.45, as orally revised; A/58/L.46, as orally
corrected; and A/58/L.47.
Before giving the floor to the speakers in
explanation of vote before the vote, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to 10
minutes and should be made by delegations from their
seats.
Mr. Mekel (Israel): Israel shares the concern of
the international community over the deterioration in
the humanitarian situation in the Middle East region.
Violence and terrorism, by their very nature, entail
hardship for the civilian population. Israeli and
Palestinian civilians have both endured tremendous
pain and suffering as a consequence of the upsurge in
terrorism in the last three years. Bringing this suffering
to an end and providing for the security and prosperity
of all the peoples in the region are critical components
of any successful peace initiative and are therefore a
prime objective of Israeli policy. In this respect, Israel
welcomes the efforts of Member States and of
international agencies to relieve the suffering of
innocent civilians.
Israel has done its utmost to cooperate with
international actors in an effort to facilitate their
humanitarian work aimed at improving the living
conditions of Palestinians in the West Bank and the
Gaza Strip. Despite the unrelenting threat of terrorism
that Israel confronts on a daily basis, we have
consistently tried to permit the flow of food, medicine,
humanitarian assistance and other necessities to the
greatest extent possible.

While Israel has tried, and will continue to try, to
facilitate humanitarian assistance to the greatest extent
possible, Palestinian terrorists have consistently
exploited any Israeli attempt to ease the conditions of
the Palestinian people. Terrorists have viewed
measures intended to increase freedom of movement as
opportunities to infiltrate Israeli cities. They have used
the immunity granted to medical and humanitarian
vehicles to smuggle weapons and explosives. It is clear
from these examples that terrorists pose a threat not
only to those they target, but also to those they hide
behind.
It is therefore entirely disingenuous to suggest, as
certain speakers did in the debate on this item, that
Israeli policies are the source of the hardships facing
the Palestinian people. As is obvious to anyone willing
to make an honest assessment of Palestinian economic
and social development over the past decade, in periods
in which the Palestinian leadership was actively
confronting terrorist organizations and engaging in
serious negotiations with Israel, the living conditions
of the Palestinian people steadily improved. It was only
with the breakdown of the peace process and the
Palestinian resort to a deliberate campaign of terrorism
aimed at the citizens of Israel that conditions began to
decline.
While it is politically useful for the Palestinians
to place the blame for their current predicament solely
on Israel’s shoulders, such allegations will do little to
offer any relief to Palestinian civilians who do not
participate in acts of terror. If the international
community is serious about alleviating the
humanitarian plight of the Palestinian people, the
single most important thing it can do is to insist that
the Palestinian leadership end its campaign of violence,
terror and incitement, as called for in signed
agreements and in the road map.
In previous years, Israel has joined the consensus
on the resolution out of concern for the welfare for all
civilians in the region, including Palestinian civilians.
We have done so despite the fact that the resolution has
used terms in reference to the West Bank and Gaza
Strip that are not consistent with the terms used in the
agreements between the parties and do not reflect, in
Israel’s view, the legal status of the West Bank and
Gaza as disputed territory which, pursuant to signed
agreements, are a matter to be directly negotiated
between the two sides.

13

A/58/PV.75

At the same time, we do not believe that the
attention of the international community should be
devoted solely to the welfare of Palestinian civilians in
this conflict. Israeli citizens, including children
suffering from terrorism, are no less deserving of
concern.
We will abstain this year on the resolution
because it includes new language unrelated to
humanitarian assistance to the Palestinian people,
including outright reference to Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003), which we do not feel is
appropriate or relevant in this context. Our views with
respect to this resolution and to the need to focus on
implementation of the road map and on negotiations as
the agreed basis for resolving the conflict have been
made clear elsewhere. We regret that this Assembly
session has been used, once again, to further a partisan
and political agenda that has sunk to the level of
denying Israel the opportunity to present for a vote a
draft resolution on the welfare of Israeli children, after
an analogous draft resolution on Palestinian children
was adopted. In such a cynical, negative and politicized
atmosphere, Israel, for all its good will, does not feel it
is in a position to support the draft resolution.
Nevertheless, we remain hopeful that we will soon be
able to return to a process of negotiation, which is the
only way to achieve a lasting political settlement for
the benefit of all of the people of the region.
Mr. Cumberbach Miguén (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Our delegation would like to point out that
our joining the consensus for the adoption of draft
resolution A/58/L.39 devoted to strengthening the
coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of
the United Nations does not mean that we endorse, in
the wording of the draft resolution, the use of concepts,
such as the “culture of protection” found in operative
paragraph 12, that still have not been properly
discussed within the framework of the work of the
Organization and that, owing to their vagueness, open
the door to distortion in applying the principles in
Assembly resolution 46/182 of 19 December 1991
referring to the important topic of humanitarian
assistance and to the relevant principles enshrined in
the United Nations Charter.
Mr. Shimamori (Japan): On behalf of the
delegation of Japan, I would like to explain Japan’s
position on draft resolution A/58/L.39 entitled,
“Strengthening of the coordination of emergency
humanitarian assistance of the United Nations”. The

14

Japanese Government has long attached great
importance to effective and efficient coordination of
humanitarian
activities.
Such
coordination
is
indispensable to achieving the optimum outcome with
inherently limited resources.
Japan has therefore been an active supporter of
the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs (OCHA), which plays a key role in
coordinating
United
Nations
agencies,
nongovernmental organizations, and other relevant actors
in humanitarian assistance. We are also sympathetic to
the view that OCHA’s financial base should be
strengthened so that it can fully discharge its expected
roles and responsibilities.
Japan believes one way to achieve such a
strengthened financial base is by broadening the
Office’s donor base, and for this reason it particularly
welcomes preambular paragraph 10, which reflects this
concept. A broadened donor base would, in turn,
contribute to strengthening the solidarity of the
international community on the subject of humanitarian
assistance by providing a sense of ownership to a wider
range of countries.
While sympathetic to OCHA’s need to strengthen
its financial base, Japan holds the firm view that this
should not lead to an increase in the overall United
Nations regular budget. In that context, we are
concerned about operative paragraph 3, which refers to
the Office’s share of the United Nations regular budget.
Agenda item 40 (a) deals with the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance and is not the
appropriate venue to talk about the overall United
Nations regular budget. In this context, we would like
to remind our colleagues that in its first report
(A/58/250), the General Committee drew the attention
of the General Assembly to its resolution 45/248 B of
21 December 1990, in which it expressed concern for
the tendency of its substantive committees and other
intergovernmental bodies to involve themselves in
administrative and budgetary matters. The same
resolution reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the
Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted
with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary
matters.
In order not to prejudge the work of the Fifth
Committee, we should therefore interpret operative
paragraph 3 of the draft resolution as a political
statement that should not lead to concrete budgetary

A/58/PV.75

implications. My delegation would be opposed to this
paragraph if it, in fact, were meant to be more than a
statement of the political will of the Assembly. I should
point out that the Japanese position, namely that
increasing the share of OCHA’s budget borne by the
United Nations regular budget should not lead to an
increase in the latter, was widely shared by many
Member States in the course of discussing the draft
resolution. It is our understanding that operative
paragraph 3 points out the need to increase the regular
budget share of OCHA’s budget in an incremental way
in the normal course of the Secretary-General’s budget
process, and that it does not contradict the Japanese
position. Based on such an understanding, Japan can go
along with the consensus.
Mr. Shalita (Rwanda): My delegation regrets
that, despite Rwanda’s recognition of the need for
special assistance for the economic recovery and
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, my delegation cannot support draft resolution
A/58/L.31/Rev.1.
The draft resolution fails to recognize recent
developments in the peace process in the Great Lakes
region of Central Africa and the improvement of
relations among States in that region. Only last month,
the heads of State of Rwanda, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, Mozambique and South Africa met in
Pretoria, South Africa, and, among other things,
affirmed the view of the Third Party Verification
Mechanism that there were no Rwandan troops present
in the territory of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. There have, in fact, been no Rwandan troops
present in the Democratic Republic of the Congo since
the pullout of Rwandan troops in October 2002. We
therefore find operative paragraphs 5 and 8 of draft
resolution A/58/L.31/Rev.1 unacceptable and not
reflective of the realities on the ground.
On the contrary, Rwanda has been very
supportive of the new Transitional Government in
Kinshasa. That was demonstrated by a visit to Kinshasa
only last month, by the Rwandan Foreign Minister.
Despite our recognition of the need for special
assistance to the people of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, we cannot support this draft resolution,
because what should have been a simple humanitarian
draft resolution has become unnecessarily politicized.
We will, however, continue to render whatever
assistance we can to the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo as we have done in the past, by,

for example, hosting tens of thousands of Congolese
refugees in various parts of Rwanda.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of vote before the vote. The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolutions
A/58/L.31/Rev.1, A/58/L.33/Rev.1, as orally revised,
A/58/L.39,
A/58/L.40,
A/58/L.41,
A/58/L.42,
A/58/L.43, A/58/L.44, as orally corrected, A/58/L.45,
as orally revised, A/58/L.46, as orally corrected, and
A/58/L.47.
We first turn to draft resolution A/58/L.31/Rev. 1
entitled, “Special assistance for the economic recovery
and reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.” Before proceeding to take action, I should like
to announce that, since the introduction of the draft
resolution, the following countries have also become
sponsors of A/58/L.31/Rev.1: Portugal, Lithuania,
Greece, Netherlands, India, France, Austria, Mali,
Italy, Belgium, Egypt, Denmark, Finland, Nigeria and
Senegal.
At this stage, I wish to announce that several
delegations have requested a little more time before we
take action on L.31/Rev.1. We shall revert to this later
in the meeting.
Draft resolution A/58/L.33/Rev.1 is entitled
“Assistance to the Palestinian people” and has been
orally revised.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria,
Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic

15

A/58/PV.75

Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
None
Abstaining:
Israel, Kenya
The draft resolution, as orally revised, was
adopted by 170 votes to none, with 2 abstentions
(resolution 58/113).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.39 is
entitled “Strengthening of the coordination of
emergency humanitarian assistance of the United
Nations”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Eritrea, Timor-Leste
and Nigeria.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.39?

16

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/114).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.40 is
entitled “Assistance for humanitarian relief and the
economic and social rehabilitation of Somalia”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft, the following countries have
become sponsors: Portugal, France and Austria.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.40?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/115).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.41 is
entitled “Economic assistance for the reconstruction
and development of Djibouti”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Portugal, Greece,
Madagascar, Nigeria and Senegal.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.41?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/116).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.42 is
entitled “International assistance to and cooperation
with the Alliance for the Sustainable Development of
Central America”.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Nigeria and Senegal.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.42?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/117).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.43 is
entitled “Participation of volunteers, ‘White Helmets’,
in the activities of the United Nations in the field of
humanitarian relief, rehabilitation and technical
cooperation for development”.

A/58/PV.75

Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Lithuania, Costa
Rica, Madagascar and Nigeria.

countries have become sponsors: the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Cuba, Lithuania,
the Netherlands, France, Mali, Austria, Bolivia,
Estonia, Indonesia, Denmark, Finland, Senegal,
Argentina and Mauritius.

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.43?

May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.46, as orally
corrected?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/118).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.44 is
entitled “Strengthening of international cooperation
and coordination of efforts to study, mitigate and
minimize the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster”
and has been orally corrected.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: India, Latvia and
Nigeria.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.44, as orally
corrected?
The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 58/119).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.45 is
entitled “Special emergency economic assistance for
the recovery and the development of the Comoros”,
and has been orally revised.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following
countries have become sponsors: Greece, Madagascar,
Islamic Republic of Iran and Senegal.
May I take it that it is the wish of the Assembly
to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.45, as orally revised?
The draft resolution, as orally revised, was
adopted (resolution 58/120).
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.46 is
entitled
“Assistance
for
humanitarian
relief,
rehabilitation and development for Timor-Leste” and
has been orally corrected.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft resolution, the following

The draft resolution, as orally corrected, was
adopted (resolution 58/121).
The President: We shall now take action on draft
resolution A/58/L.47.
Ms. Kelley (Director, General Assembly and
Economic and Social Council Affairs Division): I
should like to inform members that under the terms of
operative paragraphs 17 to 20, 26 and 28 of draft
resolution L.47, the Secretary-General is called upon to
strengthen the United Nations security system, both at
Headquarters and in the field.
The implementation of this request would require
a detailed review and development of specific
measures in that respect, including the proposal for
additional resources that may be required. These
proposals will be submitted to the General Assembly
for consideration at its resumed fifty-eighth session in
2004.
The President: Draft resolution A/58/L.47 is
entitled “Safety and security of humanitarian personnel
and protection of United Nations personnel”.
A single separate vote has been requested on the
thirteenth preambular paragraph and on operative
paragraph 10 of draft resolution A/58/L.47.
Are there any objections to this request? There
are none.
I shall first put to the vote the thirteenth
preambular paragraph and operative paragraph 10 of
draft resolution A/58/L.47, on which a separate, single
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,

17

A/58/PV.75

Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina,
Botswana,
Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burundi, Cambodia,
Canada, Central African Republic, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Denmark,
Djibouti,
Dominica,
Dominican
Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala,
Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Latvia,
Lesotho,
Liechtenstein,
Lithuania,
Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia and
Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia, South
Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Yemen, Zambia,
Zimbabwe
Against:
United States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Belarus, India, Lebanon, Sri Lanka,
Thailand, Tunisia, Tuvalu
The thirteenth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 10 of draft resolution
A/48/L.47 were retained by 149 votes to 1, with 8
abstentions.

18

[Subsequently the delegation of Lebanon informed the
Secretariat that it had intended to vote in favour, and
the delegation of the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic informed the Secretariat that it had not
intended to participate in the voting.]
The President: We will now take action on
A/58/L.47 as a whole.
Before proceeding to take action on the draft
resolution, I should like to announce that since the
introduction of the draft, the following countries have
become sponsors: France, Australia, Bolivia and
Monaco.
Ms. Corkery (United States of America): The
United States just wanted to point out at this point that
we do not want to take the resolution as a whole to a
vote. We are going to join the consensus. We will make
our explanation of vote later.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to adopt draft resolution
A/58/L.47 as a whole?
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted
(resolution 58/122).
The President: May we go back to the draft
resolution
A/58/L.31/Rev.1,
entitled
“Special
assistance
for
the
economic
recovery
and
reconstruction of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo”?
A recorded vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bolivia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil,
Brunei
Darussalam,
Bulgaria,
Burundi,
Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa
Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras,

A/58/PV.75

Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libyan
Arab Jamahiriya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States
of), Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia
and Montenegro, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United Republic of
Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Rwanda
The draft resolution was adopted by 169 votes to
1 (resolution 58/123).
The President: I give the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote after the vote on draft resolution
A/58/L.47.
May I remind the delegation that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made
from the delegation’s seat.
Ms. Corkery (United States of America): The
United States appreciates this opportunity to give its
explanation of vote on A/58/L.47 on the safety and
security of humanitarian personnel.
The lack of safe access to many communities
around the globe continues to plague humanitarian
agencies and costs lives, including those of
humanitarian workers. The year 2003 will be a long

and sadly remembered one for the unprovoked and
cowardly attack in Baghdad committed against the staff
of the United Nations on 19 August. We have all seen
the devastating consequences of this tragedy for
individual colleagues and for our community of
nations. Our commitment to the safety and security of
humanitarian workers worldwide is evidenced by
Security Council resolution 1502 (2003). We have also
demonstrated our commitment through the level of
funding provided for humanitarian personnel security
training and field officers over the past several years,
and through our support of the United Nations Security
Coordinator (UNSECOORD).
The last part of the thirteenth preambular
paragraph, which refers to the International Criminal
Court reads,
“... noting the role that the Court could play in
appropriate cases in bringing to justice those
responsible for serious violations of international
humanitarian law”.
In order to make this paragraph acceptable for us, we
had suggested replacing this clause with the following
words from the fifth preambular paragraph of Security
Council resolution 1502 (2003): “... the need for States
to end impunity for such criminal acts”. However, that
amendment was rejected.
Operative paragraph 10 calls upon all States to
consider becoming parties to the Rome Statute of the
International Criminal Court (ICC). We could not
accept that paragraph and sought its deletion, but it was
nevertheless retained in the text.
The United States can only accept neutral, factual
references to the ICC. The thirteenth preambular
paragraph and operating paragraph 10 are not neutral
references. For those reasons, the United States voted
against both the thirteenth preambular paragraph and
operative paragraph 10, but we wish to be very clear
that we joined the consensus on the overall resolution.
The President: We have heard the only speaker
in explanation of vote after adoption. I now give the
floor to the Observer of Palestine to make a statement.
Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): I
wish to express our deep thanks to all delegations that
supported the draft resolution regarding assistance to
the Palestinian people (A/58/L.33/Rev.1), which was
adopted a while ago by more than an overwhelming
majority. My delegation would also like to thank all the

19

A/58/PV.75

sponsors of that important General Assembly draft
resolution. Allow me also to express our gratitude and
appreciation to all the donor countries, United Nations
agencies, regional commissions and non-governmental
organizations, all of which have generously contributed
humanitarian and other forms of assistance to the
Palestinian people in the occupied Palestinian
territories, including East Jerusalem. Our people, who
are living under extremely harsh conditions that
amount to a humanitarian crisis, have deep feelings of
gratitude for all those parties.
At the same time, the bulk of assistance is
delivered essentially as humanitarian assistance, in lieu
of aid for economic development, because of the
horrendous conditions created by the occupying Power
for the Palestinian people. Therefore, the urgent
question is how to change the current conditions in a
way that would allow genuine economic development.
Against this backdrop, the importance of a political
solution pursuant to the road map and Security Council
resolution 1515 (2003), assumes special significance.
During past years, and since the beginning of the
peace process in 1993, that resolution was adopted by
consensus even following changes in the Israeli
Government. With deep regret, we note that this year,
the Israeli delegation chose to break away from the
consensus and to depart from the only positive tradition
regarding the Middle East which has been in effect for
10 years. My delegation views that change with grave
concern, especially in view of the theme of the draft
resolution, namely “Assistance to the Palestinian
people”, and in view of the full international consensus
on that particular issue.
We also note with regret that the Israeli position
carries some extremely dangerous political and legal
connotations, which is worse than its breaking away
from the consensus. This is the reason for the Israeli
position. The Israeli delegation took that stand because
of an added paragraph that welcomes the unanimous
adoption of Security Council resolution 1515 (2003).
Try to imagine this: the Israeli delegation is not
satisfied with expressing its views that reject Security
Council resolutions in violation of the United Nations
Charter and in the context of rejecting the road map,
but also breaks away from the consensus on the
question of assistance to the Palestinian people, for the
very same reason. We believe that such a position
should be strongly condemned and that the Assembly

20

should draw proper lessons from that position, as we
have done on our part.
We had hoped to end our intervention at this
point, but a little while ago, during the explanation of
vote, we listened to another Israeli statement that is
befitting to occupiers, colonialists and racists, a
statement that attempts to convince us that occupation
is good for the people and that the Israeli occupying
Power does not assume any responsibility for the
humanitarian tragedy being endured by the Palestinian
people.
In addition, the Israeli statement included phrases
that would ensure the end of any peace process in the
Middle East. The Israeli delegate claims that the
occupied Palestinian territories are
“disputed
territories”. That statement is an invitation to end the
mutual recognition as well as an invitation to the
Palestinian side to use phrases such as “the Zionist,
racist entity”. Mutual recognition is a matter that
relates to both sides and we will never accept that the
Israeli side would declare its illegal designs within our
territories, which the whole world considers as
occupied territory, without any discussion or
negotiation. If such statements continue, we will find
ourselves obliged to request the General Assembly to
condemn those statements and locutions as constituting
rejection of the Charter and a challenge to international
law and Security Council resolutions. This is quite
apart from the fact that such statements do not befit the
General Assembly or the United Nations system as a
whole.
Allow me in conclusion once again to express our
appreciation to the donor community and to the
General Assembly for providing assistance to our
people, who are living under extremely harsh
conditions.
The President: I would like to take this
opportunity on behalf of the General Assembly to
thank Ambassador Hoscheit of Luxembourg for
undertaking the task of holding consultations and
negotiations on the draft resolutions adopted under
agenda item 40.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 40.

A/58/PV.75

May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of sub-items
(a), (c), (d) and (e) of agenda item 40?
It was so decided.
Agenda item 42 (continued)
Follow-up to the United Nations Year for Cultural
Heritage
Draft resolution (A/58/L.11/Rev.2)
The President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolution
A/58/L.11/Rev.2.
Ms. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): My
delegation would like to make a correction to draft
resolution A/58/L.11/Rev.2. Paragraph 2 should read as
follows.
(spoke in English)
“Takes note with appreciation of the
adoption of the International Convention for the
Safeguarding of the Intangible Cultural Heritage
by the General Conference of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
at its thirty-second session on 17 October 2003.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The Egyptian delegation would like to thank all
the delegations that sponsored the draft resolution;
since the publication of document A/58/L.11/Rev.2, the
following delegations have joined in sponsoring the
draft resolution: Argentina, Cuba, Cyprus, Guatemala,
the Republic of Moldova, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Uruguay.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on draft resolution A/58/L.11/Rev.2 entitled,
“United Nations Year for Cultural Heritage, 2002”, as
orally corrected. May I take it that the Assembly
decides to adopt draft resolution A/58/L.11/Rev.2, as
orally corrected?
Draft resolution A/58/L.11/Rev.2, as orally
corrected, was adopted (resolution 58/124).
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 42?
It was so decided.

Agenda item 45
Launching of global negotiations on international
economic cooperation for development
The President: May it take it that it is the wish of
the Assembly to defer consideration of agenda item 45
and to include it in the provisional agenda of the fiftyninth session?
It was so decided (decision 58/528).
The President: This concludes our consideration
of agenda item 45.
Agenda item 3 (continued)
Credentials of representatives to the fifty-eighth
session of the General Assembly
(b) Report of the Credentials Committee (A/58/625)
Draft resolution (A/58/L.48)
The President: We shall first proceed to consider
the draft resolution recommended by the Credentials
Committee in paragraph 11 of its report (A/58/625).
The Assembly will now take a decision on the
recommendation of the Credentials Committee. The
Credentials Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
58/125).
I give the floor to the representative of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, who has asked to speak in
explanation of position on the resolution just adopted.
Mr. Hamzehei (Islamic Republic of Iran): My
delegation would like to express its reservation on
those parts of the report contained in document
A/58/625 which may be construed as recognition of
Israel.
The President: The General Assembly will now
proceed to consider draft resolution A/58/L.48. I give
the floor to the representative of Malaysia to introduce
the draft resolution.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): My delegation has
the honour to introduce, on behalf of the sponsors, a
draft resolution entitled “Representation of the

21

A/58/PV.75

Occupied Palestinian Territory, including East
Jerusalem”, as contained in document A/58/L.48 dated
15 December 2003. This draft resolution was originally
sponsored by 24 delegations: Algeria, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Comoros, Cuba, Djibouti, Indonesia,
Kuwait, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Malaysia, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Qatar, Saudi
Arabia, Senegal, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan,
Tunisia, the United Arab Emirates, Yemen and
Palestine. In addition, three delegations have joined the
list of sponsors: Brunei Darussalam, Namibia and
Zimbabwe.
The sponsors wish to recall that at their
Thirteenth Summit Conference held in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, last February the heads of State or
Government of the Non-Aligned Movement
“reiterated that Israeli representation in the work
of the General Assembly and international
conferences must be in conformity with
international law and called for ensuring that
Israeli credentials do not cover the [Palestinian]
territories occupied by Israel since 1967,
including East Jerusalem” (A/57/759, annex III,
p. 120)
In addition, the Second Ordinary Session of the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
African Union, held in Maputo, Mozambique, last July,
and the Tenth Session of the Islamic Summit
Conference, held in Putrajaya, Malaysia, last October
endorsed a similar position.
By the terms of this draft resolution, the General
Assembly, having considered the report of the
Credentials Committee (A/58/625), would affirm
“that the Observer delegation of Palestine to the
General Assembly represents the Palestinian
territory occupied by Israel since 1967, including
East Jerusalem, and that the credentials of the
delegation of Israel do not cover that territory.”
(A/58/L.48)
The second preambular paragraph of the draft
resolution would factually note that,
“pending the attainment of membership by
Palestine as a Member State of the United
Nations, the report [of the Credentials
Committee] does not currently address the issue
of the credentials of Palestine, in its capacity as
Observer, to the General Assembly”.

22

The third preambular paragraph of this draft
resolution would express the Assembly’s “hope that the
Palestinian people will soon exercise sovereignty in
their State, Palestine”.
By the fourth preambular paragraph, the General
Assembly would also reaffirm “the principle of the
inadmissibility of the acquisition of territory by force”,
in accordance with the Charter.
This draft resolution does not in any way intend
to challenge the report of the Credentials Committee
(A/58/625), which the General Assembly has just
adopted. As far as the sponsors are concerned, the
report remained unchanged as submitted and as
adopted. In addition, this initiative is not an attempt to
interfere at all with the technical aspects of the
accreditation process, which rightfully falls within the
direct purview of the Credentials Committee.
The sponsors wish to stress that the
representation of Israel to the United Nations,
including to the General Assembly, must be in
conformity with international law. We are all very well
aware that numerous resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council have documented
the fact that the territories in question are indeed under
the illegal occupation of Israel. Therefore, the
credentials of the delegation of Israel do not cover the
Palestinian territory occupied by Israel since 1967,
including East Jerusalem. In addition, the draft
resolution does not in any way intend to challenge
either the presence of the delegation of Israel at the
United Nations or its participation in the General
Assembly. It is only aimed at ensuring that such
participation takes place in accordance with
international law.
The sponsors also wish to stress that the draft
resolution should not in any way be construed as an
attempt by the General Assembly to address territorial
or border disputes. The Charter does not have any
provisions to that effect, and we are fully aware of this.
The issue that is now before us concerns specifically
the question of the representation of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, which
has been occupied by Israel since 1967 through various
means that are in contradiction to the Charter and
international law.
The adoption of this draft resolution would not
have any bearing on the currently stalled efforts on
final status negotiations between Israel and Palestine,

A/58/PV.75

which undeniably would have to be determined by the
parties concerned. Pending the eventual resolution of
such negotiations, one has valid reasons to ask why this
Assembly could not, at the very least, pronounce itself
on the question of the legitimate representation of the
occupied Palestinian territory,
including East
Jerusalem, at the General Assembly at this juncture, or
at any other time for that matter.
Finally, the sponsors are convinced that the
adoption of this draft resolution would send a strong
signal to the Government of Israel of the continued
determination of the Assembly to demand the complete
cessation of illegal annexation and occupation by Israel
of Palestinian territory. The adoption of this draft
resolution would also confirm the fact that the
Observer delegation of Palestine to the United Nations
is the rightful representative of the occupied
Palestinian territory, including East Jerusalem, at the
United Nations, as indicated by its de facto status of
providing such representation. We believe that such a
just cause, premised on a legitimate basis, rightfully
deserves the broadest support from States Members of
the United Nations.
Given the significance of this issue, the sponsors
recognize the necessity of continuing our informal
consultations to secure the broadest agreement of the
membership of this body on the draft resolution.
Bearing that in mind, we do not insist that action be
taken on the draft resolution today. However, it is the
intention of the sponsors to revisit this issue in the
immediate future during the current session of the
General Assembly to enable the Assembly to take
action on this draft resolution.
The President: I shall now call on those
representatives who wish to speak in exercise of the
right of reply. May I remind members that, in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
statements in exercise of the right of reply are limited
to 10 minutes for the first intervention and to five
minutes for the second intervention and should be
made by delegations from their seats.
Mr. Mekel (Israel): Israel would like to express
its firm opposition to the latest attempt by the
Palestinians to further their political campaign against
Israel. In past years, the frequent and annual abuse of
the credentials-approval procedure by the Palestinians
has been roundly rejected by an overwhelming number
of States, but the draft resolution before us today is

even more damaging and far-reaching than any
previous Palestinian initiatives, as it attempts to
delineate Palestinian territory under the pretext of
defining Israel’s credentials. Far from addressing the
legitimate concerns of States, the new draft resolution
not only seeks to attack Israel’s credentials, but
purports to grant rights of territorial representation to
an Observer Mission which has no authority in that
regard. This marks a dangerous effort by the
Palestinian Observer to redefine the mandate of the
Credentials Committee and the role of the Assembly in
the credentials process.
The Palestinian draft resolution attempts to
politicize a wholly technical function of the United
Nations. The process of approving credentials, and the
agenda item under which this takes place, seek to
ensure that credentials submitted comply with the
requirements set forth and the rules of procedure, and
that members of delegations are duly authorized by the
legitimate Government of the sending State.
In the case of Israel, the legitimacy of its
representatives is not in any way in question. This
initiative deals not with the question of individual
credentials, but with territorial issues that have
absolutely no place under this agenda item. The
preambular and operative paragraphs of this draft
resolution are rife with political assertions that seek to
predetermine unilaterally the outcome of a territorial
dispute that the parties have agreed to resolve by
negotiation. Such an abuse of the credentials
procedures to advance partisan initiatives is
unprecedented and wholly inappropriate. The proposed
draft resolution represents a violation of Palestinian
undertakings in the peace process agreements. In both
the Declaration of Principles and the Interim
Agreement signed between Israel and the PLO, it has
been agreed that neither side shall initiate or take any
step that will change the status of the West Bank and
the Gaza Strip, pending the outcome of the permanent
status negotiations, and that the status of those areas
will be preserved during the interim period.
It should also be noted that, under the Interim
Agreement, neither the PLO nor the Palestinian
Council elected within the West Bank and Gaza Strip is
authorized to conduct foreign relations in respect of
those areas, whether in the United Nations or in any
other international forum. The Agreement states
specifically that the Palestinian Council has no powers
or responsibilities in the sphere of foreign relations,

23

A/58/PV.75

while the PLO is only permitted to enter into
agreements for the benefit of the Council in the limited
cases set out in the Agreement.
The designation “Palestine” used within the
United Nations system has no territorial connotation.
General Assembly resolution 43/177 of 15 December
1988, which provided that the designation “Palestine”
should be used in place of the designation “Palestine
Liberation Organization”, emphasized that this was
without prejudice to the observer status and functions
of the Palestine Liberation Organization within the
United Nations system. Not only does the Palestinian
proposal violate Palestinian undertakings and General
Assembly resolutions; it also violates the fundamental
principle of universality in the United Nations. No such
draft resolution has been proposed in relation to any
other State in the United Nations, even though more
than 80 of the States Members of the United Nations
have territorial disputes.
Countenancing political objections to Israel’s
credentials would represent a conspicuous act of
discrimination against a Member State and would
represent a dangerous precedent. Abuse of the
credentials process could open a Pandora’s box with
regard to the many countries involved in territorial
disputes
throughout
the
world.
Already,
a
disproportionate amount of United Nations time and
resources is devoted to Palestinian initiatives. The
attempt to transform every possible aspect of the
General Assembly’s work into a platform for scoring
political points is a practice that should be strongly
discouraged.
This initiative unduly harms the reputation of the
United Nations, diverts our resources from important
substantive issues on the Assembly’s agenda and
contributes nothing to the prospect of peace and
security in the region.
Palestinian actions at the United Nations
contradict all efforts to restart the negotiating process
through the road map. The abuse of the credentials
procedure is but the latest example of how the United
Nations has been hijacked by narrow partisan interests
that destroy its positive role and create dangerous
precedents. As these incidents continue, the voice of
the Assembly on Middle East affairs seizes to have
legitimacy and moral authority because of the tolerance
shown to this kind of tactics.

24

Mr. Al-Kidwa (Palestine): At the outset, we have
to admit that we did not quite understand the nature of
the last statement made by the Israeli representative.
We could not grasp the meaning of the right of reply
because we did not know to what it was intended to
reply. In any case, we believe also that the Israeli
representative was not listening to the points raised in
the introduction of the draft resolution by the
representative of Malaysia. Otherwise, he would not
have mentioned many of his points.
Let me nevertheless clarify a few points. First,
there has been no past initiative similar to the current
one. Secondly, the case in question has nothing to do
with the technical aspects of the accreditation process
nor with the report of the Credentials Committee. It has
nothing to do as well with territorial disputes or border
disputes. It is the case of one State — Israel —
occupying the whole territory of another people — the
Palestinian people — for more than 36 years,
intensively colonizing the land through the illegal
transfer of its nationals and the confiscation of land, in
addition to the annexation of part of the territory it has
occupied. Indeed, this case concerns the fate of
mandated Palestine partitioned by the General
Assembly, the need for the realization of the State of
Palestine and upholding the two-State solution to the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Thirdly, for 36 years Israel has been the only
Member of the United Nations, at least until recently,
determined by the Security Council to be an occupying
Power, as reflected in at least 18 Security Council
resolutions, none of which, in addition to the other 19
applicable resolutions, have been complied with by the
occupying Power. Let me repeat the numbers: 18
Security Council resolutions, plus another 19
applicable resolutions have never been complied with
by the occupying Power.
Fourthly, the Israeli opposition to this proposal is
a clear indication of its real position: its rejection of
ending its occupation of the occupied Palestinian
territory, including East Jerusalem, its rejection of
ceasing and reversing its settlement activities and its
rejection of the existence of an independent sovereign
State of Palestine. In fact, it is a rejection of the vision
of a two-State solution for peace in the Middle East.
Otherwise, Israel would not have difficulty in
accepting the proposed draft resolution — and it
actually might not have been needed in such a case.

A/58/PV.75

Fifthly, the draft resolution has always been
necessary. Yet it has become even more essential in the
light of Israel’s actual construction of an expansionist
wall inside the occupied Palestinian territory, including
East Jerusalem. That wall has involved the confiscation
and destruction of thousands of dunums of Palestinian
land, the destruction of the livelihoods and lives of tens
of thousands of Palestinian civilians and the de facto
annexation of large areas of occupied territory. That
wall is the wall that will end any attempt at peace in
the Middle East. That is another reason why we have to
take action and, hopefully, to adopt the draft resolution.
Finally, we hope that we will deal with this
important matter in the very near future, as indicated
during the introduction of the draft resolution by the
representative of Malaysia on behalf of the 27
sponsors.
The President: In view of the statement made
earlier by the representative of Malaysia on behalf of
the sponsors of draft resolution A/58/L.48, the General
Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 3.

Agenda item 50 (continued)
Integrated and coordinated implementation of and
follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic,
social and related fields
Draft decision (A/58/L.29)
The President: Members will recall that the
Assembly held a debate on this agenda item at its 40th
through 42nd plenary meetings, held on 22 and 23
October 2003.
The Assembly will now take action on draft
decision A/58/L.29, entitled “Commemoration of the
tenth anniversary of the International Conference on
Population and Development”.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
adopt draft decision A/58/L.29?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 58/529).
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 50.
The meeting rose at 5.45 p.m.

25
