UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTIETH

YEAR

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 1860) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption on the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
((I) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of
Lebanon to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/l 1892); . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

(h) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/I 1893). , . . . . . . . . . . *. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

S/PV. 1860

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are ,coniposed of capital letters combined with figures. Mehiion’of
sudhia,isymbol
indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplemwts
of the Ojjicirrl Recwrds c.$ the Secrrrity Cortncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement,,in/. which it appears or in which infor. ‘. ’ L. _ ,,-i’.
mation about it is ‘given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of ‘Rasolr~tiotw trml
Decisiorrs of the Secvrrit.v Corrncil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1860th MEETING
Held in New York on Friday,

5 D&ember

At the itwitcrtion
of the Presi&nt,
Mr. Ghorrcr
(Lehrrnon),
Mr. Ah&l
Meg&
(Egypt),
Mr. Sihcrhi
(Syricm Arcrh Republic)
crnd Mr. Ayl (Pdestine
Libertrtion Orgcrnizcrtion)
took places crt the Security
Cormcil tcrble.

Mr. Ivor RICHARD
(United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).

President:

Present:
The representatives
of the following
States: Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic,.China,
Costa Rica, France, Guyana, Iraq, Italy, Japan, Mauritania, Sweden, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Cameroon, United Republic of
Tanzania and United States of America.

Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. Mr. MOYNIHAN
(United States of America):
Once again we meet to consider the tragedy of violence
and counterviolence
in the Middle
East and the
dilemma which it poses for all of us. Surely no one
can listen to the accounts of actions which involve
the maiming and killing of innocent civilians without
feeling the utmost compassion for those concerned. i
How satisfying it would be if we felt that through
what we say and do here we could break this vicious
circle which has brought so much tragedy to so many
people over the last quarter century. Surely, however,
as responsible members of the international community
charged with serious obligations
under the Charter
of the United Nations we must recognize that we do
not accomplish
this by condemning
isolated acts.
The attacks we are considering today do not occur
in isolation. There is always cause and effect. My
delegation considers that all loss of innocent human
life is reprehensible and we are prepared to deplore
it in strong terms whether it occurs from the acts
of organized groups or from those of Governments.

agenda (S/Agenda/l860)

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
((0 Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent Representative
of Lebanon to the
United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/I 1892)

@I Letter dated 3 December

1975 from the Permanent Representative of Egypt to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/l 1893)

Adoption

1975, at 10.30 a.m.

3. We would remind the Council that organizations
which carried out recent acts of violence against
citizens of Israel have publicly acknowledged their
responsibility for those acts just as the Government of
Israel has acknowledged
its responsibility
for the
attacks which we are now considering. I make these
points not to condone or excuse Israel’s recent massive air attacks, which by their nature could not avoid
making innocent victims. We neither condone nor
excuse them. But we must deal with them in context and not in isolation.

of the agenda

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative of Lebanon to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/11892);
(6) Letter dated 3 December 1975 from the Permanent
Representative
of Egypt to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 1893)

4. So let me be quite clear that the United States
deeply deplores these attacks just as we have consistently deplored those despicable terrorist incidents
which have caused the loss of life in Israel. We are
prepared to support an appropriate resolution which
registers the strongest disapproval by the Council of all
acts of violence in the Middle East, particularly those
which result in the death of innocent civilians, and
which calls on’all parties to refrain from any action
that might endanger peace negotiations.
Certainly
there is nothing all of us would wish to see more than

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the Security Council’s 1859th meeting,
I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives
of Lebanon,
Egypt, the
Syrian Arab Republic and the Palestine Liberation
Organization
(PLO) to participate in the discussion,
without the right to vote.
1

an end to this senseless slaughter. But on reflection
I think most of you would agree that there is only
one way to do this, and that is to bring peace to the
area. That is precisely what my Government has been
devoting its most intensive efforts to trying to do
over the past two years. We remain committed
to
that goal. We will persevere in our efforts to achieve
it. We believe we have made progress, but we
recognize that much remains to be settled.

9. The new attack on the part of Israel in Lebanon
is one further link in the whole chain of Israeli crimes.
It is obviously aimed, inter ah, at exacerbating the
situation in the Middle East and in this way preventing
the achievement of a comprehensive
political settlement of the Middle East conflict. Israel, insolently
and cynically ignoring the will and desire of world
public opinion for peace in the Middle East, and
grossly flouting the well-known
decisions of the
Security Council and the General Assembly,
has
once again reactivated its policy of aggression and
international
piracy. The barbarous acts of Israel and
the attacks of the Israeli aircraft which they calculated on carrying out with impunity against the
peaceful ,towns and villages of Lebanon and the
Palestinian refugee camps, are criminal acts of out-’
and-out aggression on the part of Israel which is trying
in’ vain to intimidate
the Arab peoples-and
especially the Palestinians-and
also to exert pressure on
the United Nations which is discussing the question
of the situation in the Middle East.

5. One of the unhappy features of the situation
we are dealing with today is the disruptive effect
it has on the efforts to move further towards a peace
agreement. The tensions and passions generated by the
recurring cycle of violence are hardly conducive to the
type of atmosphere that will permit the parties concerned to arrive at that accommodation
of opposing
views which is the prerequisite of a peace agreement. Our task is to weigh deliberately
how our
reactions can best advance that reconciliation
of
views. It will not be accomplished
through the
adoption of one-sided resolutions which leaves one
party believing it is the victim of discrimination
and
bias on the part of the United Nations. It will be
facilitated if the Council renders impartial, reasoned
and reasonable judgements
on the issues properly
within its competence. *It is our duty to react in the
most responsible and constructive way that we can
conceive.

10. The Israeli bombings of Palestinian
refugee
camps are acts of premeditated
international
mass
terrorism against the Arab people of Palestine. They
represent a gross crime against peace and mankind.
The latest aggressive acts of Israel represent an overt
challenge to the decisions of the United Nations
and in particular to the numerous resolutions of the
Security Council in which the Council has demanded
that Israel put an end to its military provocation
vis-a-vis Lebanon.

6. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretdon
jhn
Russinn):
First, on behalf
of the delegation of the USSR in the Security Council, I should like to welcome the representatives of
the PLO who have been invited by the Council to
participate fully in its meetings during the present
discussion of the barbarous acts of aggression committed by Israel. The just cause and justice have prevailed,
despite the counter action of those forces which are
hostile to the Palestinian people. The Security Council has followed the noble example of the General
Assembly and has carried out a just and historic
act, for the first time making it possible for representatives of the Palestinians to participate together with
others invited to the meetings of the Council.

11. Today, in discussing this fresh act of intemational piracy perpetrated
by Israel, the Security
Council cannot but recall the long list of aggressive
crimes perpetrated by Israel against Lebanon which
have frequently been condemned by the Council. In
December 1968 [146Uth-1462nd
medings]
the Council
considered the military attack of the armed forces
of Israel on the international civilian airport of Beirut.
At that time Israel was condemned by the Council,
in resolution 262 (1968), for its premeditated military
action. In August 1969 the Council, in resolution 270
(1969), condemned the premeditated
air attack of
Israel on villages in southern Lebanon. In 1970 the
Council three times considered the acts of Israel
against Lebanon. In May, in connexion with the incursion of Israeli armed forces into the territory of
Lebanon,
the Council,
in resolution
279 (1970),
demanded the immediate
withdrawal of all Israeli
armed forces from Lebanese territory. Also in May,
in resolution 280 (1970), the Council condemned Israel
for its premeditated military action against Lebanon.
In September, in connexion with a new incursion.
of Israeli armed forces into the territory of Lebanon,
the Council, in resolution 285 (1970), demanded once
more the complete and immediate withdrawal of all
Israeli armed forces from Lebanese territory.

7. The Council has met for this emergency meeting
in connexion with the new aggression perpetrated by
Israel against Lebanon
and with the barbarous
bombings which Israeli aircraft inflicted upon. the
territory of a neighbouring State and also on the area
where Palestine refugee camps are to be found in
Lebanon.
8. The Council has heard the statements of the
representatives
of Lebanon, Egypt and Syria and
also of the representative of the PLO [1859th meeting],
the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.
Their statements convincingly revealed the nature of
the inhuman and barbaric sorties of Israel’s air pirates
against the peaceful population, women and, children,
in Lebanon and against the Palestinian refugees.

12. However, this shameful list of criminal acts on
the part of the Israeli aggressors does not end there.
2

national
recidivist.
To try to camouflage
and
to seek to justify these misdeeds and the policy of
international terrorism can only be the work of people
who have grown up and who have been brought
up in the conditions of totalitarian gangsterism.

In February of 1972, in connexion with renewed
aggressive actions perpetrated
by Israel against
Lebanon,
the Council
in resolution
313 (1972)
demanded that Israel should immediately
desist and
refrain from any air and ground military action against
Lebanon and forthwith withdraw all its military forces
from Lebanese territory.

17. In considering today the question of this new act
of Israeli aggression, the Council at the same time
should particularly take account of the premeditated,
vicious and provocative
nature of- this new sortie
on the part of the Israeli aggressors. The present
action of Israel is aimed not only at intimidating
and terrorizing the peaceful population of Lebanon,
but also at striking a physical blow against one
of the main parties in the Middle East settlement,
that is against the Arab people of Palestine as
represented by the PLO. It is, moreover, aimed at
undermining the international efforts being made both
outside the United Nations and within it in order
to promote the achievement
of a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East.

13. In June of the same year Israel was once
again condemned by’ the Council in resolution 316
(1972) for its repeated attacks on Lebanese territory
and population.
In July the Council considered the
question of new, aggressive actions on the part of
Israel against Lebanon.
In resolution
317 (1972)
it deplored the fact that the Syrian and Lebanese
military and security personnel abducted by Israeli
armed forces from Lebanese territory on 21 June
1972 had not been released, and demanded that they
be immediately
released.
14. In September
1972, for the fourth time in a
single year, the Security Council considered further
aggressive actions of Israel against Lebanon.
At
that time [/662n(/ /netting]
three members of the
Council put forward a relatively
moderate draft
resolution [S//0784] which contained an appeal for the
immediate cessation of all military operations and a
demand to the parties to exercise the greatest
restraint in the interest of international
peace and
security. Unfortunately,
this extremely modest and
moderate draft resolution was not adopted by the
Council, since one of the permanent members of the
Security Council, the United States, voted against
the draft. In other words it applied the veto and in
that way made it impossible for the Council to take the
necessary steps against the Israeli aggressors. It is
quite obvious that this sort of action is simply giving
support and encouragement
to the aggressor and
inciting it to carry out further lawless acts against
the Arab States and to use force in any form
whatsoever.

18. But however much the Israeli
aggressors
protest, they cannot get around the well-known fact
that a just and durable peace in the Middle East can be
achieved only on the basis of the complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories
occupied in 1967 and only provided that the legitimate
rights of the Arab people of Palestine are taken
care of, including their inalienable
right to create
their own State. Only if these cardinal issues are
settled will it be possible to establish a genuinely
durable peace in the Middle East and to guarantee
sound conditions for the secure existence and development of all States in that region, including Israel.
19. The Israeli
aggressors cannot delete from
history the fact that these principles for a Middle
East settlement
are today universally
recognized;
they are furthermore
recognized
by the United
Nations. In a number of its resolutions, the United
Nations has demanded that the Israeli troops be
withdrawn from all Arab territories occupied in 1967
as one of the fundamental
prerequisites for establishing peace in the Middle East. In a number of
decisions of the United Nations,
the inalienable
rights of the Arab people of Palestine have been
recognized.
In accordance
with United
Nations
decisions, the Palestinian people is a principal party in
the establishment
of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East.

15.. In April of 1973, the Security Council in resolution 332 (1973) condemned the repeated military
attacks conducted by Israel against Lebanon in connexion with the piratical attack of Israeli forces on
the Lebanese capital of Beirut and the town of Sidon,
and called upon Israel to desist forthwith from any
military attacks. In August, the Council in resolution
337 (1973) condemned Israel for violating Lebanon’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity and for the forcible
diversion and seizure by the Israeli air force of a
Lebanese airlines from Lebanon’s air space. In April
1974, the Council in resolution 347 (1974) once again
condemned Israel for its armed attacks on the peaceful villages of Lebanon and its abduction of Lebanese
civilians.

20. In order to settle the Middle East problem,
there is a specially created international
machinery,
and that is the Geneva Peace Conference on the
Middle East. A necessary prerequisite for the success of that Conference is the participation
of the
PLO in its work, from the very moment of its
resumption,
on an equal footing with other participants. Another necessary prerequisite for its success
is the consideration
and working out by the Geneva
Conference of a comprehensive
and fundamental

16. Thus now that we are considering these latest
criminal acts on the part of Israel against Lebanon,
the Security Council cannot forget that here it is dealing
with a State which can only be regarded as an inter3

26. Those who continue to work against and resist
the participation
of the Palestinians in the discussion of the problem of the Middle East are indulging
in a gross and inadmissible
violation
of United
Nations decisions. The PLO has been recognized by
what is virtually the world community,
the United
Nations,
which at present has a membership
of
144 Member States, and no one should be allowed
to overlook this reality.

politically
settlement ‘of the Middle East conflict on
the basis of the relevant resolutions of the United
Nations and first and foremost Security Council
resolution 338 (1973) and General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX).
21. The realization
of these possibilities
is the
purpose of the new initiative
taken by the Soviet
Government, which on 9 November 1975 proposed to
the Government of the United States that the work
of the Geneva Peace Conference be resumed on this
basis.

27. As was stated on 2 December by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Soviet Union, A. Gromyko,
at a dinner in honour of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Kuwait on an official visit to the USSR:

22. The new acts of aggression by Israel against
Lebanon, against the Palestinian refugees, are aimed at
complicating
the situation in the Middle East and
thus at preventing
the convening of the Geneva
Peace Conference and the political settlement of the
Middle East conflict. We cannot fail to notice that
this is also a deliberate act of diversion aimed at
avoiding an over-all settlement of the conflict in the
Middle East by increasing the tension there.

“The ‘convening of the Geneva Conference with
the equal and full participation
of the representatives of the Palestine
Liberation
Organization
provides the most reliable means of considering
the problem of the Middle East.”
28. The Security Council should decisively and
resolutely condemn these new acts of provocation by
Israel and take effective steps to put an end to its
acts of aggression against Lebanon and the Arab
people of Palestine. In this connexion, the Council
should take into account the statement made by
the Co-ordinating
Committee
of the Non-Aligned
Countries
in the United
Nations,
published
on
4 December [S/11897]. That statement expresses the
common feeling of profound indignation and condemnation by world public opinion and all the peoples
of the earth of these barbarous acts of aggression
and terrorism by Israel against Lebanon and the
Arab people of Palestine. The statement also condemns

23. Obvious attempts are being made by Israel to
continue its aggression in order to impede the establishment of a lasting and just peace in the Middle
East. The aggressor and its protectors wish to consolidate the present unjust situation in the Middle
East which runs counter to international
law and the
principles of international
relations. The essence of
this policy, which is opposed to a peaceful settlement, is Israel’s intention to preclude and avoid a
cardinal settlement of the conflict on the basis of the
complete
withdrawal
of Israeli forces from the
occupied Arab territories and to prevent the removal
of the hotbed in the Middle East.

“most strongly the vicious and terrorist Israeli
air raids against defenceless villages and Palestinian
refugee camps, killing many innocent civilians,
women, children and elderly persons.”

24. Attempts are being made to this end to avoid
convening a Geneva Conference on the Middle East
and to substitute for it a number of other proposals.
If we check, we can see that the whole purpose
of these efforts to circumvent the affair is to prevent
the participation
of the Palestinians in the discussion of the Middle
East problem.
In resolutions
passed at the twenty-ninth and thirtieth sessions of
the General Assembly of the United Nations, the PLO
has been acknowledged to be the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people; and the Palestinian
people has been recognized to be an equal party in
all efforts, all international
meetings and bodies concerned with reaching a settlement in the Middle East.

In the statement the Committee, on behalf of the nonaligned countries, asked the Council
“to condemn this act of aggression and to take
steps to restrain Israel from pursuing its policy of
launching attacks on its neighbours and terrorizing
the Palestinian refugees.‘*
That is very well stated; it could not be put better.
29. The imperative
need for the Council to take
decisive steps, as is quite obvious to all, is of fundamental importance. To fail to resist and rebuff those
acts by Israel would be tantamount
not only to
threatening the further and future security of the peaceful populations of neighbouring Arab States but also
to condoning Israel’s desperate efforts at all costs,
even at the cost of the blood of Lebanese and Palestinian women and children, to undermine a Middle
East settlement. To condone such actions by Israel

25. In the decision adopted yesterday, the Security
Council also recognized that organization
as the
legitimate
representative
of the Palestinian people.
Consequently,
for the first time in its 30 years of
existence, the Council heard the naked truth about
the policy of aggression and international
terrorism
which is pursued by Israel directly from the representatives of the Palestinian people, who have suffered
the most from that criminal policy.
4

international
conflicts and disputes should be solved
through dialogue and by peaceful means, without
recourse to the use of force.

would be to assume serious responsibility
for Israel’s
continued
occupation
of Arab territories
and
disregard of the inalienable rights of the Arab people
of Palestine, and for turning the course of events
from a political settlement in t’he Middle East to a
new military
confrontation
which might create a
threat to peace in that area.

34. The situation in the Middle East, as we are all
aware, has gradually improved to the point where a
second disengagement agreement concluded between
Egypt and Israel last September
[s/11818/Add.I]
is now being implemented.
The Security Council has
just extended the mandate of the United Nations
Disengagement
Observer
Force on the Golan
Heights for a further six months [resolvrion 381
(1975)]. A debate in the Council on the question of
the Middle East is scheduled for mid-January.
All
these efforts are being made to create an atmosphere
conducive to a just and lasting settlement. All the
parties concerned, including the PLO, as the representative of the Palestinian people, are thus seeking to
use the negotiating
process for a comprehensive
solution of Middle East problems.

30. As far as the Soviet Union is concerned, it
has always been and will continue to be on the
side of the Arab countries and peoples which have
been the victims of Israeli aggression and “will continue to give them comprehensive assistance and support in their just and heroic struggle for the complete
elimination
and removal of the .consequences of
Israeli aggression.
t
3 I. Mr. SAITO (Japan): Yesterday [/859th lneetin~]
we listened carefully to the statements made by the
representatives of Lebanon, Egypt, the Syrian Arab
Republic and the PLO.

35. However,
the situation
in the area is still
basically unstable and, with the passage of time,
becomes increasingly
dangerous.
It is therefore
imperative that all the parties concerned avoid any
action that might endanger this atmosphere or create
any obstacles to the further reduction of tension.

32. My delegation
strongly condemns the .recent
Israeli air attacks on Palestinian refugee camps in
both the northern and the southern parts of Lebanon
with the resulting
heavy casualties,
irrespective
of the reasons asserted by Israel. Those attacks,
admittedly
preventive
in nature, were outrageous
because they were directed against an innocent
civilian population with a large number of women and
children among the victims and were perpetrated at a
time when hard-won gains in the Middle
East
situation had just been made. The Government
and
people of Japan extend their profound sympathy to
the families of all those innocent victims.

36. My Government
strongly
urges that Israel
desist from any further act of violence, especially
against civilian populations,
and appeals to all the
parties to refrain from any action which might
e,ndanger the momentum
towards a negotiated
settlement.

33. My delegation would like to reaffirm that the
basic position of the Japanese Government is that all

The meeting

5

row

crt 12.40 p.m.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

United Nations
world. Consult
COMMENT

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

publications
may be obtained from bookstores
and distributors
throughout
the
your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Units. Section
des ventes, New York ou Get&e.
KAK

nOXYYllTb

ZlSAAHUfI

OPl-AHH

3A9UH

OKI~E~IiHEHHMX

HAIRMa

HJ~LHRR
Opraunaauuu
Othenmiermbrs
HauuR
MO)KHO xynmb
B KHWXKALIS MaraJHH~X w areurcrrrax
no ncex panouax
rdnpa. Hasoztwre
cnpamof
0B u3rtanurtx
5s
aaruebt KH~IXKHOUI Maraamre
HJIH nmurrre
no anpecy : Opratiu3auu~
06%eAWXeHHbiX
Haqnif.
CeKqHR no npojusxce mnannti.
HbIo-Ffopx
HJIH )f(eHeaa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas es& en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
tcdas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in UnitedNations,

New

York

ooiso

82-61202-December

1983-2,200
