SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/223 1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the ChargC d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Morocco to the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

SIPV.223 1

NOTE
I.

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally‘published
in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2231st MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 13 June 1980, at 5.30 p.m.
President:

Mr. OIe ALGARD (Norway).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh, China, France, German Democratic
Republic, Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philippines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zambia.
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2231)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the Charge
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Morocco to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/ 13969)
The meeting

was called to order at 5.40 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 29 May 1980 from the’ Charge d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of Morocco to
the United Nations addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/13969)

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous
decisions [2225th and 2227th to 2229th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Algeria, Bahrain, Benin,
Botswana, Cuba, Egypt, Ethiopia, Guyana, Mozambique, Nigeria, Romania, Seychelles, -Viet Nam,
Yugoslavia and Zaire to take the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bouzarbia
(Algeria), Mr. Al-Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. Houngavou
. (Benin), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr. Lbpez Paz
(Cuba), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. lbrahim
(Ethiopia), Mr. Sinclair (Guyana), Mr. Lube (Mozambique), Mr. Clark (Nigeria),
Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Ha Van Luu
(Viet
Nam),
Mr.
Komatina
(Yugoslavia)
and
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda (Zaire) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT: Members of the Council have
before them document S/13995, which contains the

text of a draft resolution prepared in the course of
consultations.
3. Mr. McHENRY (United States of America): The
problem of institutionalized racial domination in the
Republic of South Africa and related questions
throughout southern Africa have been priority items
on the agenda of the Council and for many years
have been of concern to the nations located in southern
Africa and throughout that continent. These issues
have been the cause of violence, upheaval and dislocation. They have impeded piogress towards needed
development in southern Africa. They have also taken
a disproportionate amount of the time of the Organization .
They have also been the cause for hope as, one
by one, a11of these questions except those of South
Africa and Namibia have been resolved in favour
of full political participation of all citizens in governing
themselves. And the Namibian situation is, we hope,
on the brink of a resolution that will transfer political
power to a11of the residents of that Territory without
furtter violence. That would leave the troubling
question posed by South Africa’s policy of apartheid.
4.

5. South Africa faces a time for critical choices. It
must choose one of two paths to deal with the legitimate
aspirations of the majority of its population to the full
civil, political and human rights that are the birthright
of a11men. South Africa can choose the path of peaceful settlement of the dispute between the white minority
and the non-white majority. South Africa can recognize
that its people will not be denied what they ask and
what is in fact already theirs and make the courageous
decision to join them in an historic enterprise: the
search for the best, the least disruptive, the most
meaningful way to bring about the inevitable changes
in‘its national way of life.
6. No one can pretend that it will be easy for such a
society to bridge the gulf between apartheid and full
political participation. Yet we know that men of good
will can build such a bridge through negotiation and
compromise. We know that in other difficult situations
it has been possible to hammer out that measure*
of political consensus which provides the basis of
acceptable government for all. We have only to
look at the example of Zimbabwe. Despite the bitterness born of bigotry and racial injustice, the bloody
heritage of civil war, and the understandable fears of
both blacks and whites about the real possibilities

.

the country’s economic and social problems and have
recommended changes. The Government has instituted
some reforms during the last year.

for peaceful coexistence, a new country was born in
peace in Zimbabwe. We have not yet reached a final
settlement in Namibia. That situation too, I believe,
demonstrates the advantages of peaceful as opposed to
violent settlement. South Africa can take that course,
the course of peaceful settlement.

10. We do not wish to denigrate the importance of
those reforms, but similarly we cannot delude ourselves. Because those reforms have not gone to the
heart of the matter, they will never be sufficient.
South Africa’s majority is not wrong or unreasonable
in asking for more fundamental changes so that they
may be full political participants in the government of
a society that is not stratified along racial lines. They
seek the recognition of their rights as human beings.
They will be satisfied with nothing less. And, unless
South Africa is immune to the historical forces that
have triumphed in every other comer of the world,
the majority in South Africa will in the end obtain
what it seeks. We cannot predict the time when that
will happen, but I believe that we all know that it
will.

7. There is another course: the course of resistance
to change by the South African Government. We all
know too well what happens on this path. The oppressed, who are effectively disenfranchised and with
no peaceful means of redress, lash out in frustration
in the only way open to them-by violence. Violence
in turn breeds repression on the part of the authorities.
Repression leads to more and greater violence in a cycle
from which there seems to be no escape. We have seen
this phenomenon in South Africa time and time
again- in Sharpeville, in the exile and imprisoning of
moderate popular leaders, in Soweto, in the senseless
death of Steve Biko. This week, we see it in the
protests of schoolchildren and the officially sanctioned
response to their protests. We see it also in the
sabotage of the SASOL oil refinery. Such acts of
violence or repression can only harm the prospects
for a peaceful settlement and can only discourage
the moderate leaders and elements that seek to promote
peaceful change.

11. The pursuit of peaceful change, were that the
course chosen, wouId be a long process, one beset
with difficulties. There would no doubt be setbacks,
which would tempt the Government of South Africa
to swerve from a progressive course and could tempt
some to resort to violence in order to speed up the
painful process of negotiation. But we know from the
example of Zimbabwe’s 14long years of armed struggle
that intransigence will not hasten peace; it will hasten
violence. Only negotiation holds out the prospect of
finding the best way to achieve change.

8. The course adopted by the Government of South
Africa during the coming months and years will have
consequences not only for that country but for the
future of all of southern Africa. South Africa has mttch
to contribute to its region, if it and its neighbours
can begin to put behind them the animosity that
separates them because of the policy of apartheid.
Long obsessed with throwing off their own colonial
yokes, the southern African States are now beginning
a co-operative effort to address the tremendous
economic and sociai problems they face. As a
developed country with a relatively advanced
economy, South Africa could make a significant contribution to that effort, and in the process South
Africa could make progress towards resolving its own
doubts and fears about the process of change, since
development and prosperity would doubtless enhance
the prospects of peace and stability in the entire region.
If, on the other hand, South Africa rejects change,
and if friction and violence increase, the other States
of the region will suffer additional economic setbacks,
and their paths to development and stability will be
further impeded. Continuing instability will not
enhance South Africa’s willingness to come to some
accommodation with its majority.

12. Now is the time for South Africa to move
towards fundamental social and political change
-change that will come about because of, or in spite
of, the course it chooses. At this moment, the Govemment of South Africa, with its strong economy and
formidabIe defences, shouId have the confidence and
the strength to commit itself to the necessary reforms.
13. Those of us who are not citizens of South Africa
cannot dictate the form of the final solution of this
dilemma. As the front-line States declared in the
Lusaka Manifesto,’ all of us stand ready to extend
whatever assistance the South African Government
and people need or desire if the goal of fulI participatory government can be agreed upon. But we
know that no progress will be made until all South
Africans-black, white and Coloured-come together
and find a level of political accommodation that
will provide the basis for a just and representative
government.
14. This means that South Africa must avail itself of
the talents of all its people. Instead of harassing a
Desmond Tutu, South Africa must call upon him.
Instead of imprisoning political leaders on Robben
Island, South Africa must call upon them to represent
their people in the process of change. Meaningful
discussions are seriously jeopardized so long as those
whom the people themselves would choose as their

9. I do not believe that all of South Africa is deaf
to the plea for change in that country. Nor are many
of the people of South Africa ignorant of the inevitability of change. There is in my judgement considerable debate within the South African Govemment and among the majority of whites in South
Africa about what changes should be made and how to
make them. Government commissions have studied
2

representatives are forcibly
ticipating.

prevented from par-

20. That having been said, the United States will,
however, support the draft resolution before us.

15. We call upon South Africa to make a gesture of
good faith by freeing, recalhng and dealing with those
whose participation is essential to the country’s
peaceful and stable future. Such a gesture would
warrant an equivalent response, in the form of cooperation instead of violent resistance. Taken together,
these two gestures would help create an atmosphere
in which serious negotiations between all of the
country’s people could begin.

21. Mr.
FUTSCHER
PEREIRA
(Portugal):
Mr. President, it is particularly gratifying for us to
see you, the representative of a country with which
Portugal maintains the closest and most cordial relations, presiding over our deliberations during the
month of June. As testimony to the spirit of friendship between our two countries, and with a view to
strengthening further the understanding of our two
peoples, the President of the Republic of Portugal
has just paid an official visit to Norway, returning the
visit His Majesty King Olav made to Portugal two
years ago. Your dedication, together with your wellknown diplomatic skills and wisdom, gives us every
assurance that the work of the Council during the
current month could not be in better hands.

16. And now let me say a word about the role and
responsibility of the Council at this moment in this
long-standing dispute. We, too, are at a crossroads.
We can demonstrate a helpful attitude by offering our
good offices, and those of the Secretary-General, as
mediators and facilitators of a solution. Or we can be
content to add to the long litany of resolutions, immoderate in tone, which do not materially advance
the chances for settlement, and may in fact affect them
adversely. We can be as much a prisoner of our
history as South Africa has thus far been of its past.
I suggest that the former course would be more
propitious at this crucial time.
17. I should now like to speak about the draft resolution before us.
18. Many members of the Council are aware of the
point of view which I expressed during consultations
and which I believe I have just expressed in these
remarks. I have argued that much of the language of
the draft resolution repeats earlier pronouncements
of the Council, and I have urged that now is the time
for the Council to move away from what has become
a debasement of language not only on this question
but on others, including the use of adjectives which
I do not believe help our cause. I have also suggested,
before and now, a new approach. I wish to note that
the draft resolution, which we believe is clearly under
Chapter VI of the Charter, does not fit that new
approach in its entirety-particularly
the wording of
paragraph 7 (b), which I believe is not appropriately
drawn.
19. In discussions with several of our colleagues,
I have had an opportunity to present some of the ideas
of an approach which I believe would be more appropriate than that taken in the draft resolution before us.
I must say that I am grateful to them for including
some of those ideas in the present draft resolution.
We do not, however, believe that it goes as far as
we should like it to go. Therefore, I am today sending
to the President of the Council a letter [S/13998]
containing the text of some of the suggestions that we
have made in the past, because I want to make sure
that all the members of the Council are aware of the
point of view which my dear friend Ambassador
Lusaka has heard-perhaps ad naNseam-over the
past several days.

22. I should like to pay a tribute also to our President
for the month of May, Ambassador Id6 Oumarou of
the Niger, whose great ability and keen perception
of the problems brought before the Council not only
were admired by all of us but were extremely helpful
in the discharge of the Council’s responsibilities,
23. The policy and practice of apartheid in South
Africa is one of the most serious problems facing the
conscience of the international community, for it is
a permanent affront to the dignity of man.
24. Notwithstanding all its efforts, the United
Nations has not been able to bring an end to the unjust
situation in which the majority of the population of
that country lives, deprived of some of the most
elementary human rights.
25. We would have wished that statements like the
one made recently by Pieter Koomhof-that “we will
not rest until racial discrimination has disappeared
from the statute books and everyday life in South
Africa” -would soon reflect the reality of the situation
in that country. The people of South Africa and the
international community as a whole have been waiting
far too long, hoping to see those changes brought
about.
The system of apartheid, far from achieving the
results foreseen by its mentors, has only planted the
seed of dissension and incomprehension between the
different segments of the population. And the acts of
repression against those who protest against this
iniquitous system have only led to a further increase
in the dissatisfaction, unrest and political awareness of
the oppressed groups.

26.

27. The debate that we are now holding on the question of South Africa should constitute a very serious
reminder to those who are opposed to the adoption of
sweeping reforms in the institutional structure of that
country. Time is running out, and so is the patience
of the victims of this inhuman system. Political repres-

$on, if continued, can only give rise to more violence
and bloodshed, with unforeseen consequences. The
South African leaders should therefore ponder the
lessons of the past, both in their country and abroad.
The improvement of the economic conditions of the
majority of the population cannot and will not, by
itself, alter the situation or bring about that Iongdesired peace and understanding between all the ethnic
groups in South Africa. This can take place only
through the restoration of human dignity, to which
apartheid is a direct affront.

the full participation of all peoples and groups in the
political process; or continuing conflict, the end result
of which might be no less than a racial war.
34. The Chairman of the Special Committee against
Ambassador Clark of Nigeria, said in his
important statement before the Council on 4 June that
“Apartheid cannot be reformed. It must be abolished”.
12225th meting,
para. 40.1 I concur fully with that
assessment.There is no possible third road to resolving
the inherent present contradictions in South African
society. Obviously, that makes the choice before the
South African authorities all the more important.

Apartheid,

28. The Council has in the past addressed appeals to
the Government of Pretoria for the release of political
and other detainees, but some of those appeals have
regrettably gone unheeded. Today my delegation
reiterates the appeal on behalf of Nelson Mandela,
Bishop Desmond Tutu and others recently imprisoned,
who, we hope, will soon be able to join Victor Matlou
in liberty.

35. The new unrest has already had its casualties.
The ongoing student revolt, combined with workers’
strikes, is not a mere symptom of political and social
unrest. It is a serious warning of impending disaster,
unless the deepening wounds inflicted on the majority
of South Africa’s population are healed.

29. Portugal has always rejected apartheid, as a
system comp!etely foreign to our way of thinking and
our way of being, and our commitment to its eradication remains unwavering. In the present context, how.ever, we should have preferred that the Council take
into consideration some tentative but apparently
positive steps that seem to have been made by the
South African Government. Today in southern Africa
there has been a radical change and the Portuguese
Government feels that this would be the appropriate
time’for the world community and the Government in
Pretoria to explore new possibilities that might lead to
a peaceful evolution of the present situation in South
Africa.

36. The Norwegian Government was shocked to
learn of the arrest last month of Bishop Desmond Tutu
and some SO other white and black South African
church leaders. We are equally disturbed at the
prospect of their being put on trial. We urge the South
African authorities to refrain from taking any further
legal action against those representatives of South
Africa’s churches.
37. It is important that a pohcy of national reconciliation be adopted and implemented in South Africa. Such
a policy ought to start with the release of political
prisoners. Norway, for its part, wishes to give full
support to the present campaign, which was started
inside South Africa, to release Nelson Mandela and
other political prisoners in. that country. Such a move
would be a first and essential step towards starting a
dialogue and charting a new course.

30. But let there be no doubt in the minds of those
who defend the maintenance of the status quo in that
country. They cannot buy time indefinitely by using
dilatory tactics. The international community is fully
alert and will throw its full weight on the side of the
oppressed peoples of South Africa if the Pretoria
Government fails to respond favourably to the appeals
now addressed to them.

32. During the last few months, increasing political
and social unrest has again focused world attention on
the apartheid system in South Africa. The situation
in that country is clearly becoming more explosive.
That is the message coming out of South Africa these
days. The tragic memories of Sharpeville and Soweto
are again being brought back to us. Recent developments and a major turning point in the history of
southern Africa-the newly won independence of
Zimbabwe-point to an inescapable fact: South Africa
can no longer avoid a crucial choice regarding future
race relations in that country.

38. In 1963 an international group of experts, established at the request of the Security Council and
chaired by Mrs. Alva Myrdal, proposed the formation
of a national convention fully representative of all
the people of South Africa. I have noted that this
proposal has again been revived. On this occasion
I want, on behalf of my Government, to associate
myself with the appeals for such a national convention made by Bishop Tutu, the editor Percy
Qoboza, and recently, on 4 June, by the Chairman of
the Special Committee against Apartheid, Ambassador
Clark. The tasks of that convention will be formidable.
No more eloquent expression has ever been given of
those tasks than the words of Chief Albert Luthuli,
in his famous lecture after his receipt of the Nobel
Peace Prize in Oslo in December of 1961, in which
he demanded that full political, civil, economic,
social and cultural rights be given every citizen of
South Africa, irrespective of race.

33. We are unable to see more than two possibilities:
either a firm commitment to political change, ensuring

39. Those are the challenges that the South African
authorities will have to meet urgently, constructively

31. ‘The PRESIDENT: I shall now make a statement
in my capacity as the representative of NORWAY.

4
-.
t

46. It follows that we agree withmany of the provisions of the resolution in front of us. Nevertheless,
we believe that the resolution as a whole is not the
right response to the current dangers in South Africa.
The resolution ignores important facts. Times are
changing fast in the area. Since we last debated the
situation in South Africa, Zimbabwe has achieved
its independence. Progress, however fragile, is being
made in the negotiations on Namibia, to which ail
parties are still committed. There are also signs of
progress in South Africa itself, plain for all to see. There
is an important debate going on in South Africa,
evidence of a growing recognition within the white
population that change must come.

and realistically. Should they fail to do so, it is difficult
to see how South Africa can avoid a vast tragedy.
Continued oppression will necessarily foster further
violence. The international community cannot be
expected to remain silent and passive in the face of
such developments.
40. I shall now resume my functions as PRESIDENT
of the Security Council.
41. It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote now on the draft resolution
which is before it. Since there is no objection, I shall
put the draft resolution contained in document S/13995
to the vote.

47. There is no recognition in this resolution of the
fact that the South African authorities have, during
the recent unrest, shown more restraint than on occasions in the past. It is not right to compare recent
events with the Soweto riots of 1976 or the Sharpevilie
shootings. Many speakers in this debate have
exaggerated the actions of the South African authorities during the present troubles. The resolution does
not acknowledge these positive developments: it
reiterates the rhetoric of old resolutions. The Council
is in danger of imprisoning itself in its own past, of
devaluing its own language. In saying this I stress again
that we do not condone what has been done-how
could we ever condone the shooting of a schooichiid?-but if the Council is to transmit the right
message to South Africa, it must not destroy its
credibility by inaccuracy and exaggeration.

A vote was taken by show of hands.
The draft resulution
(resolution 413 (1980)).

was

adopted

unanimously

42. The PRESIDENT: I shall now call on those
members of the Council who wish to make statements
following the voting.
43. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): It
is with some reluctance that I have just voted in favour
of the resolution before us. However, after the most
careful consideration, we were prepared to support
the draft resolution because we agree with the important proposition which emerges clearly throughout the text-namely, that the fundamental problems
of South Africa derive from the system of apartheid.

48. Indeed, in our view, an important opportunity
has been missed to send a clear and reasoned message
to the Government and the people of South Africa.
The message is that southern Africa is changing fast
and it is no longer possible to put off indefinitely
change in South Africa itself. The settlement in
Zimbabwe shows that peaceful change is still feasible.
Failure to make progress and to be seen to make
progress towards eliminating apartheid means an
inevitable cycle of oppression and violence which will
involve South Africa in a highly dangerous regional
confrontation, with the further dangers of outside
interference; it will isolate South Africa further and
deny ‘to the whole region the potential of economic
co-operation and the enormous economic and social
benefits deriving from it.

44. The United Kingdom Government’s views on
apartheid are perfectly clear. I quote from a statement
to Parliament by the Prime Minister, Mrs. Margaret
Thatcher:
“The policy of apartheid, with its emphasis on
separating peoples rather than bringing them
together and ail the harshness required to impose
it on the South African population, is wholly
unacceptable.”
It is the system of apartheid that is at the root
of the dangerous events of recent days. We are disturbed at the large number of people detained during
the continuing schools boycott under legislation which
does not provide for them -to be charged with any
specific offence. We are equally concerned over the
arrest of 53 clergymen, at least two of whom are British
subjects, during a peaceful protest march on I5 May,
and over the nature of the charges laid against them.
My Government has already drawn the South African
authorities* attention to public concern over the withdrawal of Bishop Tutu’s passport. Most particularly
distressing was the shooting of two young people on
28 May, and we are also disturbed by the attacks on
oil installations on the night of 1 June. We understand
very well the emotions that these events have aroused
and the fears for the future expressed by many deiegations in this debate.
45.

49. Several speakers have mentioned the case of
Mr. Mandela and their concern is reflected in the
resolution. We are sure the Government of South
Africa recognizes very well what an excellent effect
the release of Mr. Mandela would have on international
opinion. it would be widely welcomed in the United
Kingdom and elsewhere and would be symbolic of a
desire for reconciliation in South Africa.
50. Before concluding, I should like to make two
specific comments on the resolution. We do not accept
that the reference in the seventh preambuiar paragraph
5

and in paragraph 4 to the recognition of the legitimacy
of the struggle relates to armed struggle or extends
to the use of force, and we do not regard paragraph 11
as prejudging the question of whether the arms embargo
should be extended.
51. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interpretarion from
French): Unfortunately, there has already been a long
list of meetings of the Council called in response to
events in southern Africa, be it the situation in South
Africa or the complaints of South Africa’s neighbours
over that country’s armed incursions into their
territory.

policy of apartheid. As my predecessor said here four
years ago, it is inadmissible-it is incomprehensiblethat a social system should measure the fundamental
freedoms of the individual according to ethnic considerations. It is an injustice; it is also a major
political error. Who would deny that apartheid is the
cause of the events that have led to our meeting?
We would express the hope that the demonstrations of
recent days will open the eyes of those responsible for
them.
58. It is dramatically symbolic that schoolchildren
have died because they called for equal opportunity
in the school system. Flagrant inequality and the
scorn for human dignity will inevitably lead to
violence. That violence will spare no one; it will come
to an end only when its causes, and not merely its
effects are dealt with.

52. When the press agencies announced scarcely
more than a month ago the launching of a strike
movement by high-school students in the Cape
Province protesting racial discrimination in teaching,
no one misunderstood the meaning of that demonstration. When, on 28 May, we learned of the death of two
young demonstrators, each of us was immediately
reminded of the events in Soweto. The disturbances
which then beset South Africa had been unleashed by
similar protests against the teaching system.

59. In southern Africa there has been more change
during the last five months than in the past five years.
Independence in Zimbabwe has rekindled hope.
Namibia in turn is impatiently waiting for the day
when it will live in a democratic system. In South
Africa itself, amendments to the Constitution have
been announced by the Government, and we are not
indifferent to them. In this connection, I should like
to recall the necessity for dialogue. The proposed
reforms will be effective only if they take into consideration the legitimate aspirations of all the communities. They will succeed only if they are accepted
rather than imposed.

53. South Africa is today caught up in another cycle
of strikes, demonstrations and protests. The Govemment has announced that it will ensure respect for
order; it has been issuing more and more warnings.
However, the movement has spread to all provinces,
reaching the high schools reserved to the Coloureds,
to Indians and Africans as well as the black universities, one of the best known of which-Fort Harehas been closed. Many arrests have been made,
involving journalists, the clergy, students and political
leaders from the African communities. Tension was
heightened on 1 June by the serious damage done to
industrial installations as a result of sabotage.

60. I come now to the resolution just adopted.
61. My delegation regrets that only some of the suggestions of the Western States members of the Council
have been accepted by the sponsors. We believe, in
particular, that paragraphs 1 and 7 could have been
drafted differently without impairing the meaning. We
should like to point out that, in the French version at
least, the terms utilized in the preamble and operative
parts, to describe the attitude of South Africa with
regard to Security Council and General Assembly
resolutions are neither harmonious nor appropriate.
Moreover, my delegation notes that the wording of
paragraph 11 relating to the embargo remains ambiguous. The expression “reinforce and make it more
comprehensive” must be understood as meaning. that
the embargo must be fully implemented and that all
loopholes must be closed. We understand that the
Committee established by resolution 421 (1977) will
quickly have to recommend to the Council measures
to secure the full implementation of resolution 418
(1977). Any different interpretation would run counter
to the mandate entrusted to the Committee in resolution 421 (1977). I wish to recall that France, for its
part, is strictly observing the afms embargo and that it
is ready to consider in a constructive spirit any measure aimed at enhancing the implementation of the
embargo.

54. There is no need to dwell on the gravity of these
events. The escalation of violence, if not halted, may
lead to extremely dangerous situations. We hope that
the necessary measures for pacification will be adopted
in time.
55. Preventive arrests, in particular, will not settle
the problem. Freedom of expression, a fundamental
right, is inseparable from any kind of democracy.
Once again we speak out against the consistent
method of gagging those who call for justice, rather
than heeding their cries.
56. One of the best-known adversaries of apartheid,
Mr. Nelson Mandela, a former student at the University of Fort Hare, has been held for more than
16 years on Robben Island, and his life is in peril. His
warnings cannot be ignored when he asks: “How many
more Sharpevilles will there be? How many Sharpevilles can this country sustain without violence and
terror becoming the order of the day?”
57. I shall not recall in detail the fundamental opposition of France and of the entire French people to the
6

62. With those clarifications, my delegation considers that the resolution that has just been adopted
clearly demonstrates the elements of the situation
prevailing in South Africa. In particular, my country
cannot but join in the universal condemnation of the
unjustifiable system ofapartheid and urgently requests
the South African Government to put anend to violence
and racial discrimination, Indeed, I should like to
appeal to the South African leadership not to allow
themselves to be drawn into a tragic chain of events
whose outcome is but too easily predictable and to
look clearly at the future.
63. South Africa has been endowed by nature with
resources which could allow all of its population fully
to benefit from the advantages of twentieth-century
civilization and to produce all that it requires. We
hope that this country will think more about the
blessings of unity and that it will devote all its energies
to its social, cultural and economic development and
to becoming a world in which everyone can share in
peace and dignity, without distinction as to race,
colour or origin, the fruits of a prosperity resulting
from the work of all.
64. Mr. KHARLAMOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretationfranz
Russian): The current
discussion on the question of the situation in South
Africa has amply demonstrated the fact that the
national liberation struggle of the people of that country against the criminal apartheid regime enjoys the
broadest possible support from the international community .
65. The Soviet delegation supported the draft resolution submitted to the Council, because it contains a

strong condemnation of the racist tigime of South
Africa and a demand for the implementation of a
number of measures designed to eliminate the apartheid regime, which poses a threat to international
peace and security.
66. At the sami: time, we cannot but note with regret
that the resolution adopted does not contain effective
vigorous measures which, if they were put into
practice, would exert effective pressure on the rulers
of South Africa with a view to the elimination of the
shameful policy and practice of apartheid in southern
Africa. It cannot be overlooked that this is the consequence of the position of those members of the
Council which, in essence, have striven to preserve
the racist regime of Pretoria because of their own
selfish interests on the African continent.
67. The Soviet delegation would like to state once
again that it is profoundly convinced of the need for
the immediate adoption, with regard to the racist
n?gime of Pretoria, of the most decisive and effective
measures as provided for in Chapter VII of the Charter.
68. The PRESIDENT: There are no more speakers
on the list. The Council has thus concluded the present
stage of its consideration of the item on the agenda.
The meeting

rose at 6.30 p.m.

NOTE
1 Oflcial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
sion, Annexes, agendaitem 106,documentA/7154.

Ses-

.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section. New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICAnONS

DE!3 NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sent en vente dans les libraities et les agences depositaims du
monde cntier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous B : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.

COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONEZS

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas es&t en venta en libretias y cams distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consuhe a su librero o dirijase a: Naciona Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York

00300

8361462--September 1986-2~350
