4

General Assemhly--Seventh Session

2. Expresses the hope that the exchange of sick and
wounded prisoners of war will be speedily completed
and that the further negotiations at Panmunjom will
result in achieving an early armistice in Korea, consistent with the United Nations principles and objectives;
3. Decides to recess the present session upon cornpletion of the current agenda items, and requests the
President of the General Assembly to reconvene the
present session to resume consideration of the Korean
question (a) upon notification by the Unified Command
to the Security Council of the signing of an armistice
agreement in Korea; or ( b) when, in the view of a
majority of Members, other developments in Korea require consideration of this question.
427th plenary meeting,
18 April 1953.

706 (VII). Question of impartial investigation of
charges of use hy United Nations Forces of
hacteriological warfare

The General Assembly,
Noting that accusations have been made by certain
governments and authorities charging the use of bacteriological warfare by United Nat10ns Forces, and that
the Unified Command has repeatedly denied such
charges,

Recalling that when the charges were first made the
Unified Command had requested that an impartial investigation be made of them,
Noting that the Central People's Government of the
People's :Republic of China and the North Korean
authorities have so far refused to accept an offer by
the International Committee of the Red Cross to carry
out an investigation,
N oting that the draft resolution 7 submitted ir> the
Security Council by the Government of the United
States of America proposing an investigation of these
charges by the International Committee of the Red
Cross failed to carry because of the negative vote of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Desiring to serve the interests of truth,
1. Resolves that, after the President of the Generar
Assembly has received an indication from all the governments and authorities concerned of their acceptance
of the investigation proposed in the present resolution,
a Commission, composed of Brazil, Egypt, Pakistan,
Sweden and Uruguay, shall be set up and shall carry
out immediately an investigation of the charges that
have been made ;
2. Calls upon the governments and authorities concerned to enable the Commission to 1ravel freely
throughout such areas of North and South Korea, the
Chinese mainland and Ja pan as the Commission may
<leem necessary in the performance of its task and to
allow the Commission freedom of access to such persans, places and relevant documents as it considers
necessarv for the fulfilment of its task and to allow it
to examme any witness, including prisoners of war.
under such safeguards and conditions as the Commis7 See document

S/2671.

sion shall determine: ail prisoners of war who are
alleged to have made confessions regarding the use
uf bacteriological warfare shall, prior to examination
by the Commission, be taken to a neutral area and remain under the responsibility and custody of the Commission until the end of the Korean hostilities;
3. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to transmit the present resolution immediately to the
governments and authorities concerned, requesting them
to indicate their acceptance of the investigation proposed in the present resolution;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly
to report to the General Assembly at the earliest practicable date on the results of his efforts;
S. Directs the Commission, •.vhen set up, to enlist the
aid of such scientists of international reputation, especially epidemiologists, and such other experts as it may
select;
6. Directs the Commission, after acceptance of the
investigation proposed in the present resolution by all
the governments and autho, "ties concerned, to report
to the Members of the Gene:-al A.;sembly through the
Secretary-General as soon possible and no later than
1 Septemter 1953;
ï. Requests the Secretary-General to furnish the
Commission with the necessary staff and facilities.
428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

707 (VII). Complaint hy the Union of Burma regarding aggression against it hy the Government of the Republic of China

The General Asscmbly,
H aving examined the complaint6 by the delegation
uf the Union of Burma regar<ling the presence, hostile
activities and <lepredations of foreign forces in the ter-ritory of the Union of Burma,
Considering that these facts constitute a violation of
the territory and sovereignty of the Union of Burma,
Afjirming that any assistance given to these forces
which enables them to remain in the territory of the
Union of Burma or to continue their hostile acts against
a Member State is contrary to the Charter of the
United Nations,
Considcring that the refusai of these forces to submit
to disarmament or interment is contrary to international
law and usage,
1. Dej1lores this situation and condemns the presence
of these forces in Burma and their hostile acts against
that country;
2. Der/ares that these .foreign forces must be dis;irmed and either agree to internment or leave the territory of the Union of Burma forthwith;
3. Rcquests ail States to respect the territorial integrity and political independence of the Union of
Burma in accordance with the principles of the Charter;
4. Recommends that the negotiations now in progress
through the good offices of certain Member States
8 See document

A/'2375.

5

Resolutiom adopted without reference to a Committee
should be pursued, in order to put an end to this serious
situation by means of the immediate ~isarmament and
withdrawal of the said forces from the territory of the
Union of Burma or by means of their disarmament and
internment ;
5. Urges all States:
(a) To afford the Government of the Union of
Burma on its request ail the assistance in their power
to facilitate by peaceful means the evacuation of these
forces from Burma ; and

( b) To refrain from furnishing any assistance to these
forces which may enable them to remain in the territory of the Union of Burma or to continue their hostile
acts against that country;
6. Invites the Government of the Union of Burma
to report on the situation to the General Assembly at
its eighth session.

428th plenary meeting,
23 April 1953.

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED WITHOUT REFERENCE TO A COMMITTEE
708 (VII). Report of the Secretary-General on
personnel policy
The Genera/, Assembly,
Recalling the following provisions of Articles 100 and
101 of the Charter:
"Article 100
"l. In the performance of their duties the Secretary-General and the staff shall not seek or receive
instructions from any government or from any other
authority externat to the Organization. They shall
refrain from any action which might reflect on their
position as international officials responsible only to
the Organization.
"2. Each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General
and the staff and not to seek to influence them in
the discharge of their responsibilities.
"Article 101
"l. The staff shall be appointed by the SecretaryGeneral under regulations established by the General Assembly.

"
"3. The paramount consideration in the employment of the staff and in the determination of the
conditions of service shall be the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence

and integrity. Due regard shall be paid to the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible.",
and
11 avi,ng remeu1ed and considered the report1 of the
Secretary-General on personnel policy,
1. Expresses its confidence that the SecretaryGeneral will conduct personnel policy with -these considerations in mind ;
-~- Requests the Sec-retary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its eighth session a report on the
progress made in the conduct and development of personnel policy, together with the comments of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions thereon ;
3. lt.·vites the Secretary-General and the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
to submit, after appropriate consultations with the administrative heads of the specialized agencies. their
recommendations as to any further action that may be
required of the General Assembly;
4. Calls upon all Members of the United Nations
to assist the Secretarv-General in the discharge of bis
responsibilities as chief administrative officer of the
United Nations.
422nd plenar·y meeting,
1 April 1953.
1 See document

A/2364.

709 (VII). Terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General of the
United Nations
The General Assembly,
Recalling General Assembly resolution 11 (I) of 24 January 1946 and paragraph 32 of General Assembly resolution 13 (I) of 13 February 1946,
Decides that the terms of appointment of the second Secretary-General shall
be the same as those of the first Secretary-General.
423rd plenary meeting,
7 April 1953.
