....
i·

I NATIONS UNIES

done pour le
la Tunisie re. ~ I 'Organisa-

UNITED NATIONS

ePRESIDENT,
ution presente
,dd. 1].

SECURITY COUNCIL

[ne, Equateur,
ion des Rllpuraume-Uni de
'd, Etats-Unis

e) : Le projet

Le rapport du
en ee sens ~

OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FIFTEENTH YEAR

851

15.

si MEETING: 30 MARCH 1960
hne SEANCE: 30 MARS 1960

QUINZIEME ANNEE

CONSEIL DE SECURITi
DOCUMENTS OFFICIELS
NEW

YORK

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/851/Rev.1) . • . . . . . . • • . . • • . • • •

1

Expression of thanks to the retiring President. . • . . . . • . • • • . • .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . • . • . . .

•

1

Letter dated 25 March 1960 from the representatives of Afghanistan,
Burma, Ca..,._~-)f~((ia, Ceylon, Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya,
Ghana, GUin{;Z:i, india, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Laos,
Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines,
Saudi Arabia, Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Republic and Yemen addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/4279 and Add.1)

2

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

TABLE DES MATIERES
Ordre du jour provisoire (S/Agenda/851/Rev.1) . . • . • . • • • . . . . •

1

Remerciements au President sortant . . • . . • . . . . . . • . .. . . . . . .

1

Adoption de l' ordre du jour ..•..•••..

1

0

•

0

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

Lettre, en date du 25 mars 1960, adressee au President du Conseil
de securite par les representants de I'Mghanistan, de I' Arabie
( 26 p. )
ember 1960-1,675

S/PV.851

..
TABLE DES M A TIE RES (suite)
Page

Saoudite, de la Birmanie, du Cambodge, de Ceylan, de l'Ethiopie,
de la F~deration de Malaisie~ du Ghana, de la Guinee, de l'Inde,
de l'Indonesie, de l'Irak, de l'Iran, du Japon, de la Jordanie, du
Laos, du Liban, du Lib~ria, de la Libye, du Maroc, du N~pal,
du Pakistan, des Philippines, de la R~publique arabe unie, du
Soudan, de la ThaUande, de la Tunisie, de la Turquie et du Y~men
S/42~9 et Add. 1).
0

•••••

0

••••

0

•

0

0

•••

0

••

0

•••

0

••••••

Held in

Ten

2

President: Mr. Hen
(United States
Present: The represen
States: Argentina, Ceylon,
Italy, Poland, Tunisia, U
Republics, United Kingdo
Northern Ireland, United Sta
Provisional agenda ($

1. Adoption of the ag\:lnda.

Relevant documents not reproduced in full in the records of the meetings of the
Security Council are published in quarterly supplements to the Official Records.

2. Letter dated 25 Marc
sentatives of Afghani
Ceylon, Ethiopia, Fede
Guinea, India, Indonesia
Laos, Lebanon, Liberia
Pakistan, Philippines,
Thailand, Tunisia, Tur
and Yemen addressed
Security Council (S/427

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed ofcapital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

•

• •
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso dans les
comptes rendus des s~ances du Consen de s~curittj sont publi~s dans des suppl6ments trimestriels awe Documents officiels.

Les cotes des documents de l'Organisation des Nntions Unies se composent
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans un texte
signifie qu'il s 'agit d'un document de l'Organisation.

Expression of thanks to

1. The PRESIDENT: Let
tunity to express to Sir Pie
of the United Kingdom, wh
the Council during the mon
apprectation of the members
Dixon has earned a distin
skill and wisdom, and I
tuni'] to tell him of our wa
2. Sir Pierson DIXON (U
just like to express my tha
for the kind remarks which
me •

..

3. I might also take this
satisfaction that, during the
will have the advantage of
guidance. I am sure that
to our work.

Adoption of

4. The PRESIDENT: The
visional agenda [SfAgend
dated 25 March 1960 fro
Afghanistan, Burma, C
Federation of Malaya, Ghan

EIGHT HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIRST MEETING

Held In New York. on Wednesday. 30 Morch 1960. at 10.30 a.m.
HUIT CENT CINQUANTE ET UNIEME SEANCE

Tcmue

a New York. le I'Mrc:redl 30 mars 1960. a 10 h 30.

President: Mr. Henry Cabot LODGE
(United States of America).

Pr6sident: M. Henry Cabot LODGE
(Etats-Unis d' Am~rique).

Presept: The representatives of the followillg
States: Argentina. Ceylon. China. Ecuador. France.
Italy. Poland. Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialililt
Republics. United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des Etats suivants:
Argentine. Ceylan, Chine. Equateur. Etats-Unis
d'Am&i<que. France, Italie, Pologne, Royaume-Unide
Grande-Bretaglle et d'Irlande du Nord, Tunisie, Union
des R6pW)liques sociallstes sovi6tiques.

Provisional agenda (SI AIIClflda/851/Rev.1)

Ordro du lour provisoire (SI AlIendal 851/ Rev.1)

1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Letter dated 25 March 1960 from the representatives of Afghanistan. Burma, Cambodia,
Ceylon. Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Ghana.
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran. Iraq, Japan, Jordan.
Laos. Lebanon. Liberia, Libya. Morocco. Nepal.
Pakistan. Philippines. Saudi Arabia, Sudan,
Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Republic
and Yemen addressed to the President of the
Security Council (5/4279 and Add.1).

1. Adoption de l'ordre du jour.
2. Lettre. en date du 25 mars 1960, adressoo an
President du Conseil de securite par les representants de l'Afghanistan. de l'Arabie Saoudite,de
la Birmanie, du Cambodge. de Ceylan, de l'Ethiopie. de la Federation de Malaisie, du Gballa, de
la Guinea, de l'Inde. de l'Indonesie. de l'Irak, de
ItIran. du Japon, de laJordanie.duLaos,du Liban.
du Liberia. de la Libye, du Maroc, du Nepal.
du Pakistan. des Philippines, de la Republique
arabe unie, du Soudan. de la Thai1ande. de la
Tunisie. de la Turquie et du Yemen (8/4279
et Add.1).

Expression of thonks to the retiring PresidClflt

Remereiements au President sortant

1. The PRESIDENT: Let me first take this opportunity to express to Sir Piers.,)n Dixon.representati,ve
of the United Kingdom. who served as President of
the Council during the month of February. the sincere
appreciation ofthe members ofthe Council. Sir Pierson
Dixon has earned a distinguished place here by his
skill and wisdom. and I am glad to have this opportunity to teU him of our warm regard.

1. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je saisirai
tout d'abord cette occasion d'exprimer l sir Pierson
Dixon, representant du Royaume-Uni, qui a preside
le Conseil pendant le mois de famer, la sinc~re
gratitude des membres du Conseil. Sir Pierson Dixon
s'est acquis parmi nous '.me place eminente par sa
competence et sa sagesse politique, et je suis heureux
de pouvoir lui dire la haute estime en laquelle nous
le tenons.
2. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais}: Je tiens l vous remercier. Monsieur le
President, des paroles aimables que vous venez de
prononcer l mon egard.
3. Je profite aussi de cette occasion pour dire combien il m'est agreable de penser que le Conseil aura,
pendant le mois de mars, le privil~ge d'Gtre dirige
dans ses travaux par votre sagesse et votre experience. Je suls certain que notre tache en sera
grandement facllit6e.

2. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): I should
just like to express my thanks to you Mr. President.
for the kind remarks which you have just made about
me.",
3. I might also take this opportunity to express my
satisfaction that. during the present month. the Council
will have the advantage of your wise and experienced
guidance. I am sure that this will be of great benefit
to our work.

Adoption of the agenda

Adoption de I'ordre du lour

4. The PRESIDENT: 'rhe second item on the provisional agenda [5/Agenda/S51/Rev.1] is a Letter
dated 25 March 1960 from the representatives of
Afghanistan. Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon. Ethiopia,
Federation of Malaya, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia,

4. Le PRESIDENT (tradult de l'anglais): Le second
point l l'ordre du jourprovisoire [S/Agenda/S51/
Rev.1] est une lettre. en date du 25 mars 1960.
adress6e au Pr6sident dIl ConseR de s6c1llit6 par
les representants de l' Afghanistan. de l' Arabie
1

Iran, Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia.,
Libya, Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Saudi
Arabia, Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab
Republic and Yemen addressed to the President of
the Security Council [S/4279 and Add.1].

Saoudite, de la Birmanie, du Cambodge, de Coylan,
de l'Ethiopie, de la Federation de Malaisie, du Ghana,
de la Guinee, de l'lnde, de 1'lndonesie, de l'Irak,
de l'lran, du Japon, de la Jordanie. du Laos, du Liban,
du Liberia, de la Libye. du Maroc, du Nepal, du
Pakistan, des Philippines, de la Republique arabeunie,
du Soudan, de la ThaDande, de la Tunisie, de la
Turquie et du Yemen [S/4279 et Add.I].

[The President read out the text of the 1etter.l

[Le President donne lecture de la 1ettre.l

5. The PRESIDENT: The President of the Security
Council has received a request from the representative
of the Union of South Africa [S/4280] that he be given
an opportunity to participate without a vote in the
discussion of the request for the inclusion in the
Council's agenda of the item concerning the Union
of South Africa.

5. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le representant de 1'Union sud-africaine a adresse au President du Conseil de securite une lettre [S/4280]
demandant que lui soit donnee la possibilite de participer, sans droit de vote, il la discussion qui doit
avoir lieu au Conseil de securite au sujet de la
demande visant il inscrire il l'ordre du jour du Conseil
la question relative il l'Union sud-africaine.

6. The representative of the Union of South Africa
has indicated to the President that, in view of the
standard. practice of the Council on invitations to
non-members, he would like to speak after the vote
on the adoption of the agenda.

6. Le representant de l'Union sud-africaine a informe
le President que, conformement 1l. la pratique etablie
en ce qui concerne les Membres des Nations Unies
qui ne sont pas membres du Conseil mais sont convies
il participer a une discussion, il souhaiterait prendre
la parole apr~s le vote sur l'adoption de l'ordre du
jour.

7. The representatives of India, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Pakistan, Guine::l and Liberia have also submitted to
the President requests, under rule 37, that they be
invited to participate without a vote in the discussion
of the question. These requests are before the Council
in documents S/4281, si 4283, Si 4290, si 4293, si4294
and s/4295.

7. Les reprl!lsentants de l'Inde, de 1'Ethiopie, du
Ghana, du Pakistan, de la Guinlle et du Libllria ont
llgalement adressll au Prllsident une demande en vue
d't;tre convi€ls, conform€lment ll. 1'article 37 du r~gle­
ment int€lrieur, ll. participer, sans droit de vote, ll. la
.discussion de la question. Ces demandes sont prllsenttles au Conseil dans leB documents Si 4281, si4283,
si4290, si 4293, si 4294 et si4295.

8. If there is no objection, I shall consider the agenda
adopted.

8. S'il n'y a pas d'opposition, je considererail'ordre
du jour comme adoptee

Uordre du jour est adoptee

The agenda was adopted.

Letter dated 25 March 1960 from the representatives of
Afghanistan, Burma, Cambodia, Ceylon, Ethiopia, Federation of Malaya, Ghana, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Japan, Jordan, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Morocco, Nepal, Pakistan, Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Sudan, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, United Arab Republic
and Yemen addressed to the President of the Security
Council (5;4279 and Add.l)

Lettre, en date du 25 mars 1960, adrnssee au President du
Conseil de securite paries represeriiants de l'Afghanistan,
de I' Arabie Saoudite, de la Birmanie, du Cambodge, de
Ceylan, de l'Ethiopie, de la Federation de Malaisie,
du Ghana, de la Guinee, de l'lnde, de l'l.ldonesie, de l'lrak,
de l'lran, du Japon, de la Jordanie, du Laos, du Liban,
du Liberia, de la Libye, du Marae, du Nepal, du Pakistan,
des Philippines, de la Republique arabe unie, du Soudan,
de la Thaoilande, de '" T unisie, de la T urquie et du
Yemen (5/4279 et Add.n

9. The PRESIDENT: I now call upon the representative of the United Kingdom, who has asked to
be allowed to speak on the decision which the Council
has just taken.

9. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je donne
maintenant la parole au representant du Royaume-Uni,
qui a demande a faire une declaration sur la decision
que le Conseil vient de prendre.

10. Sir Pierson DIXON (United Kingdom): Her
Majesty's Government in the United Kingdom has not
objected to the adoption of the agenda. Nevertheless,
it maintains its strong view that nothing in the Charter
authorizes the United Nations to intervene in m:;.tters
which ara essentially within the domestic jurisdiction
of any State. I must inform the members of the
Council that the United Kingdom Government will
approach the discussion in the Security Council of
these tragic incidents with that point in mind.

10. Sir Pierson DIXON (Royaume-Uni) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Le Gouvernement de Sa Majeste dans
le noyaume-Uni ne s'est pas oppose il l'adoption de
l'ordre du jour. Il maintient neanmoins son avis
formel selon lequel aucune disposition de la Charte
n'autorise les Nations Unies il intervenir dans des
affaires qui rel~vent essentiellement de la competence nationale d'un Etato Je dois faire savoir aux
membres du Conseil que crest en tenant compte de
ce point que le Gouvernement du Royaume-Uni
2

11. Mr.BERARD(Fr
The French Governme
jurisdiction of the Uni
for there to be any n
at length. It is based
the Charter which sta
contained in the pre
the United Nations to i
essentially within the
state".

12. The authority wh
in the world depends,
rule and for the pri
matters over which
jurisdiction. The fact
the adoption of the ag
is abandoning a traditio
it continues steadfastly

13. French opinion w
of the tragic incident
has always strongly
racial discrimination
hopes that there will
fortunate incidents.
14. My delegation no
regarding the legal
been submitted to
competence of the Co
15. Mr. ORTONA (It
sentatives have expre
that we have just ado
words on behalf of the .
which the Council ha
has had a wide-spreac
'fact that the grave dev
week in South Africa h:
States, representing tl
to request a meeting
itself a circumstance
cannot be overlOOked.

16. I would like to a,
the paramount impo
in the present situatio
a special interest on
we cannot fail to bea
those provisions of th
certain limits to the
part of our Organizati
17. The past record
discussions on "apar
developments appear
of that policy - clear
by us with respect to
appears to exist som
the Charter itself be
expression to the pro
human rights and
provisions aimed at
ference in their inter
of fundamental impo
of the United Nation

abordera la discussion des tragiques incidents dont
il est question.

clea
pro

11. Mr. BERARD (France) (translated from French):
The French Government's position on the scope and
jurisdiction of the United Nations is too well known
for there to be any need for me to explain it again
at length. It is based on Article 2, paragraph 7, of
the Charter which states categorically that "nothing
contained in the present Charter shall authorize
the United Nations to intervene in matters which are
essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any
state".

11. M. BERARD (France): La position du Gouvernement franQais en ce qui concerne l' etendue et la
competence de notre Organisation est trop connue
pour qu'il me soit necessaire de 1'exposer de nouveau
longuement. Elle est fondee sur 1'Article 2, paragraphe 7, de la Charte qui prescrit formellement:
"Aucune disposition de la presente Charte n'autorise
les Nations Unies A intervenir dans des affaires
qui relbvent essentiellement de la competence nationale d'un Etat ... "

12. The authority which the United Nations enjoys
in the world depends, we believe, on respect for this
rule and for the principle of non-intervention in
matters over which the individual State has sole
jurisdiction. The fact that my delegation did not oppose
the adoption of the agenda in no sense means that it
is abandoning a traditional stand which, on the contrary,
it continues steadfastly to uphold.

12. Du respect de cette r~gle et du principe de nonintervention dans le domaine reserve 1\ chaque Etat,
iepend 1\ nos yeux l' autorite des Nations Unies dans
le monde. Si m~ delegation ne s'est pas opposee A
1'adoption de 1'ordre dujour, ce n'est nullement qu'eHe
renonce A une position traditionnelle 1\ laqueHe elle
demeure, au contraire, fermement attachee.

13. French opinion was deeply moved by the news
of the tragic incidents at Sharpeville and Langa. It
has always strongly disapproved of the practices of
racial discrimination and segregation and fervently
hopes that there will be no recurrence of such unfortunate incidents.

13. L'opinion franQaise a ressenti une emotion profonde 1\ la nouveUe des tragiques evenements de
Sharpeville et de Langa. Elle a toujours reprouve
avec vigueur les pratiques de discrimination et de
segregation raciales et elle espere ardemment que
sera evite le retour de faits aussi regrettables.

14. My delegation none the less has serious doubts
regarding the legal merits of the case which has
been submitted to the Council and regarding the
competence of the Council to deal with this question.

14. Ma delegation n'en con90it pas moins des doutes
serieux sur le bien-fonde juridique du recours qui
a ete introduit devant le Conseil et elle exprime ses
reserves sur la competence de celui-ci 1\ conna1'tre
de l'affaire qui lui est aUjourd'hui soumise.

15. Mr. ORTONA (Italy): Since some other representatives have expressed their views on the agenda
that we have just adopted, I would like to add a few
words on behalf of the Italian delegation. The situation
which the Council has been requested to consider
has had a wide-spread impact on world opinion. The
'fact that the grave developments which occurred last
week in South Africa have prompted so many Member
States, representing the whole African-Asian group,
to request a meeting of the Security Council is in
itself a circumstance of great political weight which
cannot be overlooked.

15. M. ORTONA (Italie) [traduit de l' anglais]:
Certains representants ayant exprime leurs vues sur
l'ordre du jour que nous venons d'adopter, jevoudrais,
au nom de la delegation italienne, ajouter quelques
mots 1\ ce sujet. La situation que 1'on a demande
au Conseil d'examiner a produit une impression considerable sur 1'opinion mondiale. Le fait que les
evenements graves qui se sont deroules la semaine
derni~re en Union sud-africaine ont incitetantd'Etats
Membres, repr~sentant la totaliM du groupe africanoasiatique, ~. demander une reunion du Conseil de
securite, constitue en lui-m~me un element politique
qui est d'une grande importance et qu'on ne peut
meconnartre.

16. I would like to add that although we recognize
the paramount importance of these considerations
in the present situation, which in our opinion justified
a special interest on the part of the Security Council,
we cannot fail to bear in mind the very existence of
those provisions of the Charter aimed at establishing
certain limits to the possibilities of action on the
part of our Organization.

16. Permettez-moi d'ajouter que, tout en reconnaissant 1'importance capitale de ces considerations dans
la situation actueUe, considerations qui justifient 1\
nos yeux un inter~t special de la part du Conseil de
securite, nons ne pouvons oublier 1'exlstence m~me
des dispositions de I: \ Charte qui ont pour objet
d'imposer certaines limites aux possibilites d'action
de notre Organisation.

17. The past record of the Italian delegation in the
discussions on "apartheid" - and the recent grave
developments appear to be a very sad consequence
of that policy - clearly indicates the position taken
by us with respect to this problem. ObViously, there
appears to exist some internal contradiction within
the Charter itself between the need to give practical
expression to the provisions of the Charter concerning
human rights and fundamental freedoms and those
provisions aimed at protecting States from interference in their internal affairs. Both provisions are
of fundamental importance in tht> present structure
of the United Nations. This situatian represents a

17. L' attitude adoptee jnsqu' 1\ present par la delegation italienue dans les discussions sur la question de
l' "apa~eid" - politique dont les graves tlvlmements
recents semblent ~tre une triste consequence - ne
laisse aucun doute sur la position que nous avons
adoptee 1\ 1'egard de cette question. Manifestement,
il semble qu'il y ait dans la Charte elle-m~me une
certaine contradiction entre, d'une part, la necessite
de donner une expression pratique aux dispositions
relatives aux droits de 1'homme et aux libertes fondamentales, et, d'autre part, les dispositions qui
visent a protegeI' les Etats contre toute intervention
dans leurs affaires interieures. Ces deux categories
3

betw

18.
dele

ush

of le
the
devel
some
19.
Repu
have
Coun
by

25.

agen
so do
clear
last
State

•
clear challenge to our wisdom if we are to steer a
proper course in our discussions and deliberations
between these two basic requirements.

de dispositions sont d'importance fondamentale dans
la structure actuelle de l' ONU • En pl·llsence de
cette situation, noUB aurons besoin de toute notre
sagesse pour tenir, dans nos debats et deliberations,
la balance egale entre ces deux exigences fondamentales.

18. In conclusion,

I would like to say that my
delegation's stand on the adoption of the agenda before
us has been determined not so much by considerations
of legal impact; it has been determined mainly by
the special political purport of the recent tragic
developments which appear to justify, within limits,
some kind of exceptional procedure on our part.

En terminant, je dira:1 que la position de ma delegation sur l'adoption de l'ordre du jour qui nous est
propose a ete dictee non pas taut par des considerations d'ordre juridique que par la portee politique
particuli~re des tragiques evenements recents, qui
semble justifier, dans certaines limites, une sorte
de procedure exceptionnelle de notre part.

19. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): Misgivings
have been voiced here about whether the Security
Council can or should consider the letter submitted
by twenty-nine Member States of the United Nations.

19. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russel: Des doutes
viennent d'~tre exprimes sur la question de savoir
si le Conseil de securite peut et doit e..'i:aminer la
lettre de 29 Etats Membres de 1'Organisation des
Nations Unies.

20. The Soviet delegation takes the view that in
such circumstances, when twenty-nine Governments
of Asia and Africa are asking the Security Council to
discuss the alarming situation wWch has arisen in
the African continent, there can be no question whether
the Security Council should or should not examine the
question. The Council is obliged to heed the view
expressed by more than one third of the Organization's
Members.

20. De l'avis de la delegation sovietique, cette
question ne peut m~me pas se poser alors que
29 Etats d'Afrique et d'Asie demandent au Conseil
de securite de discuter la situation inquietante qui
s'est creee sur le continent africain. Le Conseil de
securite est tenu d'entendre l'opiIlion de plus du tiers
des Etats Membres de l'Organisation.

21. As to the competence of the United Nations as a
whole to discuss the question of racial discrimination
in the Union of South Africa, that issue was settled
long ago, since the United Nations has been considering
and discussing the question for years. Indeed it has not
only discussed it, but, as you are well aware,
the General Assembly has repeatedly called upon
the Government of the Union of South Africa to review
its policy of "apartheid" in the light of the purposes
and principles of the United Nations Charter.

21. Pour ce qui est de la competence de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ll. discuter le probl~me de
la discrimination raciale en Union sud-africaine,
cette question a ete tranchee il y a longtemps: non
seulement l'ONU examine et discute ce probl~me
depuis plusieurs annees, mais encore, comme vous
le savez, l'Assemblee generale a adresse des appels
reiteres au Gouvernement de l'Union sud-africaine
pour qu'il revise sa politique d' "apartheid" afin de
tenir compte des buts et principes de la Charte.

22. The latest events in the Union of South Africa
constitute a new development in the question and the
representatives of the twenty-nine countries of Asia
and Africa have very rightly drawn attention to the
fact that the discriminatory policy of the Union a.uthorities not only results in a gross violation of
fundamental human rights but also endangers the
maintenance of peace in the African continent.

22. Les €lv€mements qui se sont produits recemment
en Union sud-africaine marquent une nouvelle etape
et les representants de 29 pays d'Asie et d'Afrique
etaient parfaitement fondes ll. souligner que la politique
de discrimination des autorites sud-africaines constitue non seulement une violation flagrante des droits
elementaires de l'homme, mais encore menace le
maintien de la paix sur le continent africain.

23. Thus it is the duty of the Security Council,
which bears the main responsibility for maintaining
the peace, to heed the voice of the African and
Asian countries and thoroughly examine the newly
arisen situation in Africa. That is why the Soviet
delegation entertains no doubts about the Security
Council's competence to deal with the letter addressed
to it by the African and Asian States, and it was on
this basis that we voted for the adoption of the agenda.

23. Le Conseil de securite, organe responsable
au premier chef du maintien de la paix, est tenu
d'entendre la voix des pays d'Afrique et d'Asie et
d'examiner ll. fond la situation qui s'est creee sur
le continent africain. Clest pourquoi la delegation
sovietique n'eprouve aucun doute quant ll.la competence
du Conseil de securite ll. examiner la lettre des Etats
dlAfrique et d'Asie. En consequence, elle slest
prononcee en faveur de l'adoption de l'ordre du jour.

24. The PRESIDENT: If no other member of the
Council wishes to speak at this time, I shall speak as
representative of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

24. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Si aucun
membre du Conseil ne desire intervenir maintenant,
je prendrai la parole en qualite de representant des
ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE.

25. The United States supported the adoption of the
agenda, and I should like to set forth our reasons for
so doing. Our position on this question was expressed
clearly in Washington by Secretary of State Herter
last Friday. At that time he said that the United
States. favoured Security Council discussion of this

25. Les Etats-Unis ont appuye 1'adoption de 1'ordre
du jour et je voudrais exposer les raisons 'que nous
avons eues de le faire. Notre position sur la qnestion
a ete clairement exprimee vendredi dernier ll.
WasWngton par M. Herter, secretaire d'Etat. Il a dit
alors que les Etats-Unis etaient en faveur d'une

18.

4

question. In so
States has folIo
on "apartheid" i
last five years.
26. Since variou
qll.estion of corn
on this matter.
terpretation and
of the Charter ha
stated, in the di
the Fourteenth se

"In the yea
United Nations
cerning the ap
have emerged.
example, that
an agenda ite
matters which 1
diction. "v
27. We hold th
Security Council
When a question
Article 2, parag
Articles 55 and
Charter, all Me
pledged themsel
for, and observa
freedoms for all
language or reU
28. During the
Assembly, Mr.
representative iJ
expressed the UJ
in connexion wi1
He said:
"No Member,
seek purposely
could justifiabl
fulfil its pledg
can legitimate
Member Gove
consistent with
and earnestly
undertakings
Charter.
"We all reco
to regulate its
acknowledged
Charter. At th
right - and th
to be concerne
they affect th
ularly so in c
embodied in th
V Official Records
Plenary Meetings. 832n
1I This statement w
of t~ Special Politic
published only in summ

•
question. In so doing, he pointed out that the United
States has followed the same policy in the discussion
on "apartheid" in the General Assembly over the
last five years.

discussion de catte question par le Conseil de securite.
Ce faisant. il a souligne que les Etats-Unis ont suivi
la m~me politique dans la discussion de la question
de l' "apartheid" a. I'Assemblee generale au cours
des cinq derni~res !UlIlees.

26. Since various comments have been made on the
qu.estion of competence, let me state briefly our view
on this matter. The United States views on the interpretation and application of Article 2, paragraph 7,
of the Charter have been clearly established. Imyself
stated, in the discussion of the question of Tibet at
the Fourteenth session of the General Assembly:

26. Etant donne que diverses observations ont ete
faites sur la question de competence, j'exposerai
bri~Yement notre point de vue sur cette question.
La position des Etats-Unis en ce qui concerne
l'interpretation et l'application du paragraphe 7 de
l'Article 2 de la Charte a ete definie clairement.
J'ai declare moi-m~me, au cours de la discussion
de la question du Tibet a. la quatorzi~me session de
l'Assemblee generale:

"In the years since the establishment of the
United Nations certain principles and rules concerning the application of Article 2, paragraph 7,
have emerged. It has become established, for
example, that inscription and then discussion of
an agenda item do not constitute intervention in
matters which lie essentially within domestic jurisdiction. ".!I

11 Au cours des annees qui se sont ecoulees depuis
la cr~ation de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies,
certains principes et certaines r~gles relatifs h
1'application du paragraphe 7 de PArticle 2 se
sont fait jOur. n est, par exemple, maintenant
~tabli que 1'inscription, puis la discussion d'un
point de 1'ordre du jour ne constituent pas une
intervention dans les affaires qui rel~ventessentiellement de la competence nationale ll •11

27. We hold the same views with respect to the
Security Council that we do in the General Assembly.
When a question such as the present one is involved,
Article 2, paragraph 7, must be read in the light of
Articles 55 and 56. Under Articles 55 and 56 of the
Charter, all Members of the United Nations have
pledged themselves to promote "universal respect
for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental
freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion."

27. Notre point de vue est le m~me au Conseil de
securite qu'a. I'Assemblee generale. S'agissant d'une
question comme celle qui est a. l' ordre du jour,
le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 doit ~tre lu a. la
lumi~re des Articles 55 et 56 de la Charte. Aux
termes de ces articles, tous les Membres des Nations
Unies se sont engages a. favoriser "le respect
universel et effectif des droits de l'homme et des
libertes fondamentales pour tous, sans distinction de
race, de sexe, de langue ou de religion".

28. During the thirteenth session of the General
Assembly, Mr. George Harrison, the United States
representative in the Special Political Committee,
expressed the United States policy on these Articles
in connexion with the discussion on "apartheid".
He said:

28. A la treizi~me session de l'Assemblee g€merale,
M. George Harrison, representant des Etats-Unis
a. la Commission politique speciale, a defini la
politique des Etats-Unis en ce qui concerne ces
articles a. l'occasion de la discussion de la question
de l' "apartheid" en declarant:

"No Member of this Organization could justifiably
seek purposely to escape its pledge. No Member
could justifiably be excused from endeavouring to
fulfil its pledge. We believe that the United Nations
can legitimately call attention to the policies of
Member Governments which appear to be inconsistent with their obligations under the Charter
and earnestly to as:~ Members to abide by the
undertakings that they have accepted in signing the
Charter.

"Aucun Membre de notre organisation ne peut
legitimement chercher, de propos delibere, a.
manquer a. sa promesse. Aucun Membre ne peut
legitimement ~tre dispense de s'efforcer de la
remplir. Nous croyons que les Nations Unies
peuvent legitime:.aent appeler l'attention sur la
politique des gouvernements des Etats Membres
qui semble incompatible avec leurs obligations
aux termes de la Charte et leur demander instamment de respecter les engagements auxquels ils
ont souscrit en signant la Charte.

"We all recognize that every nation has a right
to regulate its own internal affairs. This is a right
acknowledged by Article 2, paragraph 7, of the
Charter. At the same time, we must recognize the
right - and the obligation - of the United Nations
to be concerned with national policies in so far as
they affect the world community. This is particularly so in cases where international obligations
embodied in the Charter arc concerned." J.j

"Nous reconnaissons tous que chaque pays a le
droit de regler ses propres affaires interieures.
C'est un droit reconnu par le paragraphe 7 de
I'Article 2 de la Charte. En m~me temps, nous
devons reconnaftre aux Nations Unies le droit et
le devoir de s'interesser aux politiques nationales
lorsqu'elles ont des repercussions sur la collectivite mondiale. Il en est particuli~rementainsi
dans les cas oil. sont en jeu des obligations internationales inscrites dans la Charte1l."

.!I Official Records of the General Assembly. Fourteenth Session.
Plenary Meetings. 832nd meeting, para. 83.

.!I Documents officiels de l'Assembl~e gen~rale, guatorzi~me session, S~ances plenihes, 832~me s~nce, par. 83.

lJ This statement was made on 16 October 1958 at the 90th meeting
of t~ Special Political Committee. the official record of which was
published only In summary form.

11 eette declaration a ~t~ faite le 16 octobre 1958. ilia 90eme s~ance
de la Commission polltlque sp&iale. dont les comptes rendus ne sont
publles que sous forme analytlque.

5

29. The United States profoundly regrets the tragic
loss of life in South Africa. Twenty-nine Member
States have brought this situation before the Security
Council, stating tha\. they consider it to have "grave
potentialities for international friction, which endangers the maintenance of international peace and
security" [S/4279 and Add.!]. What this means is
that in their view this situation is not only within
the scope of Articles 55 and 56, but also of Articles
34 and 35. Such wide-spread concern testifies to the
desirability of the Council considering the problem.

29. Les Etats-Unis regrettent profondement les
tragiques pertes de vies humaines qui se sont produites en Mrique du Sud. Vingt-neuf Etats Membres
ont porte cette situation a l'attention du Conseil de
securite, declarant qu'eUe "pourrait entrafner un
desaccord entre nations" et qu'eUe "menace le
maintien de la paix et de la securite internationales"
[S/4279 et Add.!]. Cela signifie quIa leur point de
vue, cette situation ne rentre pas seulement dans
le cadre des Articles 55 et 56, mais aussi des
Articles 34 et 35. Une inquietude aussi largement
partag~e prouve quIll est souhaitable que le Conseil
examine la question.

30. Let me say that the United States approaches
this question with no false pride at all. We recognize
that many countries, and the United States must be
included in the list, cannot be content with the j.. ~ogress
which they have made in the field of human rights
and that we must continue our efforts, alil we have,
to provide full equality of opportunity for all our
citizens. In many countries, unsanctioned violations
of human rights continue to occur, but we think there
is an important distinction between situations where
Governments are actively promoting human rights
and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction
as to race, sex, language or religion, and situations
where governmental policies run counter to this.

30. Permettez-moi de dire que les Etats-Unis
abordent la question avec une compl~te absence de
faux orgueil. Nous reconnaissons que de nombreux
pays, parmi lesquels il faut ranger les Etats-Unis,
ne sauraient se tenir pour satisfaits des progr~s
qu'ils ont realises dans le domaine des droits de
l'homme, et que nous devons poursuivre nos efforts,
comme nous l'avons fait, afin d'assurer a tous nos
citoyens des possibilites absolument egales. Dans de
nombreux pays, les droits de l'homme continuent
d'~tre violes impunement, mais nous pensons qu'il
existe une importante difference entre des situations
oil les gouvernements s'emploient activement a favoriser le respect des droits de l'homme et des libertes
fondamentales pour tous sans distinction de race, de
sexe, de langue ou de religion, et des situations oil
la politique suivie par le gouvernement est en sens
contraire.

31. The question we are asked to consider today
has its own particular background of geography,
racial composition, cultural diversity and economic
relationships, but even difficulties of this sort do not
relieve a government of its obligations, nor can
they relieve the United Nations of its responsibilities.
We think this question is a proper one for United
Nations consideration, and we therefore supported
the adoption of the agenda.

31. La question que l'on nous demande d'examiner
aujourd'hui s'inscrit dans un cadre particulier de
probl~mes aux points de vue de la geographie, de la
composition ethnique, de la diversite culturelle et
des rapports economiques, mais m~me des difficultes
de cet ordre ne rel~vent pas un gouvernement de ses
obligations, ni les Nations Unies de leurs responsabilites. A notre avis, la question est de ceUes qu'il
appartient aux Nations Unies d' examiner; c' est
pourquoi nous avons appuye l'adoption de l'ordre du
jour.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Fourie,
representative of the Union of South Mrica, Mr. Jha,
representative of India, Mr. Gebre-Egzy, representative of Ethiopia, Mr. Quaison-Sackey, representative of Ghana, Prince AlyKhan, representative of
Pakistan, Mr. Ca ba, representative of Guinea, and
Mr. Cox, representative of Liberia, took places at
the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, M. Fourie, representant de l'Union su:d-africaine, M. Jha, representant
de l'Inde, M. Gebre-Egzy, representant de l'Ethlopie,
M. Quaison-Sackey, representant du Ghana, le prince
Aly Khan, representant du Pakistan, M. Caba, representant de la Guinee, et M. Cox, representant dfJ
Liberia, prennent place a la table du Conseil.

32. The PRESIDENT: At the outset of these proceedings, I feel constrained to state for the benefit
of all concerned that it has invariably been held in
the Security Council that remarks made in the Council
should at all times be germane and confined to the
item set forth in the agenda, and that speakers
should avoid all subjects which, however important
in and of themselves, are nevertheless different and
distinct topics. Surely the matter before us today is
so important as to deserve our best effor1;s. It is
in this spirit that I shall try to preside over these
proceedings and I hope they may be conducted in this
manner.

32. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Au debut
de cette discussion, je me sens oblige de declarer,
a l'intention de tous les interesses, que le Conseil
de securite a toujours eu pour principe que les observations faites devant le Conseil doivent demeurer
pertinentes en toutes circonstances, ne doivent pas
s'ecarter de la question inscrite a l'ordre du jour
et ne doivent porter sur aucun sujet qui, queUe que
soit son importance intrins~que, constitue cependant
un sUjet distinct et different. La question qui nous
occupe aUjourd'hui est assurement assez importante
pour meriter tous nos efforts en ce sens. C'est dans
cet esprit que je m'efforcerai de presider ce debat
6

33. The r
has asked
of the agen

34. Mr. S
It is not m
procedure,
normp.l pr
those dele
before the
to explain
is anxious
in the Sec
not raise
make clea
precedent
under whic
sideration
to be obse
35. To re
my delega
Security C
all to serv
raising any
36. Mr.
Republics)
sentative
question 0
sidering th
37. You
representa
to speak 0
already di:
to consideI
This mean
must deal
the item be
38. In sue
Council's
that this p
sentatives
Council'S
sentatives
therefore
obviously
the repres
would have
to voice hi
us.

39. This i
should be
proposed,
would set
a precede
Indeed it
if it could
a bad pr
reserves it
40. Sir C
presentativ
this stage

es

•

1

':::":~-'1
et j'esp~re qu'il pourra se derouler conformement h
l'usage etabli.

0-

es

de
un
le

s·
de
ns
es
mt

eil

lis

de
ux
ls,
~s

de
;s,
os

de
mt

'il
ns
0-

es

de

ou

us

er

de
la
et

ieS

es

n-

llil

~st

du

'e-

wt

ie,

ce

'e-

dtt

Jut

~r,

eil
ther
as

Ur

Ue

mt

33. The representative of the Union of South Mrica
has asked to be heard at this point on the adoption
of the agenda. Is there any objection?

33. Le representant de l'Union sud-africaine a demande ~ ~tre entendu sur l'adoption de l'ordre du
jour ~ ce point de la discussion. Y a-t-il opposition?

34. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):

34. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Jen'aipas l'intentiond'elever
une objection formelle contre la procedure proposee,
mais je tiens ~ signaler qu'il aurait ete normal que
les delegations qui ant introduit la requ~te aient ll'l
priorite pour expliquer la situation. Neanmoins, daIltl
le souci de cooperer ~ un debat utile au sein du
Conseil de securite, ma delegation s' abstiendra
d'elever une objection. Elle tient toutefois ~souligner
que ceci ne doit pas ~tre considere comm'3 un precedent et qu'elle desire continuer ~ voir appliquer
au sein du Conseil de securite la rl:lgle normale qui
veut que ceux qui ant presente une requ~te soient
les premiers ~ prendre la parole.

It is not my intention to object formally to the proposed

procedure, but I feel that I should point out that the
norm:'l procedure would have been to call first on
those delegations which have brought the question
before the Council and thus give them an opportunity
to explain the situation. Since, however. my delegation
is anxious to ensure that the debate to take place
in the Security Council will be profitable. we will
not raise any objection. We wish none the less to
make clear that this should not be construed as a
precedent and that we would like the normal rule.
under which delegations submitting an item for consideration are the first to be called upon to speak,
to be observed in future.
35. To repeat, however, what I have already said,
my delegation's concern is for the' debate in the
Security Council to be of a high standard and above
all to serve a useful purpose, and it is therefore not
raising any formal objection.

35. Cependant je repl:lte, comme je l'ai dit, que,
dans le souci d'avoir au sein du Conseil de securite
un excellent debat et, surtout, un debat utile, ma
delegation ne fait pas d'objection formelle.

36. Mr. SOBOLEV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The representative of Tunisia has quite properly raised the
question of the procedure we are to follow in considering the substance of this question.

36. M. SOBOLEV (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) [traduit du russe]: Lerepresentant
de la Tunisie a souleve ~ juste titre la question de
la procedure que nous devons appliquer au Conseil
de securite pour la discussion de la question quant
au fond.

37. You said just now, Mr. President, that the
representative of the Union of South Mrica wished
to speak on the adoption of the agenda. But we have
already disposed of this question and have gone on
to consider the substance of an item of the agenda.
This means that statements made at this juncture
must deal not with the inclusion or non-inclusion of
the item before us but ....ith its substance.

37. Le President vient de dire que le representant
de I'Union sud-africaine desire faire une declaration
sur l'adoption de l'ordre du jour. Mais le Gonseil
a deja regIe ce point et a aborde la discussion quant
au fond de la question inscrite a son ordre du jour.
En d'autres t3rmes, les declarations que nous entendons maintenant ne portent plus sur la <fllestion de
1'inscription, mais sur le fond du probl~me dont nous
sommes saisis.

38. In such circumstances it has been the Security
Council's customary practice-and it seems to me
that this practice is still valid-to hear the representatives of the States submitting the item for the
CounCil's consideration. A number of these representatives are now seated at the Council table and
therefore the most appropriate procedure would
obviously be to hear them first and then call upon
the representative of the Union of South Mrica, who
would have, and who in fact has, ample opportunity
to voice his Government's views oP.. the matter before
us.

38. Dans ces conditions, la procedure habituelle du
Conseil de securite a consiste jusqu'a present - et il
me semble. que cette procedure garde toute sa valeur - a entendre les representants des Etats qui
soumettent la question a i ' examen du Conseil.
Plusieurs de ces representants si~gent ici. Le mieux
serait donc de les entendre et de donner ensuite
la parole au representant de I'Union sud-africaine
qui aurait toute latitude pour exposer le point de vue
de son gouvernement sur la question.

39. This is the normal procedure and the one that
should be followed. Since another order has been
proposed. I should like to observe that such an order
would set a bad precedent for Council procedure,
a precedent which should if possible be avoided.
Indeed it would be a very good thing for the Council
if it could be avoided today: it is not worth setting
a bad precedent. The SOViet delegation therefore
reserves its position on the matter.

39. Telle est la procedure normale et il conviendrait
de continuer de la respecter. Puisqu 'une autre procedure est proposee, je voudrais signaler que, par
la m~me, on cree au Conseil de securiteun precedent
flicheux qu'il faudrait eviter dans toute la mesure
possible. Si on pouvait le faire d~s aUjourd'hui,
ce serait pour le plus grand bien du Conseil de
securite. n ne faudrait pas creer un mauvais precedent. crest pourquoi la delegation sovietique reserve sa position sur ce point.

40. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylon): To allow the representative of the Union of South Mrica to speak at
this stage on the question of the adoption of the agenda

40. Sir Claude COREA (Ceylan) [traduit de l'anglais]:
Permettre au representant de I'Union sud-africaine
de prendre la parole sur la question de I'adoption de

US

Ilte

llS

bat

7

~, .

.~,
I,
"

I

would certainly appear to us to be completely
irregular. Normally, therefore, we would have opposed
the application;'
for considerations similar to
those expressed L J the representative of Tunisia, I
myself would not raise those objections, and this solely
for the purpose of making it clear, both to the representative of the Union of South Mrica and to all
members present here, that we are anxious to have
the fullest consideration of the question which we are
met here to discuss.

1'ordre du jour, ~ ce point de la discussion, nous
semblerait certainement tout ~ fait irregulier. Par
consequent, normalement, nous nous serions OPPOEeS
a cette demande; mais, pour des raisons analogues
a celles qui ont ete exposees par le representant de
la Tunisie, je ne soul~veraipas moi-meme d'objection,
et cela uniquement pour bien marquer, tant a 1'intention du representant de l'Union sud-africaine qu'a
l'intention de tous les membres ici presents, notre
vif desir de voir examiner le plus compl~tement
possible la question que nous allons discuter.

41. Fully conscious of the importance of the occasion,
we should like to introduce this note of harmony and
goodwill into the discussions. For that reason, while
pressing our opinion with regard to the propriety
of that action, we shall not raise any objection.

41. Ayant pleinement conscience de 1'importance de
la circonstance, nous voudrions faire entrer dans le
debat cette note dTharmonie et de bonne volonte.
C'est pourquoi, tout en maintenant notre point de vue
sur le bien-fonde de la procedure proposee, nous
ne nous y opposerons pas.

42. The PRESIDENT: This is a matter which, of
course, the members of the Council can decide in
any way they may wish. The representative of the
Union of South Mrica has requested to speak at this
stage on the matter of the adoption of the agenda;
the representative of Tun! sia, which is the only
African State on the Council, has said that he has no
obj~ction; I understand that the Soviet Union representative has not asked for a vote; the representative
of Ceylon has stated that he has no objection.
Therefore, unless the Council wishes to decide otherwise, I propose to recognize the representative of
the Union of South Mrica.

42. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous nous
trouvons en presence d'une question que les membres
du Conseil peuvent naturellement trancher comme ils
l' entendent. Le representant de l'Union sud-airicaine
a demande a prendre la parole sur la question de
l'adoption de l'ordre du jour a ce point de la discussion; le representant de la Tunisie, seul representant
d'un Etat africain membreduConseil, a declare ne pas
elever d'objection; je crois comprendre que le representant de l'Union sovietique n'a pas demandeunvote;
le representant de Ceylan a .dit qu'il ne faisait pas
d'opposition. Par consequent, a moins que le Conseil
ne veuille en decider autrement, je donnerai laparole
au representant de 1'Union sud-africaine.

43. Mr. FOURIE (Union of South Mrica): ThaL'k you,
Mr. President, for according me this opportunity
to speak.

43. M. FOURIE (Union sud-africaine) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Je vous remercie, Monsieur le President,
de me permettre de prendre la parole.

44. I have been instructed by the South African
Government to record a strong protest against the
refusal to hear its representative on the request to
place this item on the Council TS agenda, particularly
as this is the first time in the history of the United
Nations that the Security Council has decided to
consider purely local disturbances within the territory
of a Member State contrary to the spirit and intention
of the relevant articles of the Charter, thereby
creating a most dangerous precedent which might
in the future recoil also on other :M pmber States.

44. J'ai ete charge, par le Gouvernement de l'Union
sud-africaine, d'elever une ferme protestation contre
le refus, de la part du Conseil, dTentendre le representant de ce gouvernement sur la demande d'inscription de la question a l'ordre du jour, particuli~rement en raison du fait que c'est la premiere fois
dans 1'histoire de l'Organisation des Nations Unies
que le Conseil de securite a decide d'examiner des
troubles de caract~re purement local intervenus sur
le territoire d'un Etat Membre, contrairem.ent a
I 'esprit et a 1'intention des articles pertinents de
la Charte, creant ainsi un tres dangereux precedent
qui pourrait se retourner a l'avenir contre d'autres
Etats Membres.

45. The South Mrican Government's objection to
the consideration of this matter by the Security
Council is, in the first instance, based on two legal
grounds, namely:

45. L'opposition du Gouvernement de l'Union sudafricaine a l'examen de la question par le Conseil de
securite se fonde essentiellement sur les deux motifs
d'ordre juridique que je vais exposer.

46. First, that the inclusion of this item in the
agenda and any subsequent discussion or resolution
in regard thereto is in violation of a basic principle
of the Cb~rter upon which the United Nations was
founded. This basic principle is enshrined in Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter which has an overriding
effect in regard to all the other Articles of the Charter.

46. Premi~rp'Ilent, l'inscription de la question a
l'ordre du jour et toute discussion ou resolution s'y
rapportant constitue une violation d'un principe fondamental de la Charte sur laquelle est fondee
l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Ce principe fondamental est enonce au paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2,
dont l'effet l'emporte sur celui de tous les autres
articles de la Charte.

47. Second, the Union's objection is based on the
ground that such action is in conflict with the terms
of a decision unanimously taken and recorded by a
plenary session of the San Francisco Conference of
1945. That decision read as follows: "nothing contained in Chapter IX of the Charter can be construed

47. Deuxi~mement, l'opposition du Gouvernement de
l'Union se fonde sur le fait qu'une telle action est
en contradiction avec une decision prise a l'unanimite et enregistree lors d'une seance pleni~re de
la Conference de San Francisco en 1945. Selon cette
decision, "rien dans le Chapitre IX ne peut ~tre
8

l f Un

.f/ Of
Politic
.§J Ibi

,
lon, nous
ier. Par
OPPOf:eS

nalogues
3ntant de
bjection,
t il 1'in!line qu'il
;s, notre
I~tement

1;ance de
r dans le
volonte.
I1t de vue
€le, nous

ous nous
nembres
lmme ils
sfricaine
8stion de
L discus:esentant
rene pas
lerepreeunvote;
tsait pas
l Conseil
la parole

aduit de
resident,

81'Union
m contre
.e reprele d'insparticuli~re fois
ns Unies
liner des
'enus sur
'em.ent a
nents de
Irecedent
d'autres

Lion sudouseil de
IX motifs

iestion a
.ution sly
cipe font fondee
:ipe fon-

~rticle 2,

is autres

ement de
Lction est
l'unaniiniere de
lIon cette
,eut ~tre

as giving authority to the Organization to intervene
in the domestic affairs of Member States".Y And I
may add that Chapter IX includes, inter alia, Articles
55 and 56.

interprete comme autorisant 1'Organisation il intervenir dans les affaires nationales d'Etats Membres 1111.
J'ajoute que le Chapitre IX comprend notamment
les Articles 55 et 56.

48. In the past some Members of the United Nations
have, however, considered Article 2, paragraph 7, not

48.

as excluding debate, but as excluding what is called
"intervention". I shall refer to only a few expressions
of opinion on this point, taken from the summary
records of the Special Political Committee.

Dans le passe, certains Membres de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies ont cependant estime que
le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 n'emp~chait pas la
discussion, mais emp~chait ce que lion appelle
l' "intervention". J e ne citerai que quelques-unes des
opinions qui ont ete exprimees sur ce point, extraites
des comptes rendus analytiques des seances de la
Commission politique speciale.

On 23 October 1957, the representative of Iraq
made a statement oil the question before the Special
Political Committee. I shall read a portion of the
summary record:

49. Le 23 octobre 1957, le representant de 1 'Irak a
fait, a ce sujet, une declaration devant la Commission
politique speciale dont voici un extrait, tire du compte
rendu analytique de la seance:

"••• there was nothing in Article 2, paragraph 7,
of the Charter to prevent the United Nations from
discussing any question which it judged to be within
its competence or from adopting any resolutions
it thought fit on such questions. No one had suggested,
of course, or was suggesting that the United Nations
should intervene directly to put an end to the
policies of "apartheid" of the Union Government.
Only the people of the Union could do that".i/

n Au demeurant, rien dans le paragraphe 7 de
PArticle 2 de la Charte n'emp~che 1'Organisation
de discuter une question qu'elle juge etre de sa
competence et d'adopter sur cette question les
resolutions qu'elle juge utHes. Certes, personne
n'a suggere ni ne suggere que l'Organisation intervienne directement pour mettre fin il la politique
d'lIapartheid" du Gouvernement de l' Union sudafricaine. C'est uniquement il la population de
l'Union qu'il appartient d'agir dans ce sens.il.1I

50. On 29 October 1957 the representative of
Argentina made a statement, the summary record
of which read as follows:

50. Le 29 octobre 1957, le representant de l'Argentine a fait une declaration dont le compte rendu
analytique de la seance fait etat comme suit:

"Many delegations wonderedwhether the Assembly
had not gone too far, and likewise recognized that,
having established a precedent, it would find it
hard to decide where to draw the line in intervening
in the domestic affairs of States. There were many
instances in which it could be claimed that States
were violating human rights in their domestic
affairs. That explained the opposition of many
States which abhorred racial segregation and themselves respected all the provisions of the Charter,
to intervention by the United Nations in any matter
which they considered fell within the domestic
jurisdiction of States. Article 2, paragraph 7, of
the Charter provided a fundamental guarantee which
Member States should not sacrifice and was of vital
importance to those among them that were not entitled to exercise the veto. Its existence had been
of far greater value in the maintenance of peace
than had over-liberal interpretations of the scope
of the Organizationis activities, however worthy
the purpose of such interpretations might have
been.

"De nombreuses delegations se demandent si
l'Assemblee n'est pas allee trop loin, et considerent egalement que, ayant cree un precedent,
elle aura de la peine il decider oil. commence
1'intervention dans les affaires interieures des
Etats. Il y a beaucoup de cas oil. lion peut dire que
des Etats violent les droits de I 'homme dans leurs
affaires interieures. Cela explique que de nombreux
Etats qui condamnent la segregation raciale et
respectent eux-memes toutes les dispositions de
la Charte s'opposent il 1'intervention de 1'Organisation des Nations Unies dans toute affaire quills
estiment relever de la competence nationale des
Etats. Le paragraphe 7 de l'Article 2 de la Charte
offre une garantie fondamentale que les Etats
Membres ne doivent pas sacrifier et qui est d'une
importance vitale pour ceux d'entre eux qui ne
disposent pas du droit de veto. L'existence de cette
garantie a contribue davantage au maintien de la
paix que les interpretations trop liberales des
limites de l'activite de l'Organisation, si estimable
qu'en ait pu etre l'objet.

"Although it was right that the United Nations
should do its utmost to promote respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms for all without
regard to race, it was equally true that in doing
so it could not make itself into a supra-national
authority. Any attempt on its part to intervene in
the domestic affairs of its Members weakened its
authority and prestige. ,,§J

IIBien qu'il soit certain que l'Organisation des
Nations Unies doive faire tout ce qui est en son
pouyoir pour encourager le respect des droits de
1'homme et des libertes fondamentales pour tous,
sans distinction de race, il est non moins vrai
qu'elle ne doit pas, ce faisant, chercher il se
transformer en une autorite supranationale. Toute
tentative de sa part pour intervenir dans les affaires
interieures des Etats Membres affaiblit son autorite
et s on prestige.§l."

49.

11 Conference des Nations Unies sur l'Organlsation internatlonale,
P/20.

:JJ United Nations Conference on International Organization, P /20.
jJ Official Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Session, Special
Political Committee, 52nd meeting, para. 3.

jJ Documents offlclels de l'Assemblee generale, dOllzi'l!me seSSIon,
Commission pol~tigue speciale, 52t!me seance, par.3.
.§I Ibid.. 54l!me seance, par. 46 et 47.

fl.J Ibid., 54th meeting, paras. 46 and 47.

9

51. In 1952, the representative of Canada also
clearly stated the case in the context of this particular
matter. I shall read from the summary record.

51. En 1952, le representant du Canada a fait ressortir avec clarte le principe en jeu dans le contexte
de cette question particuli~re. Je cite le compte
rendu analytique de la seance:

"[The representative of Canada] did not believe
that the Charter should be interpreted in such a
way as to exclude discussion of an item once it
had been placed on the agenda. The Canadian delegation had no intention of ignoring Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter, or dismissing it as
a legal technicality. It felt, however, that a distinction should be drawn between intervention and
the right of the General Assembly to discuss any
matters within the scope of the Charter."§J

"[Le representant du Canada] ne pense pas qu'il
faille interpreter la Charte de mani~re a exclure
la discussion d'une question une fois que cette
question a ete inscrite a 1'ordre du jour. La delegation canadienne n 'a pas 1'intention de negliger
le paragraphe 7 de I'Article 2 de la Charte, nl de
1'ecarter comme un point de technique juridique.
Cependant, elle est d'avis qu'il faut etablir une
distinction entre 1'intervention et le droit qu'a
1'Assemblee d'·)xaminer toute question qui etltre
dans le cadre de la Charte.Q/."
.

52. In November 1955 the representative of India
said that his delegation did not consider that the
discussion of the matter by the General Assembly
involved any intervention in matters essentially
within the domestic jurisdiction of the Union of
South Mrica; if it did, his delegation wouid be opposed to such discussion. V

En novembre 1955, le representant de l'Inde
a declare que sa delegation ne pensait pas que la
discussion de la question par 1'Assemblee generale
constituait une "intervention" dans les affaires qui
rel~vent essentiellement de la competence de l'Union
sud-africaine et que, si elle le croyait, elle s'opposerait a cette discussion11.

53. In November 1952, the representative of Sweden
said that a commentary had been made on the
Charter with which he was inclined to agree, that the
word lIintervention", as used in that paragraph, was
not to be given a narrow, technical interpretation
since discussion did not necessarily amount to interventi on.~/

53. En novembre 1952, le representant de la SuMe
a declare que d'apr~s un commentaire de la Charte
auquel il inclinait a souscrire, le mot "intervenir" ,
tel qu'il est employe dans le paragraphe 7 de
PArticle 2, ne devait pas ~tre interprete d'une mani~re etroite et au pied de la lettre, car la discussion
n'equivalait pas necessairement a 1'intervention.§!.

54. However, in relation to the matter now before
the Council, I do not think that anybody can deny that
by placing this question on the agenda lIintervention"
in the domestic affairs of South Mrica, even in the
narrower sense of that term, is contemplated. This
attempt is being made by reference to Article 35
of the Charter.

54. Cependant, en ce qui concerne la question dont
le Conseil est saisi actuellement, je ne pense pas
que 1'0n puisse nier qu'en inscrivant cette question
a 1'0rdre du jour c'est une "intervention" dans les
affaires interieures de I'Union sud-africaine, ml3me
si 1'0n prend ce mot dans son sens le plus etroit,
que 1'on envisage. On le fait en invoquant PArticle 35
de la Charte.

55. The scope of that Article is, however, circumscribed by Article 34, which reads:

55. Toutefois, la portee de cet 2....>1:icle est limitee
par 1'Article 34 qui est redige comme suit:

"The Security Council may investigate any dispute,
or any situation which might lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute, in order to
determine whether the continuance of the dispute
or situation is likely to endanger the maintenance
of international peace and security. 11

"Le Conseil de securite peut enqu~ter sur tout
differend ou toute situation qui pourrait entrafuer
un desaccord entre nations ou engendrer un differend, afin de determiner si la prolongation de ce
differend ou de cette situation semble devoir
menacer le maintien de la paix et de la securite
internationales. "

It has been argued that recent events in South Mrica
constitute a situation lIwhich might lead to international
friction or give rise to a dispute likely to endanger
international peace and security".

On a fait valoir que les evenements qui se sont produits
recemment en Afrique du Sud ont cree une situation
"qui pourrait entrafuer un desaccord entre nations
ou engendrer un differend qui semble devoir menacer
la paix et la securite internationales".

56. The question arises, therefore, how these possibilities can eventuate. Clearly there must be at
least two parties if there is to be a dispute or if
such a situation is to exist. Furthermore, within the
framework of the Charter theBe parties must be
sovereign independent States.

56. Par consequent, la question se pose de savoir
comment ces eventualites pourraient se realiser.
Il est evident qu'il doit y avoir au moins deux parties
s 'il doit se produire un differend ou s 'il doit exister
une situation de ce genre. En outre, au sens de
la Charte, ces parties doivent ~tre des Etat~
souverains independants.

52.

Qj Ibld.. septi'eme session, Commission politiQue speciale. 20'eme
seance, par. 13.

§J Ibid" Seventh Session, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 20th meeting,
para. 13.

11 Ibid" Tenth Session, 9th meeting, para. 30.

11 Ibid., dixi'eme session, CommiSSion politique speciale, 9'eme
seance, par. 30.

fJJ Ibid., Seventh Session, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 13th meeting,
para. 31,

fJJ Ibid.. septi'eme session, Commission politigue speciale, 13'eme
seance, par. 31.

10

11

lda a fait resms le contexte
ite le compte

lense pas qu'il
.~re it exclure
'ois que cette
jour. La deH3)ll de negliger
! Charte, nl de
lque juridique.
ut etablir une
le droit qu'a
tion qui eu.~re

Itant de l'Inde
,ait pas que la
nblee generale
~s affaires qui
mce de l'Union
'alt, elle s'op-

mt de la SuMe
'e de la Charte
>t "intervenir",
ragraphe 7 de
rete d'une mar la discussion
lrvention.fu'•

a question dont
~ ne pense pas
cette question
1tion 11 dans les
fricaine, meme
I le plus etroit,
ant PArticle 35
cle est limitee
suit:

lU~ter sur tout
rrait entrafuer
:endrer un difIlongation de ce
semble devoir
de la securite

le sont produits
Be une situation
d entre nations
devoir menacer

pose de savoir
It se realiseI'.
ns deux parties
s 'il doit exister
re, au sens de
itre des Etat~

57. I assure the Council that the Union has no intention, or the least desire, of provoking such a
dispute or creating such a situation. If, therefore,
such a danger does in fact exist, then I submit that
the Coun~il should focus its considerations on the
actions Q.l. the other party or parties trying to create
an international dispute and thereby to endanger
international peace and security.

57. J e puis donner au Conseil1'assurance que 1'Union
n 'a ni l'intention ni le moindre aesir de provoquer
un tel differend ou de Creel' U.1le telle situation. Par
consequent, s 'il existe en fait un tel danger, je
sugg~re, dans ces conditions, que le Conseil devrait
concentrer son attention sur les agissements de l'autre
partie ou des autres parties qui essaient de Creel'
un differend entre nations et ainsi de mettre en peril
la paix et la securite internationales.

58. I do not wish to engage in any exhaustive legal
arguments on the implications of Article 2,
paragraph 7, of the Charter. Members of the Council
are well aware of all the arguments stated and
restated through the years. The South Mrican
Government continues to adhere to the views it has
so often expressed and continues to maintain its
position on the meaning and scope of this Article of
the Charter. However, leaving aside for the moment
the legal objections to the consideration of this
subject, the question arises immediately why the
anxiety to pick on South Mrica? How many disturbances and riots, leading to a serious loss of life,
have occurred during the last twelve months throughout the world, including Mrica?

58. Je ne veux pas m'engager dans une etude juridique approfondie des incidences du paragraphe 7 dB
l'Article 2 de la Charte. Les membres du Conseil
connaissent parfaitement tous les arguments qui ont
ete invoques maintes fois depuis des annees. Le
Gouvernement de l'Union sud-africaine persiste dans
l'opinion qu'il a si souvent exprimee et continue a
maintenir sa position au sujet du sens et de la portee
de cet article de la Charte. Cependant, si nous laissons de cote, pour le moment, les objections d'ordre
juridique a l'examen de cette question, nous sommes
immediatement amenes a nous demander quelle est
la raison de l'acharnement a s'en prendre a l'Union
sud-afl'icaine. Combien de troubles et d'emeutes qui
ont entrarne d'importantes pertes de vies humaines
ont eclate au cours des 12 derniers mois dans le
monde, notamment en Afrique?

59. On what grounds is it now proposed to single
out the Union of South Mrica? Or am I to assume
that all Members favouring the placing of this item
on the Council's agenda will, when their turn comes,
willingly submit to the consideration in this Council
of their efforts to maintain law and order in their
own countries? Jf it is to be done in the case of South
Mrica, it can be done in the case of all violent
disturbances against the authority of all Member
States. Are Members prepared to accept that sort
of future for themselves and for the United Nations?
Or, if they are not willing so to submit themselves,
must one then assume that it is simply a case of
South Mrica being made the whipping hoy?

59. Pour quels motifs propose-t-on maintenant de
choisir pour cible l'Union sud-africaine? Ou dois-je
en conclure que tous les Etats Membres qui sont
partisans de l'inscription de cette question a l'ordre
c!u jour soumettront volontiers 11 l'examen du Conseil,
lorsque leur tour viendra, leurs efforts pour assurer
le respect de la loi et le maintien de I' ordre dans
leur propre pays? Si on le fait dans le cas de l'Union
sud-africaine, on peut le faire pour tous les troubles
graves qui attentent a l'autorite de tous les Etats
Membres. Les Etats Membres sont-ils disposes 11
accepter un avenir de ce genre pour eux-m~mes et
pour l'Organisation des Nations Unies? Ou bien, s 'ils
ne sont pas prets 11 s'y exposer, faut-il donc en
conclure que 1'on veut simplement. faire de notre
pays un bouc emissaire?

60. The sponsors of the request now before the
Council have referred to the mass killing of unarmed
and peaceful demonstrators against racially discriminatory and segregationist laws in South Africa.

60. Les auteurs de la lettre dont le Conseil est
saisi ont parle de massacre de manifestants sans
armes qui protestaient pacifiquement contre les lols
sur la discrimination et la segregation raciales en
Union sud-africaine.

61. The Union Government has already arranged
for full judicial inquiries to be made cv obtain with
utmost speed an official account of the relevant facts.
The Government is also considering the appointment
of a commission, with a judge as chairman, to inquire
into the contributory factors and to deal with broader
aspects of the problem. But even at this early stage
the statement about the alleged mass killing of
"unarmed and peaceful demonstrators", a statement
on which the inclusion of this question is based, cannot
go unchallenged.

61. Le Gouvernement de l'Union a deja pris des
dispositions pour faire mener des enqu~tes judiciaires approfondies afin d'obtenir le plus rapidement
possible un compte rendu officiel des faits pertinents. Le gouvernement envisage egalement la nomination d'une commission, presidee par un magistrat,
chargee d'enqueter sur les facteurs qui ont contribue
a creel' cette situation et sur les aspects plus generaux
de la question. Mais, meme a ce premier stade, on
ne saurait laiflser passeI' sans la contester l'affirmation concernant le pretendu massacre de
"manifestants sans armes C!'U protestaient pacifiquement", affirmation sur laquelle est fondee la
demande d'inscription de cette question a l'ordre
du jour.

62. Because of this statement and the many misleading reports which have appeared abroad, I feel
compelled to give the Council, for its information
only, the salient features of the situation. I emphasize
that I am doing this solely for purposes of information

62. En raiSOD de cette affirmation et des nom1·.r-eux
comptes rendus trompeurs qui ont paru a' I' etranger,
je me sens oblige d'exposer devant les membres
du Conseil, uniquement a titre d'information, les faits
marquants de la situation. Je souligne que je fais cet

jue sp&iale. 20~me

que

sp~ciale.

9~me

jue sp&lale, 13~me

11

-and without prejudice to the Union Government's
legal position, a position to which the Union Government adheres as strongly as ever. The history of the
disturbances, as it has thus far been authoritatively
established, is as follows.

expose uniquement A des fins d'informatlon et sans
prejudice de la position juridique du Gouvernement
de 1'Union, position que ce gouvernement maintient
plus fermement que jamais. L'historique des troubles,
tel quIll a ete jusqu'A present etabli de source autorisee, est le suivant.

63. A splinter organization of extremists had started

63. Une organisation composee d'une minorite d'extremistes s'est mise II y a quelque temps il. organiser
une manifestation massive de protestation contre le
port des livrets d'identite. Je puis indiquer enpassant
que le syst~me des livrets d'identite a ete institue
lorsque celui des laissez-passer, qui d'ailleurs €ltait
en vigueur depuis plus d'un si~cle, a ete aboli en 1952.
Le livret d'identite se compose premi~rement, d'une
carte d'identite qui, en vertu des lois en vigueur,
doit ~tre delivree aux personnes des deux sexes et
de toutes les races, et non pas seulement aux Bantous;
deuxi~mement, d'une section oil doivent ~tre inscrits
des renseignements sur le paiement de 1'imp6t,
le contrOle des deplacements, etc. Ces derniers
renseignements sont destines il. emp~cher un afflux
excessif de main-d'reuvre non qualifiee venant des
zones rurales et allant dans les zones industrielles,
oil, si cet afflux n'est pas contrOle, II cree de tr~s
graves probl~mes sociaux, des probl~mesdu logement,
et a egalement un effet defavorable sur le niveau
des salaires.

some time ago to organize a mass demonstration to
protest against the carrying of reference books. In
passing, I might mention that the reference book was
instituted when the paSI5 system-which incidentally
had been in operation for over a century-was
abolished in 1952. The reference book consists of:
First, an identity card which, under our laws, applies
to male and female of all races-not only to the Bantu;
secondly, a section which makes provision for noting
particulars of tax payments, influx control, etc. The
latter is a measure designed to counter uncontrolled
flocking of unskilled labour from the rural areas to
the industrial areas, where, if it is not controlled,
it will create tremendous social problems, housing
problems and also have a depressing effect on wages.

64. The essential aims of the reference book are:

64. Les buts essentiels du livret d'identite sont les
suivants: ~) permettre d'identifier les habitants, dont
beaucoup n'ont pas l'habitude de la vie occidentale
et sont souvent illettres; !!) fournir un moyen commode
d'identifier les Bantous venus d'autres pays ou
territoires, qui affluent en masse en Union sudafricaine, la plupart sans passeport ni aucune pi~ce
d'identite.

(~ to afford a means of identification to people, many

of whom are unaccustomed to Western life and often
illiterate; (Q) to provide a ready means of identifying
Bantu people from other countries and territories who
flock to the Union in large numbers, mostly without
any passports or identification papers whatever.
65. By intimidating and threatening persons who do not
belong to the group, the extremists managed to gather
a crowd of approximately 20,000 people in a township,
Sharpeville, in the Transvaal and a crowd of about
6,000 at Langa in the Cape Province.

65. En usant d'intimidation et de menaces il. l'egard
de personnes n'appartenant pas au groupement, les
extremistes sont parvenus il. reunir une foule d'environ 20.000 personnes il. Sharpeville, municipalite
du Transvaal, et une foule d'environ 6.000 personnes
il. Langa, dans la province du Cap.

Police were in the areas concerned to exercise
normal control, if needed, as is done in all wellordered societies all over the world when large
masses of demonstrators gather. At Sharpeville some
agitators immediately adopted a threatening attitude
towards the police. Attempts were madE to arrest
some of the violators, but the crowd became more
belligerent and the police were attacked with a
variety of weapons: pangas, axes, iron-bars, knives,
sticks and firearms.

66. Des forces de police se trouvaient dans ces

66.

regions pour y exercer une surveillance normale en
cas de necessite, ainsi quIll est d'usage dans toutes
les societes policees du monde entier lorsque des
manifestants se rassemblent en grands nombres.
A Sharpeville, certains agitateurs ont immediatement
adopte une attitude mena~ante a l'egard de la police.
On a tente d'arreter certains fadieux, mais la foule
est devenue plus agressive et la police a ete attaquee
avec des armes diverses: pangas, haches, barres de
fer, couteaux, gourdins et armes a feu.

•
only a few more pages left
Mr. President, I shall conti
69. Indeed, shots were fi
the police returned fire in
lives and also to foresta!
even greater and more
hardly say how deeply the
that there was this tragic 10

70. The action that the po
must be seen against a back
people outside South Africa
the latest tragedy, a gro
brutally battered to death b
peaceful group. On another
policemen was engaged in
about thirty tons of the
marijuana, which had bee
inspection. While they were
they were set upon by
gathered, and all five pol
their bodies mutilated by
and axes.

I am referring to these
out to members of the Co
when 10,000 miles removed,
for haVing used fire-arms
indeed asking too much of a
to commit suicide, to sta
turn to be stoned to dell.
world have a difficult an
rather thankless, task to
the rioters are human; the
have an elementary right t
threatened by :mobs not a
methods of con'erol.
71.

72. No Government can al
of its citizens to be inti
the Bantu in South Africa 0
with the most dire consp.
with their daily occupatl
structions of a militant gro

67. The

PRESIDENT: I dislike interrupting the
representative of the Union of South Africa, but I
would like very respectfully to call his attention to
the fact that it was understood that he would make
his statement on the matter of the adoption of the
agenda and the questions pertaining to the inclusion
of the item. Therefore, I trust that he will be able
to confine himself to that phal5e of the matter.

67. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l' anglais ): J e
regrette de devoir interrompre le representant de
l'Union sud-africaine, mais je tiens il. lui rappeler
respectueusement qu'll etait entendu que sa declaration porterait sur l'adoption de l'ordre du jour
et les points se rapportant il. l'inscription de la
question. J'esp~re donc quIll lui sera possible de
s'en tenir il. cet aspect de la question.

73. I have with me here
which is and has been v
ticism of the Union Gov
intimidation practised by m
fellow-beings who are atte
daily lives, the paper sa
roamed the ill-lit streets of
Johannesburg and rammed
up the nostrils of African
breaking taxis, and that the s
returning only the page wi
on it-and beat up the stri
it.

68. Mr. FOURIE (Union of South Africa): I refer
to th~se matters in so far as they relate to the inclusion of the item in the agenda. It becomes a matter
under Article 34, and it was with that in view that
I referred to these questions. I may add that I have

68. M. FOURIE (Union sud-africaine) [traduit de
l'anglais]: Je ne parle de certains points que dans'
la mesure oil lIs se rapportent il. 1'inscription de la
question il. l'ordre du jour. Il s'agit d'une question
soulevee au titre de l'Article 34, et c'est pourquoi

74. I may add that the dem
peaceful as so many beli
particularly relevant to the
the agenda-in fact eng

12

only a few more pages left and witlbt your permission.
Mr. President, I shall continue.

j'ai aborde ces points. J'ajoute que je n'a1 plus que
quelques pages et avec votre permission, Monsieur
le President, je continuerai ma declaration.
69. En fait, on a tire sur la police avant qu'eHe
ne fasse usage de ses armes, nour se defendre et
aussi pour emp@cher ce qui aurait pu aboutir A une
effusion de sang plus grave et plus tragique encore.
Je n'ai gu~re besoin de dire combienleGouvernement
de I'Union deplore ces tragiques pertes de vies 00maines.

69. Indeed, shotl!l were fired at tlbte police before
tlbte police returned fire in order to defend their own
lives and also to forestall what might have led to
even greater and more tragic bloodshed. I need
hardly say how deeply the UDion Government regrets
that there was this tragic loss of life.

70. Lee mesures que la police a ete contrainte de
prendre doiTent etre considerees en tenant compte
cl'un ensemble de circonstancesque peu de personnes
connaissent en dehors de I'Afrique du Sud. Moins de
deux mois avant ces derniers incidents tragiques,
neuf agents de police ont ete roues de coups et tues
par l'un de ces groupes de personnes que 1'0n a
pretendu etre IIsans armes lll et pacifiques. Une autre
fois, cinq agents etaient occupes A rassembler et
cletruire una trentaina de tonnes de ce stupefiant
connu ici sous le nom de marijuana, qui avaient ete
confisquees au cours d'une inspection ordinaire.
Alol's qu'ils detruisaient le stupefiant, ils ont ete
attaqu6i! par une foule irritee qui s'etait rassemblee;
l1s ont 6t6 tues tous les cinq et leurs corps ont 61:6
mutiles par une foule arm6e de bltons et de haches.

70. The action that the police were forced to take

must be seen against a background not Imown to many
people outside South Africa. Not two months before
the latest tragedy. a group of Dine policemen was
brutally battered to death by a so-called lIIunarmedll•
peaceful group. On another occasion a party of five
policemen was engaged in collecting and destroying
about thirty tons of the narcotic. here Imown as
marijuana, which had been collected in a routine
inspection. While they were destroying themarijdna,
they were set upon by an angry mob which had
gathered, and all five policemen were killed and
their bodies mutilated by a mob armed with sticks
and axes.

71. Je n'i!lvoque ces incidents que pour montrer aux
membres du Conseil que s'il est facile, A. 15.000 kilomMres de distance, de critiqueI' les autorit6s pour
avoir fait usage d'armes A feu en cette occasion, il est
en fait abusif de demander A un petit groupe d'agents
de police de consentir au suicide en attendant sans
bouger leur tour d'etre lapid6s. Dans le monde entier,
la police a une tAche difficile, dangereuse, souvent
ingrate. Bien certainement, il n'y a pas que les
emootiers qui soient des @tres hwnains, les agents
de police sont eux aussi des etres humains et ils
ont le droit eIementaire de defendre leur vie quand
ils se voient menaces par une foule qu'on ne poot
martriser par les moyens ordinaires.
72. Aucun gouvernement ne peut tolerer que des
centa1nes de milliers de ses citoyens soient intimides
par des extremistes, comme le sont souvent
les Bantous en Union sud-africaine; il ne peut tolerer
qu'ils soient menaces des pires consequences s'ils
continuent A vaquer A leurs occupations journali~res
sans obeir aux instructions d'ungroupemilitant.

71. I am referring to these incidents merely to point
out to members of the Council that, while it is easy,
when 10.000 miles removed, to criticizethe authorities

for having used fire-arms on this occasion, it is
indeed asking too much of a small group of policemen
to commit suicide. to stand by idly awaiting their
turn to be stoned to death. The police all over the
world have a difficult and daDgerous. and often a
rather thankless. task to perform. Surely not only
the rioters are human; the police are too. and they
have an elementary right to defend their lives when
threatened by mobs not amenable to the ordinary
methods of control.
72. No Government can allow hundreds of thousands
of its citizens to be intimidated by extremists-as
the Bantu in South Africa often are-to be threatened
with the most dire consequences. if they proceed
with their daily occupations and disobey the instructions of a mUitant group.
73. I have with me here a London daily newspaper
which is and has been very outspoken in its criticism of the UDion Government. ConcerDing the
intimidation practised by mobs against their peaceful
fellow-beings who are attempting to carry on their
daily lives. the paper says that mobs of strikers
roamed the m-lit streets of African locations outSide
Johannesburg and rammed sharpened bicycle spokes
up the nostrils of African workers riding in strikebreaking taxis. and that the strikers tore up passbooks,
returDing only the page with the owner's photograph
on it-and beat up the strike-breakers who carried
it.

73. J'ai ici un numero d'un quotidien de Londres qui
ne manque jamais de critiquer ouvertement le Gouvernement de l'UDion. A propos des pratiques d'intimidation exercees par les emeutiers contre ceux de
leurs concitoyens pacifiques qui cherchent Acontinuer
l viVl'e normalement, ce journal rapporte que des
masses de grevistes parcouraient les rues mal
6clair'6es des quartiers africains des faubourgs de
Johannesburg, enfonQ!lDt des rayons de roues de
bicyclettes aiguises dans les narines d'ouvriers
africains qui circulaient dans des taxis de briseurs
de gr~ve, et que les grevistes decbiraient les livrets
d'identite, ne rendant que la page oil figurait la
photograpbie, et rouaient de coups les non-grevistes
qui en 6taient porteurs.

74. I may add that the demonstrators. far from bei~
peaceful as so many believe-and this, I think, is
particularly relevant to the inclusion of this item in
the agenda-in fact engaged in looting. arson,

74. J'a.jouterai que les manifestants, loin d'etre
pacifiques comme on le croit si volontiers - et cela,
je perlse, presente un interllt particulier pour ce qui
est de l'inscription de cette question A I'ordre du

13

destruction of property, including their own churches,
schools and clinics. They cut telephone wires, set
buildings on fire, murdered a coloured driver and
set his car on fire and stoned civilian people unconnected with the riots. Among~+; those were four
nurses.

jour - se sont en fait livres au pillage, ~ l'incendie,
aux depredations, a11ant jusqu'~ detruire leurs propres
eglises, leurs ecoles et leurs dispensaires. lls ont
coupe des fils teleph'.miques, mis le feu ~ des
blltiments, assassine un chauffeur de couleur et mis
le feu ~ sa Yoiture, et lapide des civils parfaitement
etrangers aux manifestations, dont quatre infirmi~res.

75. This past Monday was ordered by the extremists
to be a day of mourning. But what was it in fact?
Merely a repetition of the previous violence, plundering
and senseless destruction of social and educational
institutions which are there for the benefit of the
Bantu themselves. But the extremists do not mind
what they destroy, as long as they do destroy.

75. Les extremistes ont decrete que lundi dernier
serait jour de deuil. Que s'est-il passe en fait ce
jour-a? La repetition pure et simple des violences
des jours precedents, des pillages, des actes insenses
de destruction d'etablissements socia\l:~ et d'enseignement crees dans l'intergt des Bantous eux-m~mes.
Les extremistes ne se soucient pas de ce qu'ils
detruisent, pourvu qu'ils detruisent.

76. Members of the Council may also be interested
in certain pamphlets which, according to press
reports, were distributed by those behind the riots
in Johannesburg. One, for e.xample, says and I quote
it as reported:

76. Les membres du Conseil prendront sans doute
connaissance aussi avec inter~t de certains tracts
qui, d'apr~s des communiques de presse, ont ete
diffuses par les promoteurs des emeutes il.
Johannesburg. L 'un de ces tracts dit par exemple
ceci, et je cite le rapport de presse:

"The present capitalistic South African State
must be completely destroyed and a people's State
must be built up. Our comrades would want that
we wrest the country from our oppressors with
armed force and that after victory we march on to
the establishment of the South African People's
Republic. Wor~ers of the world unite! "

"ll faut aneantir l'actuel Etat capitaliste sudafricain, il faut edifier un Etat populaire. Nos
camarades veulent que nous arrachions le pays il.
nos oppresseurs par la force armee et qu'apr~s
la victoire, nous neus attelions il. la creation de
la Republique populaire d'Afrique du Sud. Travailleurs de tous les pays, unissez-vous!"

77. It must be clearly understood that the South
African Government fully intends to discharge its
duties to maintain public order and safety and to
safeguard the internal security of the country, whoever
may threaten it-white or non-white.

77. II doit ~tre bien etabli que le Gouvernement
sud-africain tient farmement il. s' acquitter de ses
devoirs et donc il. maintenir l'ordre public et la
sarete, il. sauvegarder la securite interieure du pays
d'oll que vienne la menace, des blancs ou de nonblancs.

78. One of the most important principles involved
in this matter is the question of the observance of
the law of the land. The point at issue is not whether
there is agreement or disagreement with any
particular law. The point at issue is that the law must
be enforced despite disagreement, and no Government
worthy of the namp. could abdicate from or share its
responsibility in such enforcement. If such abdication
or sharing does take place chaos will undoubtedly
result and rule by the mob will take the place of
rule by the Government. The Government itself is
the arbiter of the measures it deems necessary to
secure obedience to the law, and interference, from
any source whatsoever, in this prime responsibility
of any sovereign government, cannot be countenanced.
Indeed, any such interference, or attempt at interference, could only have a most deleterious effect
on the observance of the rule of law-and this applies
not only to South Africa. It is equally applicable to
all countries and to all the Governments of the world.

78. L'un des principes les plus importants qui
sont en jeu est celui du respect de la loi du pays.
La question en cause n'est pas de savoir s'il y a
accord ou des accord sur te11e ou telle 101. La question
en cause est que la loi dolt gtre appliquee m~me
s'il y a desaccord et aucun gouvernement digne de
ce nom ne peut abdiquer la responsabilite qui lui
incombe de faire respecter la loi ni partager cette
responsabilite. Si le gouvernement consent il. cette
abdication ou il. ce partage, on aboutirainevitablement
au chaos, ce ne sera plus le gouvernement qui gouvernera, ce sera la populace qui fera la loi. Le gouvernement lui-m~me est juge des mesures qu'il estime
necessaires pour assurer le respect de la loi et
aucune ingerence dans cette fonction primordiale de
tout gouvernement souverain ne peut ~tre admise,
d'ou qu'elle vienne. En fait, toute ingerence de cette
nature, ou toute tentative d'ingerence, ne pourrait
qu'avoir l'effet le plus nefaste sur le respect de
la loi, et cela est vrai non seulement pour l'Union
sud-africaine, mais egalement pour tous les pays et
tous les gouvernements du monde.

79. Therefore, if by word or deed, or even gesture,
this Council disassociates itself from this vital priJ.1ciple of constitutional government, namely the enforcement of the law of the land, a step will have been
taken the consequences of which cannot be foreseen.

79. En consequence, si, par les paroles ou les actes,
ou m~me l'attitude, le Conseil 011 nous sommes renie
ce principe essentiel du gouvernement constitutionnel,
le principe du respect de la loi du pays, il aura fait
un geste dont les consequences sont impossibles ~
prevoir.

80. It is my Government's belief that the annual diBcussion of the racial problems of South Africa Bince
1946 has helped to inflame the situation there. It

80. Le Gouvernement de 1'Union sud-africaine estime
que le debat qui a lieu tous les ans depuis 1946 sur
les probl~mes raciaux en Afrique du Sud a contribue
14

would be even Ulore se
in the Council were to
as incitement to furth
in South Africa, with
not only on members
of peaceful citizens 0
normal life. I am inst
to be the result the ;.l
shoulders of the Sec
members of the Counci
a heavy responsibility.
placed on the Council's
to report to my Gover

81. In conclusion, Mr.
and the members of
your attention.
Mr. Foarie, repres
Africa, withdrew.

82. The PRESIDENT:
dated 25 March 1960
twenty-nine Member
Two members of the
have already indicate
course, they will spe
the Security Council,
the Council. I therefo
have named, and any
speak today, be recogn
who have expressed a
been the regular pract·

83. Mr. SLIM (Tunis
My delegation is amon
situation in South Afri
as a situation which i
tenance of internatio
normal procedure wo
floor first in order to
document si 4279, but
Africa had asked to s
that we should object
that he should be allow
84. Acting as we i
carrying out our OOti
in our constant desire
to ensure a satisfacto
international peace an
acceptance of this
discussion of the quest·
85. I cannot but regre
sentative saw fit, in h
the question of the c
question which in my
the incidents themselv
hoped that he would be
of the question more
position in detail and
explanations the Securi
to carry out its duties.
representative unfor
Security Council meet
statement. That to me

would be even Ulore serious if the present discussion
in the Council were to li'mbolden the agitators or serve
as incitement to furthor demonstrations and rioting
in South Africa, with subsequent attacks by rioters
not only on members of the police, but also the mass
of peaceful citizens of all races trying to carry on a
normal life. I am instructed to say that if this were
to be the result the ;.llame will rest squarely on the
shoulders of the Security Council. I am sure that
members of the Council would not wish to accept such
a heavy responsibility. This question now having been
placed on the Council's agenda, it is incumbent on m£)
to report to my Government for instructions.

~ y envenlmer la situation. Ce serait encore plus
grave si la presente discussion au Conseil de securite
devait enhardir les agitateurs ou servir ~ inciter
d'autres manifestations et d'autres emeutes, qui
seraient suivies d'attaques des 13meutiers, non
seulement contre les forces de police mais aussi
contre la grande masse des citoyens pacifiques de
toutes races qui voudraient continuer ~ vivre norm,alement. J'ai reQu instruction de declarer que si
tel devait ~tre le resultat de cette discussion, la
responsabilite en incomberait clairement au Conseil
de ~ecurite. Je suis certain que les membres du
Conseil ne voudraient pas assumer une si lourde
responsabilite. La question etant maintenant inscrite
~ l'ordre du jour du Conseil, je dois rendre compte
a mon gouvernement et demander des instructions.

81. In conclusion, Mr. President, I wish to thank you
and the members of the Council for having given me
your attention.
Mr. Fourie, representative of the Union of South

81. Monsieur le President, jetiens a vous remercier,
ainsi que les membres du Conseil, d'avoir bien vouIu
m'entendre.

Africa, withdrew.

se retire.

82. The PRESIDENT: We now come to the letter
dated 25 March 1960 from the representatives of
twenty-nine Member States [S/4279 and Add. 1].
Two members of the Council, Tunisia and Ceylon,
have already indicated that they wish to speak. Of
course, they will speak before the non-members of
the Security Council, according to the custom of
the Council. I therefore propose that the members I
have named, and any other members who wish to
speak today, be recognized, and then the non-members
who have expressed a wish to participate. That has
been the regular practice of the Security Council.

82. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nous passons maintenant a la lettre en date du 25 mars 1960
emanant des representants de 29 Etats Membres
[S/4279 et Add.l]. Deux membres du Conseil, les
representants de la Tunisie et de Ceylan, ont deja
demande :l prendre la parole. Nous les entendrons
naturellement avant les representants d'Etats non
membres du Conseil de securite, comme le veut la
pratique du Consei!. Je propose donc que ces deux
representants ainsi que tous autres membres du
Conseil qui desireraientfaire une declarationprennent
la paro~:a et que nous entendions ensuite les representants de pays non membres qui ont exprime le
desir de participer a la discussion. Telle est la
pratique habituelle du Conseil de securite.

83. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia) (translated from French):
My delegation is among those which have brought the
situation in South Africa before the Security Council
as a situation which is likely to endanger the maintenance of international peace and security. The
normal procedure would have been for it to take the
floor first in order to present the matter outlined in
document S/4279, but as the representative of South
Africa had asked to speak beforehand we did not feel
that we should object to the President's proposal
that he should be allowed to do so.

83. M. SLIM (Tunisie): Ma delegation est une de
celles qui ont saisi le Conseil de securite de la
situation en Afrique du Sud comme etant une situation
mettant en danger la paix et la securite internationales. n eQt ete normal qu'elle ait eu la parole
la premi~re pour exIJilser la question, objet du
document S/4279. Le representant de l'Union sudafricaine ayant demande la parole avant cet expose,
nous n'avons pas cru devoir faire objection a la
proposition du President d~.s ce sensa

84. Acting as we invariably do in good faith in
carrying out our duties in the United Nations, and
in our constant desire to co-operate in the Council
to ensure a satisfactory debate which would promote
international peace and security, we hoped that our
acceptance of this course would expedite the
discussion of the question.

84. Constants dans notre bonne foi dans Faccomplissement de nos responsabilites ~ l'egard des Nations
Unies et soucieux toujours de cooperer au sein de
ce conseil en vue d'un excellent d~bat avec un r~­
sultat heureux pour la paix et la securite internationales, nous avons espere que, ce faisant, nous
pourrions faciliter le debat du Consei!.

85. I cannot but regret that the South African representative saw fit, in his statement, to concentrate on
the question of the competence of the Council, a
question which in my view is largely outweighed by
the incidents themselves and by the precedents. I had
hoped that he would be willing to go into the substance
of the question more fully after we had explained the
position in detail and that he would then give any
explanations the Security Council might need in order
to carry out its duties. I regret that the South African
representative unfortunately saw fit to leave the
Security Council meeting when he had concluded his
statement. That to me is indicative of an unwillingness

85. Je ne peux que regretteL' que le representant
de l'Union sud-africaine ait cru devoir s'attaquer
specialement, dans son expose, a la question de
competence du Conseil qui est, ~ mon point de vue,
largement depasse et par les evenements eux-m~mes
et par les precedents. J'osais esperer qu'il aurait
voulu aborder plus amplement le fond de la question,
une fois que nous Paurions expo~ ie en detail, et
qu'il aurait apporte alors toutes explications utiles
pour le Conseil de seem"ite, en vue de l'accomplissement de ses responsabilites. J e regrette que
le representant de I' Afrique du Sud ait malheureusement cru devoir quitter la seance du Conseil

to c
inter

M. Fourie, representant de I rUnion sud-africaine,

15

90. 1
To th
northl
is no
and t
and
Afric
91.
very
in a
an i
the U
resol
creat
of int

92.
and
enabl
Twen
have
ma
25 M
an in
this
of th
has b
neces

to co-operate with the Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security.

de securite apr~s son expose. Je constate HI. un
manque de volonte de cooperation avec le Conseil
en vue du maintien de la paix et de la securite dans
le monde.

86. At the beginning of the debate doubts were expressed regarding the Council's competence to deal
with the question before it. My delegation naturally
cannot let them pass unchallenged; in its view there
can be no doubt whatever about the competence of
the Council. I shall have some cogent arguments to
put forward on this subject in the statement I am
about to make on the situation in South Africa.

86. On a, au debut de ce debat, emis des reserves
sur la competence du Conseil, s'agissant de la question
qui lui est soumise. Ma delegation ne saurait, bien
entendu, les laisser passeI' sans affirmer que, de son
point de vue, cette competence ne souffre aucun
doute. J'aurai 11 developper des arguments pertinents
en ce sens dans l'expose que je vais faire sur la
situation dans 1'Union sud-africaine.

93. On 21 Mar
started in a n
Africa in prote
Africans should
mitting them to
Under the raci
outside the rese
South Africa, ev
in his own hous
there illegally
issued to him b
there.

87. Two months ago almost to the day, on26 January
1960 [850th meeting], the Security Council decided
to recommend that a newly independent African State,
Cameroun, should be admitted to membership in the
United Nations.

87. n y a deux mois presque jour pour jour, le 26
janvier 1960 [850~me seance], que le Conseil de
securite s'est prononce sur l'admission. comme
Membre de l'Organisation des Nations Unies, d'un
Etat africain nouvellement independant, le Cameroun.

94. Leaving thei
therefore decide
stations and to
carrying these p

88. At that time the Tunisian delegation, together with
all the other members of the Council, expressed its
satisfaction at this happy event and its hope that the
Council would meet again during 1960 to deal with
other req1'ests for admission from other new States
of the African continent whose peoples everywhere
are eagerly working to make up for lost time and are
longing to be able, in freedom, tranquillity, and above
all, dignity, to make a valuable contribution to international co-operation and the maintenance of peace
among nations.

88. La delegation tunisienne s'etait alors felicitee,
en m~me temps que tous les autres membres du
Conseil. de cet heureux evenement, et nous avions
exprime l'espoir que le Conseil se reunirait dans le
courant de cette m~me annee 1960, pour statueI' sur
d'autres demandes d'admission de nouveaux Etats de
ce m~me continent d'Afrique dont les peuples, partout,
oouvrent ardemment pour rattraper le temps perdu
'et aspirent avec ferveur ~ pouvoir apporter, dans
la liberte, la quietude, et surtout dans la dignite,
une contribution precieuse ~ la cooperation internationale et ~ la paix entre nations.

89. How happy we should have been if this vital organ
of the United Nations, upon whom lies the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, had had nothing to concern itself
with, as far as Africa is concerned, except recommendations to the General Assembly for the admission
of new members to this great international family!

89. Comme nous aurions aime que cet organisme
essentiel des Nations Unies, sur lequel repose la
responsabilite principale du maintien de la paix et
de la securite internationales, n'ait ~ s'occuper,
quant ~ l'Afrique, que de recommander ~l'A8semblee
generale l'admission de nouveaux membres dans la
grande famille internationale !

90. Unfortunately this hop~ has not been fulfilled.
To the heart-rending tragedy which has afflicted the
northern part of Africa for the past five years there
is now added a situation fraught with danger. Bloody
and tragic incidents have broken out in South Africa
and have aroused feelings throughout the world, in
Africa as in Asia, in Europe as in America.

90. Ce voou n'est malheureusement pas exauce. A la
tragedie douloureuse que l' Afrique subit depuis
cinq ans dans sa partie Nord, vient de s'ajouter
un drame plein de menaces. Des evenements sanglants
et tragiques ont, en effet, eclate en Afrique du Sud
et ont emu la conscience internationale partout dans
le monde, en Afrique comme en Asie, en Europe
comme en Amer ique.

91. By their scale, their inhuman character, their
very nature, these incidents have once again revea.led,
in a very painful way, an opinionated attachment to
an irrational policy of racial discrimination which
the United Nations has condemned in more than one
resolution and whose persistent implementation has
created a grave situation endangering the maintenance
of international peace and security.

91. Par leur ampleur, leur caract~re inhumain, leur
nature m~me, ces evenements ont mis ~ nouveau en
evidence, et d'une mani~re combien penible, l'ent~tement d'une politique absurde de discrimination
raciale que l'Organisation des Nations Unies a reprouvee dans plus d 'une resolution et dontIa poursuite
obatinee a cree une grave situation mettant en danger
le maintien de la paix et de la.securite internationales.

92. It is this situation which has led the African
and Asian delegations to act in concert in order to
enable the United Nations to take effective action.
Twenty-nine States Members of the United Nations
have accordingly deemed it necessary to bring this
matter before the Security Council in a letter dated
25 March 1960. The Tunisian delegation, representing
an independent African State, will endeavour during
this debate to make an objective and calm analysis
of the grave situation to which the Council 'a attention
has been called in document S/4279 and to draw the
necessary conclusions.

92. C'est ce qui a amene les delegations d'Afrique
et d'Asie ~ se concerter en vue de permettre ~
notre Organisation d'agir, et d'agir efficacement.
C 'est ainsi que, par leur lettre du 25 mars 196Q,
29 Etats Membres des Nations Unies ant estime
necessaire de saisir le Conseil de securite de cette
situation. La delegation tunisienne, representant un
Etat independant d'Afrique, essayera, au CaUl's de
ce debat, d'analyser objectivement et calmement la
situation sur la gravite de laquelle l'attention du
Conseil a ete attiree par le document S/4279, et
de degager les conclusions qui s'imposent.
16

95. In the smal
majority of the
strators who
Vanderbijlpark p
doing by the po
disperse them
unarmed populati

96. At Sharpevi
cars which fired
planes nosedive
an account publi
March 1960, Mr
of the South Afri
spot in Sharpevil
the crowd just b
saw nothing in th
reason to fear f
a European and
way belligerent; 1
were laughing a
direction of the
This same eye
allegation that
"ferocious" wea
after they fled. In
he says, referrin

"1 saw no wea
and afterwards
scene. While
and a few bicyc
97. Similar bloo
burg. The result
were killed or
that on this one
seventy-four kill
reason to believe
98. A Johannesb
land, speaks of
The Government
African Parliam
exceeded 250.
99. Such are the
deep emotion th
South Africa itse
the brutality wi
peaceful demonst
legitimate, but ab

93. On 21 March 1960 a peaceful campaign was

started in a number of towns in the Union of South
Africa in protest against the requirement that all
Africans should always carry with them passes permitting them to move about in their own country.
Under the racial law, in fact, any African who is
outside the reserves, in any locality whatsoever in
South Africa, even in the street where he lives, even
in his own house in the town, is regarded as being
there illegally unless he can prove by a document
issued to him by the police that he is entitled to be
there.

93. Le 21 mars 1960, dans un certain nombre de
villes de I'Union sud-africaine se declenche une
campagne pacifique de protestation contre l'obligation,
i'l. laquelle sont soumis tous les Africains, d'~tre
continuellement porteurs de laissez-passer leur permettant de se deplacer dans leur propre pays. En
vertu de la loi raciale, en effet, chaque Africain
qui se trouve hors des reserves, dans un lieu quelconque de l'Afrique du Sud, m~me clans la rue oil. il
habite, m~me dans sa propre maison en ville, est
cense y ~tre illegalement i'l. moins qu'il ne prouve
par le document que lui delivre la police qu'il est
autorise i'l. s 'y trouver.

94.

Leaving their passes at hom~, the Africans had
therefore decided to proceed peacefully to the police
stations and to let themselves be arrested for not
carrying these papers.

94. Laissant leurs papiers chez eux, les Africains
avaient done decide de se rendre pacifiquement
devant les commissariats de police et de se laisser
arr~ter pour non-detention de ces pi~ces.

95. In the small town of Vereeniging, where a large
majority of the inhabitants are African, the demonstrators who were making their way to the
Vanderbijlpark police posts were prevented from so
doing by the police, who used tear-gas bombs to
disperse them and opened fire on a peaceful and
unarmed population.

95. Dans la petite ville de Vereeniging habitee par
une forte majorite africaine, les manifestants se
dirigeant vers les postes de police de Vanderbijlpark
en ont ete emp~ches par la police qui utilisa, pour
les disperser, des bombes lacrymogi~mes, et ouvrit
le feu sur une population paisible et desarmee.

96. At Sharpeville the police brought in armoured
cars which fired on the crowd, while Sabre-type jet
planes nosedived to frighten the demonstrators. In
an account published in the London Observer of 27
March 1960, Mr. Humphrey Tyler, assistant editor
of the South African magazine Drum, who was on the
spot in Sharpeville, reports that he was mingling with
the crowd just before the firing started and that he
saw nothing in the attitude of the Africans to give him
reason to fear for his personal safety, although he is
a European and a white man; their attitude was in no
way belligerent; large numbers of children and women
were laughing and making friendly gestures in the
direction of the armoured cars which were 2.rriving.
This same eyewitness categorically denies the
allegation that the demoastrators were carrying
"ferocious" weapons, which were found on the ground
after they fled. In the article published in the Obsenlr
he says, referring to these weapons:

96. A Sharpeville, la police fit intervenir des vehicules blinctes qui tir~rent sur la foule pendant que
des avions ~. reaction du type "Sabre" effectuaient
des piques pour effrayer les manifestants. Dans un
recit publie par l'Observer de Londres du 27 mars
1960, M. Humphrey Tyler, sous-directeur de larevue
sud-africaine Drum, qui se trouvait sur les lieux
11 Sharpeville, rapporte qulil s'es~ m~le i'l. la foule
quelques instants avant la fusillade et qu'il n' a rien
observe dans l'attitude des Africains qui ait pu lui
donner i'l. craindre pour sa personne, quoiqu'il soit
europeen et blanc; leur attitude n'etait nullement
belliqueuse; de nombreux enfants et des femmes
riaient et faisaient des signes amicaux i'l. l'adresse
des automitrailleuses qui arrivaient. Lem~metemoin
oculaire d€lmenf catllgoriquement I 'allllgation selon
laquelle les manifestants etaient porteurs d'armes
"feroces" qui auraient ete retrouvees sur le sol
apr~s leur fuite. Il declare, dans l'article publiC par
l'Observer, i'l. propos de ces armes, et je cite:

"I saw no weapons although I looked very carefully
and afterwards studied the photographs of the death
scene. While I was there I saw 0nly shoes, hats
and a few bicycles left among the bodies."

"Je n'en ai jamais vu et pourtant, j'ai regarde
avec beaucoup d'attention et j'ai examine par apr~s
les photographies des lieux tragiques. Lorsque j'y
etais, je n'ai vu que des chaussures, des chapeaux
et quelques bicyclettes parmi les marts."

97. Similar bloody incidents occurred at Johannesburg. The result of all this was that many Africans
were killed or wounded. The official figures admit
that on this one day, 21 March 1960, there were
seventy-four killed and 184 wounded. There is every
reason to believe that the figures were actually higher.

97. Des evenements sanglants similaires eurent lieu
i'l. Johannesburg. Il resulta de tout cela de nombreux

morts et blesses parmi les Africains. Les chiffres
officiels reconnaissent 74 morts et 184 blesses pour
cette journee du 21 mars 1960. Il Y a tout lieu de
penser qu'ils sont au-dessous de la realite.

98. A Johannesburg evening newspaper, Die Vaderland, speaks of 82 dead and some 250 wounded.
The Government admitted yesterday in the South
African Parliament that the number of wounded
exceeded 250.

98. Un journal du soir de Johannesburg, Die Vaderland,
parle de 82 morts et d'environ 250 blesses. Le gouvernement vient de reconnartre hier, au Parlement
de 1'Union sud-africaine, que le nombre des blesses
depassait 250.

99. Such are the tragic incidents which have aroused
deep emotion throughout the world as well as in
South Africa itself. ThiS emotion is due not only to
the brutality with which the police acted against
peaceful demonstrators, whose aims are indubitably
legitimate, but above all to the serious consequences,

99. Tels sont les incidents tragiques qui ont provoque
dans le monde entier, et en Afrique du Sud elle-m~me,
une emotion considerable. Cette emotion est due non
seulement a la brutalite avec laquelle les forces de
police sont intervenues contre des manifestants paisibles dont les intentions sont incontestablement
17

to which attention has been drawn so painfully, that a
resolute and systematic policy of racial discrimination has engendered, and is likely to go on engendering, for the maintenance of world peace.

legitimes, mais surtout aux lourdes consequences,
douloureusement soulignees, qu'une politique determinee et systematique de discrimination raciale a
engendrees et risque encore d'entrafuer serieusement,
pour la paix dans le monde.

African w
be no peac
laws remai

100. Throughout the world, in Africa, in Asia, in
Europe and here in America, public opinion has
expressed its indignation and Governments have
evinced their concern. Those in positions of authority have expressed their regrets and anxiety.
In my country, Tunisia, the National Assembly,
roused to indignation by the tragic incidents of
21 March, adopted a strong motion of protest against
the inhuman policy of the Government of the Union
of South Africa towards a population which could not
be more peaceable.

100. Partout, en Afrique, en Asie, en Europe et ici,
en Am€!rique, 1'opinion publique internationale a manifest€! son indignation, les gouvernements ont manifests leur pr€!occupation. Des voix tr~s autorisees ont exprime leurs regrets ou leurs inquietudes.
Dans mon pays, la Tunisie, l'Assemblee nationale,
vivement indignee par lea evenements tragiques du
21 mars, a emis une €mergique motion de protestation contre la politique inhumaine du Gouvernement
de l'Union sud-africaine ~ l'egard d'une population
on ne peut plus pacifique.

107. As a
have just
curred on
of mourni
dead and
continuing
spread.
108. Fro
France-Pr

101. Since these events the situation has remained
very tense, if not explosive. Africans are prohibited
from holding any meetings. The only two African
political organizations, the African National Congress
and the Pan-Africanist Congress, have been dissolved
and outlawed. Yet they are moderate organizations;
in fact, the only forms of action which they advocate
in support of their just claims are the strike and
passive resistance.

101. Depuis ces evenements, la situation reste tr~s
tendue, sinon explosive. Toutes les reunions sont
interdites aux Africains. Les deux seules organisations
politiques africaines, le Congr~s national africain
et le Congr~s panafricain, sont dissoutes et mises
hors la 101. Ce sont pourtant deux organisations mederees; les seules methodes d'action qu'e11es preconisent, en effet, pour appuyer leurs justes revendications, sont la gr~ve et la resistance passive.

102. The Liberal Opposition in the South African
Parliament has denounced this bloody repression and
has asked not only for an inquiry into the tragedy
but over and above all that discussions with the
African leaders should be initiated as soon as possible.

102. L'oppcsition liberale du Parlementsud-africain
a manifeste sa reprobation i\ l' egard de cette repression sanglante et a reclame non seulement une enqu~te sur cette tragedie, mais surtout que des discussions s'engagent le plus rapidement possible avec
les leaders africains.

103. The religious leaders of the Union of South
Africa, the Council of the Congregational Union Qf
South Africa, the Chief Rabbi and the Roman Catholic
Archbishop of the Cape Province stated on 24 March:

103. Les chefs religieux de l'Union .~ud-africaine,
le Conseil de l'Union des congregations, le grand
rabbin et l'archev~que catholique du Cap, n'ont pas
manqu~ d'exprimer leur profonde ~motion. L'archev~que anglican du Cap a declare le 24 mars, et je
cite:

"I invite all men of goodwill to pray for South
Africa at this very tragic moment in its history.
But I feel obliged to observe that until the whole
body of discriminatory legislation which leans so
heavily on certain sections in the population is
withdrawn, there can be no possibility of a peaceful
future for the country."

"J'invite tous les hommes de bonne volonte ~
prier pour l'Afrique du Sud dans un moment aussi
tragique de son histoire. Mais force m'est de
constater que tant que des lois de discrimination
pesant aussi lourdement sur certaines categories
de la population ne seront pas abolies, il n'y aura
pas de paix dans ce pays."

It gives us satisfaction to pay a tribute to him for

these very wise and fair observations.

n nOllS est agreable de rendre hommage ~ des paroles
aussi sages et aussi justes.

104. The Union Government eventually decided on
24 March to order an inquiry to be carried out,
but searches and arrests are continuing.

104. Le GOllvernement de 1'Union a fini par ordonner
une enqu~te le 24 mars, mais les perquisitions et
les arrestations continuent.

105. It also announced that it was temporarily suspending the requirement that passes should be carried.
How trivial this measure seems in view of the broad
scope of the movement and the importance of the
. question! In the first place, because it is only of
uncertain duration; then, and above all, because the
law concerning the compulsory carrying of passes
by Africans is only one part of a whole series of laws
and regulations establishing the system of racial
discrimination in South Africa. And there is already
talk of reconsidering the decision to suspend this
requirement.

105. n a annonce aussi qu'il suspendait provisoirement le port obligatoire des laissez-passer.
Combien parart anodine une te11e mesure devant
I' ampleur du mouvement et l'importance du probl~me !
D'abord, parce qu'e11e n'est que precaire; ensuite,
et surtout, parce que la loi sur le port obligatoire
du laissez-passer impose aux Africains n'est qu'une
partie d'un ensemble de lois et de r~glements qui
instituent le regime de discriminatiQn raciale en
Afrique du Sud. Et voil~ que l'on parle dej~ de
revenir sur cette decision de suspension.

106. The Africans' refusal since 21 March to obey
thl! pass laws is only a practical and peaceful method
of resisting this whole system which is an embodiment
of the racist doctrine itself. As a prominent Souti'

106. Le refus oppose depuie le 21 mars par lea
Africains il se soumettre il la legislation sur les
laissez-passer n'est qu'une mani~re pratique et
pacifique de s'opposer ~ l'ensemble de ce regime
18

"The
African
the Afric
Albert L
a large n
for thei
Africans.
Congress
Young Pe
the Colo
the Colo
mentione
"Mr.
and autho
Country,
ashamed
arrested
of the
Marknya
Mr. Leo
Trade U
number 0

109. Thus
in South Af
higher. It
the struggl
gear. Peac
repression,
which has
Africans t
their legiti
the greate
subjugated
becomes t
cUrity. It b
is brought t
110. I ca
-over and
have broug
the conscie
situation.
to see the
have been
in London,
the large
Union of So
111. This
capital citi

.\\

es,
er-

e a

JUt,

lci,

lalatoes.
lIe,
du
esent
ion

rlls
ant
ons
ain
!les

10-

re-

en.ve.
ain

African whom I have just quoted has said, there will
be no peace so long as this whole arsenal of racial
laws remains in operation in South Africa.

constitue par la doctrine raciste elle-m~me. Comme
1'a dit une eminente personnalite sud-afric!line que
je viens de citer, 11 n'y aura pas de paix tant que
l'ensemble de cet arsenal de lois raciales subsistera
encore en Afrique du Sud.

107. As a sad but inevitable illustration of what we
have just said, further incidents unfortunately occurred on 28 March du.ring a strike started as a sign
of mourning; the regrettable outcome was fifteen
dead and some dozens wounded. The arrests are
continuing and are becoming more :::.nd more widespread.
108. From the latest dispatches from "Agence
France-Presse" we learn that:

107. Triste mais inevitable illustration de ce que
nous venons de dire, les incidents ont malheureusement repris, le 28 mars, au cours d'une gri':lve
declenchee en signe de deu11; 15 morts et plusieurs
dizaines de blesses sont ~ deplorer. Les arrestations
continuent et prennent de plus en plus un aspect
generalise.

liThe arrests carried out today by the South
African police have been directed-in addition to
the African National Congress, whose President,
Albert Luthuli, is among those arrested-against
a large number of other organizations either known
for their liberal sympathies or composed of
Africans. Among them the Transvaal Indian
Congress, the South African Liberal Party, the
Young People's League, the Congress of Democrats,
the Coloured People's Progressive Association and
the Coloured Worker's Association are specifically
mentioned.

IILes arrestations operees aujourd'hui par la
police sud-africaine ont frappe - en dehors du
Congri':ls national africain, dont le prllsident,
Albert Luthuli, figure parmi les personnalites mises
en etat d'arrestation - un grand nombre d'autres
organisations connues pour leurs tendances liberales ou groupant des Africains. Parmi elIes, on
cite notamment le Congri':ls indien du Transvaal,
le Congri':ls sud-africain, le Parti liberal d'Afrique
du Sud, la Ligue des jeunes, le Congres des democrates, l'Association progressiste des gens de
couleur, l'Association des travailIeurs de couleur,
etc.

"Mr. Alan Paton, Chairman of the Liberal Party
and author of the well known novel Cry. my Beloved
Country, who has not been arrested, said 'I am
ashamed that I have not been arrested'. Among those
arrested are Mr. Duma Nokwe, General Secretary
of the African National Congress, the Reverend
Marknya of the Pretoria Anglican Mission, and
Mr. Leon Levy, Chairman of the South African
Trade Union Congress. It is thought that the total
number of arrests may be as high as 200.

"M. Alan Paton, president du Parti liberal et auteur du celi':lbre roman Pleure, mon pays bien-aime,
qui n'a pas ete arr~te, a declare: IIJ'ai honte de
n'avoir pas ete arrete. 1I Parmi les personnalites
arr~tees figurent M. Dun1a Nokwe, secretaire
general du Congri':ls national africain, le reverend
Marknya, de la Mission anglicane de Pretoria,
M. Leon Levy, president du Congri':ls des syndicats
sud-africains. On pense que le nombre total des
arrestations pourra atteindre 200.

"The wave of arrests has had a marked effect
on the Johannesburg stock exchange, where prices
have slumped sharply."

IILa vague d'arrestations a produit un effet considerable ~ la Bourse de Johannesburg, oil. les
cours ont enregistre un vllritable effondrement."

109. Thus the repression goes on; tension mounts
in South Africa; international feeling runs higher and
higher. It would seem that the classic machinery of
the struggle against colonialism is being put into
gear. Peaceful demonstrations are met with blind
repression, which is intended to be decisive but
which has the inevitable effect of provoking the
Africans to strive the more desperately to obtain
their legitimate rights. The harsher the repression,
the greater is ilie danger that the struggle of the
subjugated will erupt in violence, and the greater
becomes the threat to international peace and security. It behoves us today to ensure that this process
is brought to an end.

109. Ainsi donc, la repression continue, la tension
en Afrique du Sud augmente; 1'emotion internationale
est de plus en plus vive. Il semble que 1'on soit pris
dans l'engrenage classique de la lutte anti-coloniale.
Aux manifestations pacifiques, on repond par une
repression aveugle et qui se veut decisive, d'oil. la
consequence inevitable de la reprise plus vehemente
de la lutte des Africains pour la conqu~te de leurs
droits legitimes. Plus la repression sera dure, plus
la lutte du domine risque malheureusement de prendre
un aspect violent, plus la paix et la securite internationales seront menacees" C'est le deroulement de
ce processus qu'il nous incol)lbe aUj ourd'hui d' arreter.

110. I cannot give the names of all the countries
-over and above the twenty-nine Member States which
have brought this matter before the Council-in which
the conscience of the people has been aroused by this
situation. May I say, however, how reassuring it is
to see the demonstrations of public opinion which
have been taking place above all at The Hague and
in London, the capitals of the countries of origin of
the large majority of the white population of the
Union of South Africa.

110. Je ne saurais enumerer en detail tous les pays,
autres que les 29 Etats Membres qui ont saisi le
Conseil, dans lesquels la conscience populaire s'est
manifestee devant cette situation. Qu 'H me soit per:rp.is,
toutefois, de signaler combien reconfortantes sont
les manifestations de cette conscience populaire qui
ont eu lieu principalernent ~ La Haye et ~ Londres,
capitales des pays d'origine de la grande majorite
de la population blanche de 1'Union sud-africaine.

111. This great and deep emotion which has stirred
capital cities all over the world and has led to the

111. Cette grande et profonde emotion qui a souleve
les capitales ~ travers le rnonde et qui a provoque

108. Aux dernieres nouvelles, publi~es par 1'agence
France-Presse, nous apprenons que, et je cite:

es-

en-

lS-

vec

.ne,

and
pas
he-

t je

e~

:ssi
de
:ion

'ies

ura

lIes

ner
et

lvi-

:er.
'ant

(le!

ite,

lire

une
qui

en
. de

les

les
et
me

19

convening of the Security Council, is aroused not so
much by the bloody events of 21 March themselves
as by the fact that they are the foreseeable result
of a systematic policy of racial discrimiuation conducted in defiance of the purposes and principles of
the Charter and of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and in disregard of the numerous
resolutions adopted by the Assembly, especially
since 1952. Ever since 1952 the General Assembly
has sought in vain, session after session, to bring
the Union Government to a better understanding of
its responsibilities under the Charter and the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

la convocation du CO!lseil de securite, provient
moins des evenements sanglants du 21 mars en euxm~mes, que du fait qu'ils sont le resultat previsible
d tune politique systematique de discrimination raciale menee 1l. l'encontre des buts et des principes
de la Charte et de la Declaration universelle des
droits de 1'homme, et ce malgre les nombreuses
resolutions adoptees par l'Assemblee g€merale depuis,
notamment, 1952. Car crest depuis 1952 que, sans
reHlche, de session en session, l'Assemblee generale
essaie en vain de ramener le Gouvernement de 1'Union
1l. une meilleure conception de ses responsabilites
aux termes de la Charte et de la Declaration universelle des droits de l'homme.

112. Having made the absolute supremacy of 3 million
white people a fundamental principle of the State,
the Union of South Africa has instituted a system
which relegates 12 million Africans to the status of
pariahs.

112. Faisant de la suprematie totale de 3 millions
de blancs un principe fondamental de l'Etat, l'Union
sud-africaine a institue un systi':lme qui reli':lgue
12 millions d'Africains 1l. la condition de parias de
la societe.

113. Reserves are established for them in the areas
least favoured by nature and they are denied by law
the right to acquire 1<1.:'ld, even in the reserves where
they are compelled to live. Outside these reserves
they are forbidden to move from place to place.
For example, an African who after living continuously
for fifty years in the town where he was born leaves it
to reside elsewhere, even for only two weeks, no
longer has the right to return to his town for more
than seventy-two hours. An African who has lived in
the same town ever since his birth is not allowed to
entertain a married daughter or a son of over
eighteen years of age in his home for more than
seventy-two hours. A white man is forbidden to employ
without authorization an African who has resided in
a town continuously for fourteen years. Certain types
of work among white people are of course absolutely
prohibited to Africans. There can of course be no
question of an African occupying a post of any importance in the administrative or governmental
service. Africans may live only in the reserves.
Elsewhere, whether in the country or in the towns,
they may not work for a living or move from one
place to another without special authorization, under
penalty of imprisonment or of heavy fines, which if
necessary, they will pay in the form of forced labour
on private farms.
114. In such a system, which inevitably brings to
mind the system established against the Jews by
the Nazi regime, the police are of course all powerful.
This explains the importance of the pass, which alone
enables an African to live in his own country. This
system, which is contrary to the purposes and principles of the Charter and to Article 55 c has more
than once occupied the attention of the General
Assembly. Despite all the resolutions, despite all
the conciliatory efforts to approach the Government
of the Union of South Africa in order to bring it to
a healthy understanding of its responsibilities as
a Member of the United Nations, that Government
has rejected any solution in conformity with law and
justice.

113. Creant des reserves, pour eux, dans les regions
les moins favorisees par la nature, la loi leur interdit le droit d'acquerir un terrain, m~me dans les
reserves, oil. ils peuvent seulement subsister. Hors
de ces reserves, il leur est interdit de se deplacer.
Ainsi, un Africain ne dans une vi!lp. <:>! Y vivant d'une
fagon continue depuis 50 ans n'a plus le droit dry
retourner pour plus de 72 heures, s'il quitte Gette
ville pour resider ailleurs, ne !tU-ce que deux semaines. Un Africain qui, depuis sa naissance, a
reside continuellement dans une ville, n'a pas le
droit de recevoir chez lui, pour plus de 72 heures,
sa filIe mariee ou un fils qui a depasse l'a.ge de
18 ans. nest interdit 1l. un blanc d'employer sans
autorisation un Africain qui a reside continuellement
14 ans dans une ville. Certains genres de travaux,
chez les blancs, sont bien entendu absolument interdits aux Africains. n ne saurait assurement etre
question de se demander si unAfricainpeutparticiper
1l. un rouage de quelque importance de l'appareil
administratif ou gouvernemental. Les Africains
peuvent seulement vivre dans les reserves. Ailleurs,
dans la campagne ou dans les villes, ils ne peuvent
travailler pour vivre ou se deplacer qu'en vertu
d'autorisations speciales, sous peine d'emprisonnement ou de fortes amendes qu'ils regleront au
besoin par les travaux forces dans les fermes privees.

114. Dans un tel systi':lme, qu'OTI ne peut siemp~cher
de comparer au systi':lme etabli contre les juifs par
le regime nazi, la police a bien entendu tous les
droits. On comprend alors l'importance du laissezpasser qui seul permet 1l. un Africain de vivre dans
son propre pays. Ce regime, contraire aux buts et
aux principes de la Charte et au paragraphe Q de
l'Article 55 de la Charte, a preoccupe 1l. plus d'une
reprise l' Assemblee generale. Malgre toutes les
resolutions, malgre toutes les tentatives d'approche
conciliantes en vue d'amener le Gouvernement de
1'Union sud-africaine l'!. une saine comprehension de
ses engagements comme Membre de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies, ce gouvernement s'est refuse 1l.
toute solutior. conforme au droit et 1l. la justice.

115. I do not propose to recall in detail the debates
which have taken place on the painful subject of
"apartheid" since 1952. But I do not think we can
forget the praiseworthy efforts made by the General
Assembly to put an end to this immoral and inhuman
doctrine, which is the direct cause of the bloody
disturbances which we deplore today. Three times

115. Je ne veux pas rappeler dans leur detail les
debats qui, depuis 1952, ont eu lieu autour de cette
penible question de l' "apartheid". Mais je ne crois
pas qu'on puisse oublier les efforts meritoires de
l'Assemblee generale tendant 1l. mettre fin 1l. cette
doctrine immorale et inhumaine, source directe des
troubles sanglants que nous deplorons aUjourd'hui.

20

the
co-o
thre
amic
the
Gove
worki
revea
to c
Gene
to pr
Coun
The
It ha
discr
princ
refus
again
which
It is
in th
Afric
and t
that
endan
feare
South
serio
regre
in fa
twen
have
Secur
116.
shirk
Articl
it to
Natio
those
in Sou
peace
its
Memb
decisi
logi.ca
studvi
numb
in vi
Gener
reco
situat
opinio
and t
dome
place,
which
and
bym
ar
many
vi01at
Unite

runni
in Ch
of the
one r
its.pu
to ap

provient
's en euxJrevisible
lation raprincipes
'selle des
mbreuses
Lledepuis,
que, sans
l generale
del'Union
nsabilites
ation uni-

I millions

Lt,l'Union
i rel~gue
parias de

esregions
i leur ine dans les
ter. Hors
deplacer.
vant d'une
I droit d'y
Litte eette
l deuxsessance, a
'a pas le
12 heures,
e l'a.ge de
.oyer sans
.u ellement
l travaux,
Llment inIment etre
participer
l'appareil
Africains
Ailleurs,
le peuvent
.'en vertu
lmprison;leront au
Isprivees.
emp~cher

juifs par
u tous les
u laissez{ivre dans
IX buts et
lphe .2 de
plus d'une
:outes les
l'approche
lement de
lension de
ganisation
; refuse ~
tice.
detail les
r de cette
~ ne crois
itoires de
in ~ cette
irecte des
ljourd'hui.

the General Assembly has tried to find a basis for
co-operation with the Union Government through a
three-member Commission. Sac! to relate, these
amicable methods have never been successful in
the numerous conflicts between the South African
Government and the United Nations. The method of
working through a commission has been particularly
revealing of the reluctance of the Union Government
to co-operate. Thus all the efforts made by the
General Assembly during eight consecutive sessions
to prevent such a situation as that with which the
Council is now faced have unhappily been in vain.
The Union of South Africa has disregarded them.
It has stubbornly persisted in its policy of racial
discrimination,. which it has made a fundamental
principle of the State. In so doing it has deliberately
refused to co-operate with the United Nations, once
again disregarding the clear-cut and precise obligation
which each Member has assumed under the Charter.
It is with regret that I must add here that I note that
in this debate the delegation of the Union of South
Africa apparently wishes to abandon our discussions
and to withhold its co-operation. The continuance of
that racial policy has created a situation likely to
endanger international peace and security. It is to be
feared that the distressing events occurring inside
South Africa may start a chain reaction which will
seriously endanger international security. It is
regrettable to note that the tragedy of 21 March has
in fact created a situation of such Lt nature that
twenty-nine States Members of the United Nations
have been impelled to bring the matter before the
Security Council.

A trois reprises, l'Assemble generale a essaye de
trouver une formule de cooperation avec le Gouvernement de l'Union, par l'intermediaire d'une commission de trois membres. Il est triste de dire que
ces methodes amiabIes n'ont jamais reussi dans les
nombreux conflits qui opposent le Gouvernement
sud-africain a l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
La methode des commissions a particuli~rement
demontre le peu d'empressement du Gouvernement
de l'Union ~ cooperer. Ainsi, toutes les tentatives
de l'Assemblee generale, depuis huit sessions consecutives, en vue de prevenir une situation telle que
celle qu'affronte le Conseil aujourd'hui, ont ete
malheureusement vaines. L'Union sud-africaine les a
ignorees. Elle s'est obstinee a poursuivre sa politique de discrimination raciale, erigee en principe
fondamental de l'Etat. Ce faisant, elle a deliberement
refuse de cooperer avec l'Organisation, ignorant
encore une fois l'engagement net et precis que tout
Membre a pris en vertu de la Charte. J'ai le regret
d'ajouter ici que je constate et j'enregistre qu'au
cours de ce debat, la delegation de l'Union sudafricaine semble vouloir deserter le Conseil et
refuser sa cooperation. La poursuite de cette politique raciale a crM une situation de nature il. mettre
en danger la paix et la securite internationales. n
etait a craindre que des evenements douloureux a
l'interieu:!" de l'Afrique du Sud n'engendrent une serie
d'evenements en chafne qui mettent effectivement en
danger la securite internationale. n est regrettable
de constater que la tragedie du 21 mars a cree effectivement une situation telle que 29 Etats Membres
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies ont ete amenes
~ saisir le Conseil de securite .

116. My delegation considers that the Council cannot
shirk the responsibility incumbent upon it under
Article 24, paragraph 1, in particular, which authorizes
it to act on behalf of the Members of the United
Nations, the more so since more than one third of
those Members have drawn its attention to the situation
in South Africa as one likely to endanger international
peace and security. In agreeing that in carrying out
its duties the Council acts on their behalf, all the
Members have implicitly undertaken to abide by its
decisions, in accordance with the Charter. It is only
logical that the Council, for its part, cannot avoid
studying a situation brought before it by a large
number of Members of the Organization, especially
in view of the various resolutions in which the
General Assembly has already, and in vain, made
recommendations designed to prevent a dangerous
situation like the one which we now deplore. In our
opinion it is useless to invoke Article 2, paragraph 7,
and to say that the matter is essentially within the
domestic jurisdiction of a Member State. In the first
place, the eight sessions of the General Assembly
which dealt with racial discrimination in South Africa
and the many resolutions which have been adopted,
by majorities of over two-thirds, make such an
argument untenable. Moreover, it has been recognized
many times that there are situations in. which the
violation of human rights is so serious that the
United Nations could not disregard them without
running the risk of failing in its mission, as defined
in Chapter I setting forth the purposes and principles
of the Charter. When a State sets up the supremacy of
one race over another as a fundamental principle of
its .public life and devises every means of coercion
to apply it rigorously, it incontestably creates a

116. Ma delegation estime que le Conseil ne saurait
se derober ~ la responsabilite qui lui incombe, notamment, en vertu de l'Article 24, paragraphe 1, de
la Charte, agissant ainsi au nom des Membres de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies, alors et surtout que
plus du tiers de ces Membres viennent d'appeler son
attention sur la situation en Afrique du Sud comme
etant une situation mena~ant la paix et la securite
internationales. En reconnaissant que le Conseil agit
dans l'accomplissement de ses responsabilites, en leur
nom, tous les Membree se sont engages implicitement
~ se soumettre ~ ses decisions conformement a la
Charte. nest logique, en contrepartie, que le Conseil
ne puisse eviter d' examiner une situation que lui
soumet une fraction importante des Membres de
l'Organisation, d'autant plus que differentes resolutions de l'Assemblee generale ont deja vainement
formule des recommandations en vue de prevenir une
situation dangereuse telle que celle que nous deplorons.
On invoquerait vainement, a notre aVis, l'Article 2,
paragraphe 7, pour dire qu'il s'agit d'une question
relevant essentiellement de la competence interieure
d'un Etat Membre. Tout d'abord, les huit sessions
au cours desquelles l'Assemblee generale a traite de
la discrimination raciale en Afrique du Sud et les
'multiples resolutions qui ont ete adoptees, a une
majorite depassant les €leID: tiers, ne sauraient permettre un tel argument·. 'n a ete par ailleurs maintes
fois reconnu qu'il y a des situations oil. la violation
des droits de I 'homme est tellement grave que
l'Organisation ne saurait les meconnaitre sans risque
de faillir il. sa mission, telle qu'elle est definie au
Chapit1'0 premier, qui €lnonce les buts et principes de
la Charte. Lorsqu'un Etat llrige en principe fondamental de sa vie publique la supr€lmatied'une race sur

21

r.

"'
'.1.
(,;

r
;:'

.

dangerous situation not only within its own territory
but also for the peace and security of the continent
where it is situated and, consequently, of the whole
world.

une autre, et forge tous les moyens de coercition pour
1'appliquer avec rigueur, 11 cree incontestablement
une situation dangereuse, non seulement 1\ l'interieur
de ses fronti~res, mais pour la paix et la securite
sur le continent oil il se trouve et, par voie de consequence, dans le monde entier.

117. I have said that one cannot help comparing the

117. J'ai dit que 1'on ne peut s'emp~cher de rapprocher la pratique de la politique raciale en Afrique
du Sud 1\ l' egard des Africains majoritaires dans le
pays 1\ celle pratiquee par le nazisme i\ l'egard des
Juifs pourtant minoritaires dans le pays. Dans les
deux cas une politique inhumaine a ete pratiquee par
le gouvernement. Les Africains de l'Union sudafricaine ont seulement cet avantage sur les Juifs
dans le regim nazi que la couleur de leur peim les
dispense du port obligatoire d'un signe apparent.
Notre generation n'a pas encore oublie les consequences desastreuses qu'ont entralhees, pour le
monde, les methodes nazies.

racial policy practised in South Africa with regard to
the African majority in that country to the policy
practised by the Nazis with regard to the Jewish
minority in their country. In both cases an inhuman
policy was carried out by the Government. The
Africans in the Union of South Africa have only this
advantage over the Jews during the Nazi regime:
that the colour of their skin absolves them from the
obligation to wear some visible sign. Our generation
has not yet forgotten the disastrous consequences
which the Nazi methods entailed for the world.
118. One of the fundamental reasons for the estab-

118. L'une des raisons essentielles de la creation
de l'Organisation des Nations Unies est justement
d'reuvrer en vue de garantir les droits fondamentaux
de 1'homme dans 1'egalite, la dignite et la justice.
Elle l'a fait sans resultat au cours des differents
debats de l'Assemblee generale i\ propos de la politique raciale de l'Afrique du Sud. n appartient au
Conseil de securite maintenant, et surtout depuis
le 21 mars 1960, de trouver la meilleure solution i\
une situation qui devient de plus en plus dangereuse.
Car, nous n'en sommes plus i\ une situation simplement contraire i\ la morale et au droit, mais ~ une
situation qui met en peril la paix sur tout le continent
africain. Quand la paix risque d'etre menacee, le
Conseil de securite se doit d'intervenir.

lishment of the United Nations was precisely that it
should endeavour to guarantee the fundamental rights
of man in equality, dignity and justice. Its efforts
to do so dUring the various debates of the General
Assembly on the racial policy of South Africa have
been in vain. Now, and especially since 21 March 1960,
it is the duty of the Security Council to find the best
solution to a. situation which is becoming increasingly
dangerous, for we are no longer confronted with a
situation that is merely contrary to morality and law;
we are confronted with a situation which endangers
peace on the whole African continent. When there is
a threat to peace, the Council is in duty bound to
intervene.
119. May I recall that in 1946, during its discussion
of the Spanish question, the Security Council gave
very serious attention to what might seem to be a
purely domestic situation. It considered, however,
that the situation was a sufficiently serious threat to
the maintenance of peace to warrant its taking the
matter up very actively. In our opinion the state of
affairs now prevailing in South Africa creates a much
more serious situation than did the Spanish question.

119. Rappellerai-je qu'en 1946, le Conseilde securite
s'est penche tr~s serieusement, ~ propos de la
question espagnole, sur une situation qui pouvait
para1'tre purement interieure. Il avait pourtant estime
qu'une telle situation etait suffisamment grave pour
le maintien de la paix pour qu'il s'en occupa.t tr~s
activement. Or, i\ notre avis, l' etat de choses qui
r~gne actuellement en Afrique du Sud est bien plus
grave que la situation que lIon a examinee ~ propos
de la question espagnole.

120. First of all, I should like to emphasize how

peaceful we Africans are and what a feeling of deep
friendship we have for all the foreigners who have
settled in our continent, especially when they cease
to define their relations with us as those between the
dominating and the dominated. We are seriously
afraid that the brutality with which on 21 March last
the Government of the Union of South Africa put down
a movement of peaceful and legitimate protest against
one of the manifestations of its racial policy-that
of not being able to move from place to place without
a pass-we fear, I say, that the situation thus created
will engender throughout Africa unfortunate resentments which will jeopardize co-operation, concord
and harmony on the African continent.

120. Je tiens tout d'abord 1\ souligner combien nous,
Africains, sommes pacifiques et de sentiments profondement amicaux i\ 1'egard de tous les etrangers
qui sont venus s'installer sur notre continent, surtout
quand ces etrangers cessent de definir leurs rapports
~ notre egard comme etant ceux du dominant et du
domine. Nous craignons serieusement que la brutalite avec laquelle le Gouvernement de 1'Union sudafricaine a reprime le 21 mars dernierunmouvement
de protestation aussi pacifique, mais aussi legitime
contre une des manifestations de sa politique raelale - celle de ne pouvoir se deplacer sans laissezpasser - nous craignons, dis-je, que la situation ainsi
creee n'engendre partout en Afrique des ressentiments
malheureux menaQant la cooperation, la concorde et
1'harmonie sur le continent africain.

121. I venture to hope that the Africans of the Union
will be able to remain sufficiently calm and composed
in the face of the repression which the Government
of the Union of South Africa has unfortunately undertaken. From this point of view it is indeed
reassuring that on 22 March one of the African
leaders, Mr. Albert Luthuli, President of the African

121. J'ose esperer que les Africains de 1'Union
sauront garder suffisamment de calme et de sangfroid devant la repression dans laquelles'estmalheureusement engage le Gouvernement de l'Union sudafricaine. Combien il est reconfortant i\ ce point de
vue que 1'un des leaders africains, M. Albert Luthuli,
president du Congr~s national africain, assigne ~ resi22

•

coercition pour
Jontestablement
3nt it 1'interieur
I{ et la securite
lar voie de con-

p~cher de rapJiale en Afrique
,ritaires dans le
!le it l' egard des
pays. Dans les
le pratiquee par
:e l'Union sud;e sur les Juifs
de leur peau les
signe apparent.
.blie les consefnees, pour le

: de la creation
s est justement
ts fondamentaux
:e et la justice.
;; des differents
'opos de la polin appartient au
surtout depuis
lleure solution it
llus dangereuse.
ituation simpleroit, mais it une
tout le continent
lre menacee, le
ir.

'nseil de securite
~ propos de la
:ion qui pouvait
; pourtant estime
nent grave pour
'en occupllt tr~s
.t de choses qui
Id est bien plus
aminee ~ propos

ir combien nous,
sentiments prolS les etrangers
ontinent, surtout
lr leurs rapports
L dominant et du
nt que la brutade 1'Union suder un mouvement
s aussi legitime
sa politique raer sans laissezla situation ainsi
3S ressentiments
1, la concorde et

•

r
National Congress, who has been ordered to live in
Zululand, sent a message to the Europeans. After
asserting that the Africans had no intention of driving
the whites out of the country but were simply claiming
the right to just treatment, he stated that there
would be no solution until the races reached an
understanding. Thus, it is reassuring to see that the
Africans are thinking only of peace and agreement.
But it would be dangerous if the Security Council did
not take the situation seriously in hand with a view
to finding an adequate solution for it.

dence au Zoulouland, ait adresse le 22 mars dernier
un message aux Europeens. Apr~s avoir affirme que
l'intention des Africains n', '3t nullement de chasser
les blancs du pays, mais d'a"oir droit it un traitement
juste, il a declare qu'il n'y aurait de solution que
lorsque les races s'entendront. Ainsi, il est reconfortant de voir les Africains ne penser qu'it la paix et it
l'entente. Mais il serait dangereux que le Conseil
de securite ne prenne pas serieusement la situation
en main en vue de lui trouver une solution adequate.

122. At this stage of the debate, the Tunisian delegation wishes to make the following observations.

122. A ce stade du debat, la delegation tunisienne
tient, toutefois, it faire les precisions suivantes.

123. The request that we addressed to the Security
Council does not concern the problem of racial discrimination per se, as a question involving the
universal principles of human rights, since in our
opinion this question is still within the competence
of the General Assembly, which has already dealt
with it in the course of eight consecutive sessions.
We can only regret that the various resolutions adoptee.
in that respect have not been accepted by the Government of the Union of South Africa.

123. n ne s'agit pas, dans la requ~te adress~e par
nous au Conseil de securite, du probl~me de la discrimination raciale en soi, en tant que question touchant aux principes universels des droits de 1'homme,
ce probl~me continuant it relever it notre avis de la
competence de l'Assemblee generale, qui en a dejit
traite au cours de huit sessions consecutives. Nous
ne pouvons que regretter que les differentes resolutions adoptees it cet egard n'aient pas trouve un
accueil favorable aupr~s du Gouvernement de 1'Union
sud-africaine.

124. What the request brought be-:.:>re the Council
by the twenty-nine nations concerns is the bloody
repression undertaken by the Union Government,
especially since 21 March 1960, as an inevitable
consequence of its racial policy. The present situation
is likely to produce complications both inside and
outside the Union, thus creating a latent threat to
international peace and security. We hold that the
Council is in duty bound to take prompt and energetic
action in accordance with its responsibilities. It
seems to us that the General Assembly's various
resolutions have exhausted all possible means of
conciliation; we can only regret that they have been
unsuccessful.

124. Mais ce dont il s'agit dans la requ~te introduite
devant le Conseil par les 29 nations, c'est de la
repression sanglante dans laquelIe s'est engage le
Gouvernement de l' Union, notan!lillent depuis le
21 mars 1960, comme consequence inevitable de sa
politique raciale. La situation presente risque d'engendrer des complications internes et externes it
1'Union creant une menace latente contre la paix et
la securite internationales. Le Conseil, selon nous,
se doit se decider d'une action prompte et energique
dans le cadre de ses responsabilites. Il nous semble
que toutes les voies de conciliation ont ete epuisees
par les differentes resolutions de l'Assemblee generale; nous ne pouvons que regretter qu'elles n'aient
pas reussi.

125. It is now the Council's duty to take really
effective action to bring the situation before it to an
end, with a view to the maintenance of a genuine and
lasting peace, which according to resolution 377 (V),
entitled "Uniting for peace", "depends... especially
upon respect for and observance of human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all ... ".

125. n appartiendra maintenant au Conseil de prendre
une decision reellement efficace mettant fin radi··
calement it la situation soumise it son examen, en vue
du maintien d'une paix reelle et durable qui, suivant
la resolution 377 (V) intitulee "Uunion pour le maintien de la paix", "depend, en particulier, du respect
effectif des droits de 1'homme et des libertes fondamentales 110ur tous ... ".

126. My delegation reserves the right to state its
position in further detail if it deems that necessary.

126. Ma delegation se reserve le droit de preciser
davantage sa position si elIe l'estimait necessaire.

The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m.

La seance est levee a 13 h 5.

ains de l'Union
lme et de sang11e s'est malheude l'Union sudlllt it ce point de
•. Albert Luthuli,
n, assigne it resi23

~-

!

-=="":=="= "-~'-

SALES AGENTS FOR UNIT~D NATIONS PUBLICATIONS
DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARG~NTINA·"A.RGENTINE

Edltarlal Sud"merlcana, S.A., AI.lna 500,
Buenos Aires.
AUSTRALlA·AUSTRALlE
Melbaurne University Pren, 369/71 Lon..
dale Street, Melbaurne C.l.
AUSTRIA·AUTRICHi:
Gerald & Co., Graben 31, Wien, 1.
B. Willlerstorff, Markus Slttlkusstras.. 10,
Salzburg.
BELGIUM.BELGIQUE
Agence et Messagerles de la Prene,
S.A., 14-22, rue du Persil, Bruxelles.
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
lIbrerla Selecciones, Casllla 972, La Paz.
BRAZIL·BRESIL
livraria Agir, Rua Mexico 98·B, Calxa
Postal 3291, Rio de Janeiro.
BURMA-BIRMANIE
Curator, Govt. Baok Depot, Rangoon.
CAMilODIA-CAMBODGE
Entreprise khmere de Iibrairie, Phnom·
Peoh.
CANADA
The Queen's Printer, Ottawa, Ontario.
CEYLON·CEYLAN
lake House Baakshap, Assac. Newspapers
of Ceylon, P.O. ~"x 244, Colombo.
CHILE-CHill
Editorial del Pacifica, Ahumada 57,
Santiaga.
lIbrer!a Iven', Casllla 205, Santiaga.
CHINA-CHINE
The W'arld Baak Co., lid., 99 Chung
King Raad. 1st Sectian. Taipeh, Taiwan.
The Cammercial Press, lid., 211 Honan
Rd., Shanghai.
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
librer!a Buchhalz, Bogota.
librerla America, Medellin.
!Ibrerla Nacianal, Ltda., Barranqullla.
COSTA RICA
Imprenta y librerla Treia., Apartada
1313, San Jose.
CUBA
La Caso Belga, O'Reilly 455, la Habana.
CZECHOSLOVAKIA-TCHECOSLOVAt:lUIE
Ceskoslavensky Spisavatel, Narodnf rrida
9, Praha 1.
DENMARK-DANEMARK
Elnar Mu"k.gaard. lid., Nprregade 6,
Ktlbenhavn, K.
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC.
REPUBLIQUE DONOINlCAINE
lIbrerla Domlnlcana, Merced.. 49, Clu·
dad Trullllo.
ECUADOR.EQUATEUR
lIbrerla Clentlflca, Guayaqul,' & Qulto.
EL SALVADOR.SALVADOR
Manuel Novas y Cia., la. Alenida .ur
37, San Salvador.
ETHIOPIA.ETHIOPIE
InternatianClI Press Agency, P.O. Bax
120, Addis Ababa.
FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateemh;en Kirjakauppa, 2 Ke.kuskatu,
Hel,inki.
FRANCE
Editians A. Pedane, 13, rue Saufflot,
Pari, (Ve).
GERMANY-ALLEMAGNE
R. Eilenschmldi, S;hwanthaler Strosse
59, Frankfurt!Main.
Elwert & Meurer, Hnuptstrasse 101,
Berlin·Schoneberg.
Alexander Harn. Sp.i"gelga"e 9, Wie.·
baden.
W. E. Saarbach. Gertrudenstra.,e 30,
Koln (1).

GHANA
University Baakshap, University College
af Ghana, P.O. Bax Legan.
GREECE-GRECE
Kauffmann Baak.hap, 2B Stadlon Street,
Athene••
GUATEMALA
Sociedad Econ6mico-Financiera, 6a Av.
14-33, Guatemala City.
HAITI
Libralrle "A la Caravelle", Boite pa.tale
111.B, Part·au·Prince.
HONJjURAS
Libreria Panamericana, Teguclgalpa.
HONG KONG-HONG-KONG
Th" Swindan Baok Ca., 25 Nathan Raad,
Kawlaon.
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bakave..lun Sigfu.ar Eymund"anar H.
F., Au'turstraeti 18, Reykjavik.
INDIA-INDE
Orient Langmans, Calcutta, Bambay, Ma·
dras, New Delhi & Hyderah.d.
Oxlard Boak & Statianery Ca., New
Delhi & Calcutta.
P. Varadachary & Ca., Madras.
INDONESIA·INDONESIE
Pemban(lunan, Ltd., Gunung Saharl B4,
Diak,,,ta.
IRAN
"Guity", 482 Ferdaw.i Avenue, Teheran.
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie's Baok'hap, Baghdad.
IRELAND·IRLANDE
Statianery Office, Dublin.
ISRAEL
Blum.tein's Baak,tares, 35 Allenby Rd.
and 4B Nachlat Benjamin St., Tel Aviv.
ITALY·ITALlE
lIbreria Cammissionarla Sonsanl, VIa
Gina Cappani 26, Firenze, & Via D. A.
Azuni 15/ A, Roma.
JAPAN-JAPON
Maruzen Campany, Ltd., 6 Tari.Nichame,
Nihanba'hi. Takyo.
JORDAN.JORDANIE
Jaseph I. Bahaus & Co., Dar·ul·Kvtub,
Box 66, Amman.
KOREA·COREE
Eul·Yoo Publl.hlng Co., Ltd., 5, 2·KA,
Chongno, Seoul.
LEBANON·L1;AN
Khayat'. Colleg. Book Caoperative
92.94, rue BII.., Beirut.
LIBERIA
J. Mamalu Kamara, Manrovia.
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer, luxembaurg.
MEXICO·MEXIQUE
Editarial Herme., S.A., Ignacio Marl.cal
41, Mexico, D.F.
MOROCCO-MAROC
Burea,' d'etudes ef de participatians
industrieUes, 8, rue Michaux·Bellaire,
Robot.
NETHERLANDS·PAYS·BAS
N.V. Martinu, Nijhoff, Lange Vaarh",,'
9, 's·Gravenhage.
NEW ZEALAND·NOUVELLE-ZELANDE
United Nations Association af New Ze,,·
land, C.P.O. lOll, Wellingtan.
NORWAV.NORVEGE
Jahan Grundt Tanum Farlag, Kr. Au·
gus"gt. 7A, Oslo.

Orders and inquiries from countries where sales agents have
not yet been appointed may;';

s-'m~ fO:~-.:JJS and Circulation

Sedion, United Nations, New York, U.S.A.; or Sales Section,

United Nalians Ollice, Patois des Nalions, Geneva. Swilzer/and.

Litho in V.N.

PAKISTAN
The Pakistan Ca'aperative Baak Saclety.
Dacca, East Pakistan.
Publishers United, Ud., lahore.
Thamas & Thamas. Karachl. 3.
PANAMA
Jase Menendez, Apartada 2052, Av. aA,
sur 21·58, Panama.
PARAGUAY
Agencia de librerias de Salvadar Nina,
Calle Pte. Franca Na. 39·43, Asunclon.
PERU·P~ROll

Librer.JQ Internacional del Peru, S.A.,
Lima,

PHILIPPINES
Alemar's Baak Stare, 769 Rizal Avenue,
Manila.
PORTUGAL
livrarla Radrlgues, 186 Rua Aurea, 1I..
baa.
SINGAPORE-SINGAPOUR
The City Back Store, lid., Callyer Quay.
SPAIN-ESPAGNE
libreria Basch, 11 Randa Unlversidad.
Barcelona.
libreria Mundl.Prenso, Castella 37, Ma·
drid.
SWEDEN-SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl. Havbakhandel A·B,
Fred,gatan 2, Stackhalm.
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payat, S.A., Lausanne, Geneve.
Hans Raunhardt, Kirchgasse 17, Zilrlch 1.
THAILANIl-THAILANDE
Pramuan Mit. lid., 55 Chakrawat Raad,
Wat Tuk. Bangkak.
TURKEY-TURQUIE
libr"irie Hachette, 469 ISliklal Caddesi,
Beyaglu. Istanbul.
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
UNION SUD-AfRICAINE
Van Schaik', Baakstare (Pty.), Ltd.• Bax
724. Prelaria.
UNION OF SOVIET SOCIALIST
REPUBLICS-UNION DES REPUBLlQUES
SOCIALlSTES SOVIETIQUES
Mezhdunaradnaya Knyiga, Smalenskaya
Plashr.had, Maskva.
UNIUD ARAB REPUBLIC.
REPU~L1QUE ARABE UNIE
lIbralrle "la Renaissance d'Egypte", 9
Sh. Adly Pasha, CaIra.
UNITED KINGDOM.ROYAUME.UNI
H. M. Statlanery OHlc~, P.O. Box 569,
london, S.E.l.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE
International Documents ServIce, Colum-

bia University Pre", 2960 Braadway.
New Ya.k 27, N. Y.
URUGUAY
Representacion de Editoriales, Praf. H.
D'Elra, Plaza Cagancha 1342, 1 0 plso,
Mantevidea.
VENEZUELA
librerla del Este, Av. Miranda, No. 52.
Edf. Galipan, "Caracas.
VIET-NAM
librairie.Papeterie XuBn Thu, 185. rue
Tu.Da, B.P. 283, Saigan.
YUGOSLAVIA-YOUGOSLAVIE
Can karjeva Zala~ba, ljubljana, Slo>v( ;;a.
Drzavno
Preduzec'e,
Jugoslovenska
Knjiga. Terazije 27/11, Beagrad.
Prosvjeto, 5, Yrg Bratstva i Jedinstya,
Zagreb.
[60Bl]

Les commandes et eiemandes de renseignements emanonl de
pays all it n'existe pas encore cle· deposifa;res peuvent etre
oaressees a la Section des ventes et de la distribution,
Organlsalion des Natians Unies, New·York (Elals·Unis d' Am.·
rique): ou ci 10 5edion aes ventes, Orgonisation des 'Nations
Unies, Palais des Nations, Geneve (5uisse).

Price: $V.S. 0.35; 2/6 stg.; Sw. fr. 1.50
(or eqUivalent in other currencies)

18340-November 1960-1,675
