A/72/49 (Vol. III)

Resolutions and Decisions
adopted by the General Assembly
during its seventy-second session
Volume III
25 December 2017 – 17 September 2018

General Assembly
Official Records·Seventy-second Session
Supplement No. 49

United Nations·New York, 2019

NOTE
The resolutions and decisions of the General Assembly are identified as follows:
Regular sessions
Until the thirtieth regular session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed by a roman numeral in parentheses indicating
the session (for example: resolution 3363 (XXX)). When several resolutions were
adopted under the same number, each of them was identified by a capital letter placed
between the two numerals (for example: resolution 3367 A (XXX), resolutions 3411 A
and B (XXX), resolutions 3419 A to D (XXX)). The decisions were not numbered.
Since the thirty-first session, as part of the new system adopted for symbols of
General Assembly documents, resolutions and decisions have been identified by an
arabic numeral, indicating the session, followed by an oblique stroke and another arabic
numeral (for example: resolution 31/1, decision 31/301). When several resolutions or
decisions were adopted under the same number, each of them has been identified by a
capital letter placed after the two numerals (for example: resolution 31/16 A,
resolutions 31/6 A and B, decisions 31/406 A to E).
Special sessions
Until the seventh special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly were
identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letter “S” and a roman
numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 3362 (S-VII)). The decisions
were not numbered.
Since the eighth special session, resolutions and decisions have been identified
by the letter “S” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by an oblique
stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution S-8/1, decision S-8/11).
Emergency special sessions
Until the fifth emergency special session, the resolutions of the General Assembly
were identified by an arabic numeral followed, in parentheses, by the letters “ES” and
a roman numeral indicating the session (for example: resolution 2252 (ES-V)). The
decisions were not numbered.
Since the sixth emergency special session, resolutions and decisions have been
identified by the letters “ES” and an arabic numeral indicating the session, followed by
an oblique stroke and another arabic numeral (for example: resolution ES-6/1, decision
ES-6/11).
In each of the series described above, the numbering follows the order of adoption.
*
*

*

The present volume contains the resolutions and decisions adopted by the General Assembly
from 25 December 2017 to 17 September 2018. Resolutions adopted by the Assembly from
12 September to 24 December 2017 appear in volume I. Volume II contains the decisions adopted
by the Assembly during that period.

ISSN 0252–7014

Contents
Section

Page

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee ........................................................................ 1
II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee) ....................................................................................................................................... 105
III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee........................................................................ 107
IV. Decisions......................................................................................................................................................... 177
A. Elections and appointments................................................................................................................... 179
B. Other decisions ....................................................................................................................................... 185
1.

Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee ....................................................... 185

2.

Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee........................................................... 195
Annexes

I. Allocation of agenda items ............................................................................................................................ 199
II. Checklist of resolutions and decisions .......................................................................................................... 201

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page

72/267.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds
and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts ........................................................................ 2

72/268.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis................................ 4

72/271.

Improving global road safety ........................................................................................................................................................ 7

72/272.

World Bicycle Day ...................................................................................................................................................................... 13

72/273.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea ............................................. 15

72/274.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases................................................................................................. 16

72/275.

International Association of Permanent Representatives to the United Nations..................................................................... 18

72/276.

Follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace .................................................... 19

72/277.

Towards a Global Pact for the Environment ............................................................................................................................. 20

72/278.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union....................................... 22

72/279.

Repositioning of the United Nations development system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review of operational activities for development of the United Nations system .................................................................... 25

72/280.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia,
and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia .................................................................................................................... 30

72/281.

International Day of Family Remittances .................................................................................................................................. 31

72/282.

Complete and unconditional withdrawal of foreign military forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova ........... 32

72/283.

Strengthening regional and international cooperation to ensure peace, stability and sustainable development
in the Central Asian region ......................................................................................................................................................... 34

72/284.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review ........................................................................................... 37

72/305.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council .......................................................................................................................................... 49

72/306.

Implementation of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025) ............................................................ 54

72/307.

Modalities for the high-level review of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway .......................... 55

72/308.

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration ................................................................................................................................................................ 57

72/309.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing countries,
particularly in Africa, by 2030.................................................................................................................................................... 68

72/310.

New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support.................................... 77

72/311.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa.......................................................................... 85

72/312.

United Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse .......................................................................................................... 94

72/313.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly ................................................................................................................ 95

1

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/267
A/RES/72/267

Adopted at the 78th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.41 and
A/72/L.41/Add.1, sponsored by: Angola, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada, Central African
Republic, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guinea, Hungary, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Lithuania, Malta, Montenegro, Namibia, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Ukraine, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Zambia

72/267. The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link between the illicit transaction of rough
diamonds and armed conflict as a contribution to prevention and settlement of conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that the trade in conflict diamonds continues to be a matter of serious international concern, which
can be directly linked to the fuelling of armed conflict, the activities of rebel movements aimed at undermining or
overthrowing legitimate Governments and the illicit traffic in and proliferation of armaments, especially small arms
and light weapons,
Recognizing also the devastating impact of conflicts fuelled by the trade in conflict diamonds on the peace,
safety and security of people in affected countries, and the systematic and gross human rights violations that have
been perpetrated in such conflicts,
Noting the negative impact of such conflicts on regional stability and the obligations placed upon States by the
Charter of the United Nations regarding the maintenance of international peace and security, and recognizing that
continued action to curb the trade in conflict diamonds is imperative,
Noting with appreciation that the Kimberley Process, as an international initiative led by Participants, has
pursued its deliberations on an inclusive basis involving concerned stakeholders, including producing, exporting and
importing States, the diamond industry and civil society, as well as applicant States and international organizations,
Noting that the vast majority of rough diamonds produced in the world are from legitimate sources, recalling
that the elimination of conflict diamonds from legitimate trade is the primary objective of the Kimberley Process, and
stressing the need to continue its activities in order to achieve this objective,
Welcoming the important contribution of the Kimberley Process, which was initiated by African diamondproducing countries, and calling for the consistent implementation of commitments made by Kimberley Process
Participants and the diamond industry and civil society organizations, as observers,
Acknowledging the successful role that the Kimberley Process has played, in the last 15 years, in stemming the
flow of conflict diamonds and the valuable development impact it has had in improving the lives of most people
dependent on the trade in diamonds,
Acknowledging also that the diamond sector is an important catalyst for promoting economic and social
development, which are necessary for poverty reduction and meeting the requirements of the Sustainable
Development Goals in many producing countries, particularly in developing countries,
Recalling its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, committed itself to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, recognized that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions, including
extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable development, and
expressed its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling also the positive benefits of the legitimate diamond trade to producing countries and its critical
contribution to the economies of the producing, exporting and importing States, and underlining the need for
continued international action to prevent the problem of conflict diamonds from negatively affecting the trade in
legitimate diamonds,
Recalling further the Charter and all the relevant resolutions of the Security Council related to conflict diamonds,
and determined to contribute to and support the implementation of the measures provided for in those resolutions,
2

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 1459 (2003) of 28 January 2003, in which the Council strongly supported
the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme1 as a valuable contribution against trafficking in conflict diamonds,
Noting with satisfaction that the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme continues to
have a positive impact in reducing the opportunity for conflict diamonds to play a role in fuelling armed conflict and
helps to protect legitimate trade and ensure the effective implementation of the relevant resolutions on trade in conflict
diamonds,
Acknowledging that lessons learned from the Kimberley Process may be useful for the work of the
Peacebuilding Commission in its consideration of the countries included in its agenda, as appropriate,
Recognizing that regular review and reform of the Kimberley Process will be necessary to keep pace with and
aim to address the ongoing threat of instability, conflict and contemporary challenges in the diamond trade, as well as
to seize contemporary opportunities,
Welcoming the implementation of the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme in such a way as not to impede
the legitimate trade in diamonds or impose an undue burden on Governments or industry, particularly smaller
producers, nor to hinder the development of the diamond industry,
Welcoming also the decision of the 54 Kimberley Process Participants, representing 81 countries, including the
28 States members of the European Union represented by the European Commission, to address the problem of conflict
diamonds by participating in the Kimberley Process and implementing the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme,
Welcoming further the demonstration by Gabon of its determination to become a Kimberley Process Participant
and its having met the main requirements,
Noting the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of 11 December 2012 granting an
extension until 31 December 2018 of a waiver with respect to the measures taken to implement the Kimberley Process
Certification Scheme,
Recognizing that State sovereignty should be fully respected and that the principles of equality, mutual benefits
and consensus should be adhered to,
Recognizing also that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme, which came into effect on 1 January 2003,
will be credible only if all Participants have the requisite national legislation coupled with effective and credible
internal systems of control designed to eliminate the presence of conflict diamonds in the chain of producing,
exporting and importing rough diamonds within their own territories and across their borders, while taking into
account that differences in production methods and trading practices, as well as differences in the institutional controls
thereof, may require different approaches to meeting minimum standards, encouraging all Participants to exceed them
and to work towards overall compliance with the Kimberley Process standards,
Recalling its resolution 71/277 of 2 February 2017 and its previous resolutions 55/56 of 1 December 2000,
56/263 of 13 March 2002, 57/302 of 15 April 2003, 58/290 of 14 April 2004, 59/144 of 15 December 2004,
60/182 of 20 December 2005, 61/28 of 4 December 2006, 62/11 of 26 November 2007, 63/134 of 11 December
2008, 64/109 of 11 December 2009, 65/137 of 16 December 2010, 66/252 of 25 January 2012, 67/135 of
18 December 2012, 68/128 of 18 December 2013, 69/136 of 12 December 2014 and 70/252 of 22 January 2016, in
which it called, inter alia, for the development and implementation as well as a periodic review of proposals for a
simple, effective and pragmatic international certification scheme for rough diamonds,
1. Takes note of the outcomes of the fifteenth plenary meeting of the Kimberley Process, hosted in Brisbane
by Australia from 10 to 14 December 2017;2
2. Reaffirms its strong and continuing support for the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme1 and the
Kimberley Process as a whole;
3. Recognizes that the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme helps to ensure the effective implementation
of relevant resolutions of the Security Council containing sanctions on the trade in conflict diamonds and contributes
_______________
1
2

See A/57/489.
See A/72/775, annex.

3

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

to the prevention of future conflicts fuelled by diamonds, and calls for the full implementation of existing Council
measures targeting the illicit trade in rough diamonds, particularly conflict diamonds which play a role in fuelling
conflict;
4. Also recognizes the important contributions that the international efforts to address the problem of conflict
diamonds, including the Kimberley Process, have made to the settlement of conflicts and the consolidation of peace
in Angola, Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia and Sierra Leone;
5. Encourages Member States to continue to extend capacity-building assistance to Participants in areas
relevant to compliance with Kimberley Process standards, rules and procedures, as well as best practices in the
diamond industry;
6. Reaffirms the importance of the tripartite nature of the Kimberley Process, stresses that the widest possible
participation in the Kimberley Process Certification Scheme is essential, encourages Participants to contribute to the
work of the Kimberley Process by seeking membership, participating actively in the Certification Scheme and
ensuring compliance with its undertakings and the effective implementation of its measures, underscores the
importance of the Civil Society Coalition and its members to the Kimberley Process, and acknowledges the
importance of supporting additional applications for membership by civil society organizations;
7. Commends the work of Kimberley Process working bodies in advancing the objectives of the Kimberley
Process, recognizes the value that engagement with external organizations has brought to the work of the Kimberley
Process and its working bodies, and recognizes the progress made in preparing guiding principles to that end;
8. Encourages further strengthening of the Kimberley Process to enhance its effectiveness in addressing
challenges posed to the diamond industry and related communities, including from instability and conflict, and to
ensure that the Kimberley Process remains relevant for the future and continues to contribute to international peace
and security, including peacebuilding, and the achievement of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development3 and
the Sustainable Development Goals;
9. Acknowledges with great appreciation the important contribution that Australia, as Chair of the Kimberley
Process in 2017, has made towards curbing the trade in conflict diamonds, and welcomes the selection of the European
Union as the Chair of the Kimberley Process for 2018 and India as the Vice-Chair for 2018 and the Chair for 2019;
10. Welcomes the five special forums arranged by the 2017 Chair of the Kimberley Process to canvass broader
matters pertinent to the diamond trade, which included discussions of diamond supply chain equity, indigenous
peoples and mining in Australia, alluvial and artisanal diamond mining, synthetics, sustainability reporting and the
harnessing of new technologies, including blockchain technology;
11. Requests the Chair of the Kimberley Process to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session
a report on the implementation of the Kimberley Process;
12. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “The role of
diamonds in fuelling conflict”.
RESOLUTION 72/268
A/RES/72/268

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.40, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

72/268. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 71/159 of 15 December 2016, entitled “Global health and foreign policy: health
employment and economic growth”, in which it decided to hold a high-level meeting in 2018 on the fight against
tuberculosis,
_______________
3

4

Resolution 70/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling also its resolution 71/3 of 5 October 2016, entitled “Political declaration of the high-level meeting of
the General Assembly on antimicrobial resistance”, and its resolution 70/266 of 8 June 2016, entitled “Political
Declaration on HIV and AIDS: On the Fast Track to Accelerating the Fight against HIV and to Ending the AIDS
Epidemic by 2030”,
Recognizing that through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development4 and its Sustainable
Development Goals in September 2015, Heads of State and Government made a bold commitment to ending the
tuberculosis epidemic by 2030,
Recognizing also the World Health Organization End TB Strategy, endorsed by the sixty-seventh World Health
Assembly, in 2014,5
Taking note of the Global Tuberculosis Report 2017 of the World Health Organization,
Emphasizing that current global actions and investments fall far short of those needed to end the global
tuberculosis epidemic,
Welcoming the convening of the World Health Organization First Global Ministerial Conference on Ending
Tuberculosis in the Sustainable Development Era: A Multisectoral Response, held in Moscow on 16 and
17 November 2017, and taking note with appreciation of its outcome, which forms part of the way towards the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly on tuberculosis,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on the options and modalities for the organization of the highlevel meeting on tuberculosis convened by the President of the General Assembly,6
1. Decides that the one-day high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis convened by the President
of the General Assembly shall be held in New York on the second day of the general debate of the Assembly at its
seventy-third session, from 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., consisting of an opening segment, a plenary
segment for general discussion, two multi-stakeholder panels and a brief closing segment;
2. Also decides that the overall theme of the high-level meeting will be “United to end tuberculosis: an urgent
global response to a global epidemic”;
3.

Further decides that:

(a) The opening segment, to be held from 10.30 to 11.30 a.m., will feature statements by the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-third session, the Secretary-General, the Director General of the World Health
Organization, the Chair of the Stop TB Partnership and the Chair of the World Health Organization First Global
Ministerial Conference on Ending Tuberculosis in the Sustainable Development Era: A Multisectoral Response, as
well as an eminent high-level champion of the fight against tuberculosis and a person affected by tuberculosis, both
selected, in consultation with Member States, by the President of the General Assembly, giving due consideration to
gender equity;
(b) The plenary segment, to be held from 11.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 5.30 p.m., will comprise
statements by Member States and observers of the General Assembly; a list of speakers will be established in
accordance with established practices of the Assembly, and the time limits for these statements will be three minutes
for individual delegations and five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group of States;
4.

Decides that the organizational arrangements for the two multi-stakeholder panels will be as follows:

(a) Two consecutive multi-stakeholder panels will be held in parallel to the plenary segment, one from
11.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and the other from 3 to 4.30 p.m.;
(b)

The multi-stakeholder panels will address the following themes:

Panel 1: Accelerating comprehensive response through access to affordable prevention, diagnosis,
treatment and care to end the tuberculosis epidemic, including multi-drug-resistant tuberculosis, taking into
consideration co-morbidities and the linkages to relevant health challenges on each country’s path towards
_______________
4

Resolution 70/1.
See World Health Organization, document WHA67/2014/REC/1, resolution 67.1.
6
A/72/645.
5

5

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

achieving universal health coverage, taking note of and building on the efforts concerning an accountability
framework to drive multisectoral action, as envisaged in the Moscow ministerial declaration;
Panel 2: Scaling up sufficient and sustainable national and international financing and implementation for
service delivery, innovation and research and development to identify new diagnostics, drugs, vaccines and
other prevention strategies;
(c) Each of the two multi-stakeholder panels will be co-chaired by two representatives, one from a hightuberculosis-burden country and one from a low-tuberculosis-burden country with successful tuberculosis control
programmes, to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly from among the Heads of State or
Government attending the high-level meeting, in consultation with the regional groups;
(d) The President of the General Assembly may invite parliamentarians, local governments, the heads or
senior representatives of relevant United Nations entities, civil society, the private sector, academia, medical
associations, indigenous leadership and community organizations to serve as speakers on the panels, taking into
account gender equity, level of development and geographical representation;
5. Also decides that the closing segment by the President of the General Assembly will comprise summaries
of the multi-stakeholder panels and concluding remarks by the President of the General Assembly and a statement by
a person affected by tuberculosis;
6. Further decides that the high-level meeting shall approve a concise and action-oriented political
declaration, agreed in advance by consensus through intergovernmental negotiations, to be submitted by the President
of the General Assembly for adoption by the Assembly;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with the support of the World Health Organization and
the Stop TB Partnership, hosted by the United Nations Office for Project Services, to organize and preside over an
interactive civil society hearing, no later than July 2018, with the active participation of appropriate senior-level
representatives of Member States, observers of the General Assembly, parliamentarians, representatives of local
government, relevant United Nations entities, non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council, invited civil society organizations, academia, medical associations and the private
sector, as well as people affected by tuberculosis and broader communities, ensuring the participation and voices of
women, girls and indigenous leadership as part of the preparatory process for the high-level meeting, and also requests
the President to prepare a summary of the hearing prior to the high-level meeting;
8. Encourages all Member States to participate in the high-level meeting, including the multi-stakeholder
panels, at the highest possible level, preferably at the level of Heads of State and Government;
9.

Invites all observers of the General Assembly to be represented at the highest possible level;

10. Invites the United Nations system, including funds, programmes and specialized agencies, including the
World Health Organization, regional commissions and relevant envoys of the Secretary-General, as well as the Stop TB
Partnership, hosted by the United Nations Office for Project Services, UNITAID, hosted by the World Health
Organization, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, as appropriate, to participate in the highlevel meeting, as appropriate, and urges them to consider initiatives in support of the preparatory process and the meeting,
particularly with regard to sharing good practices, challenges and lessons learned from tuberculosis-related responses;
11. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council with
relevant expertise to register with the Secretariat to attend the meeting;
12. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of other relevant representatives of
relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector with
expertise in tuberculosis who may attend the high-level meeting and participate in the interactive civil society hearing
and the multi-stakeholder panels, taking into account the principles of transparency and equitable geographical
representation, with due regard to the meaningful participation of women, and to submit the list to Member States for
their consideration on a non-objection basis;7
_______________
7

The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.

6

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

13. Invites members of civil society, especially those representing communities and those in vulnerable
situations heavily affected by tuberculosis, to make a fundamental contribution to the process in terms of raising
awareness of the issues faced by the poorest and most marginalized populations of the world;
14. Encourages Member States to consider including in their national delegations representatives such as
parliamentarians, mayors and governors of cities and states with a high burden of tuberculosis, representatives of civil
society, including non-governmental organizations, indigenous leadership, community organizations and faith-based
organizations, academia, philanthropic foundations, the private sector and networks representing people affected by
tuberculosis, with due regard to gender equity;
15. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session, in consultation with
Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high-level meeting.
RESOLUTION 72/271
A/RES7/2/271

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.48 and
A/72/L.48/Add.1, sponsored by: Andorra, Angola, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Canada, Chad, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Estonia,
Finland, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Japan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Malawi,
Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Myanmar, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Palau, Philippines, Poland, Qatar,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain, Sudan, Sweden, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam

72/271. Improving global road safety
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 57/309 of 22 May 2003, 58/9 of 5 November 2003, 58/289 of 14 April 2004, 60/5 of
26 October 2005, 62/244 of 31 March 2008, 64/255 of 2 March 2010, 66/260 of 19 April 2012, 68/269 of 10 April
2014 and 70/260 of 15 April 2016, on improving global road safety,
Having considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report on improving global road safety8
and the recommendations contained therein,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Recalling that the Sustainable Development Goals and targets are integrated and indivisible and balance the
three dimensions of sustainable development, and acknowledging the importance of reaching the road safety-related
targets, such as target 3.6, which aims to halve, by 2020, the number of global deaths and injuries from road traffic
accidents, and target 11.2, which aims to provide, by 2030, access to safe, affordable, accessible and sustainable
transport systems for all, improving road safety, notably by expanding public transport, with special attention to the
needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons, as well as road
safety targets aimed at strengthening resilience and adaptive capacity vis-à-vis hazards and developing sustainable
and resilient infrastructure,
Noting that, as the end of the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020 approaches, the overwhelming
majority of road traffic deaths and injuries are preventable and that, despite some improvements in many countries,
including in developing countries, they remain a major public health and development problem that has broad
social and economic consequences which, if unaddressed, may affect progress towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals,
_______________
8

A/72/359.

7

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that human suffering, combined with costs to some countries of up to 5 per cent of their gross
domestic product a year, makes reducing road traffic deaths and injuries both an economic and a social priority,
especially for some countries, and that investment in road safety has a positive impact on public health and the economy,
Taking into account that road traffic deaths and injuries are also a social equity issue, as the poor and the
vulnerable are most frequently also vulnerable road users, namely, pedestrians, cyclists, users of motorized two- and
three-wheeled vehicles and passengers of unsafe public transport, who are disproportionately affected and exposed to
risks and road traffic crashes, which can lead to a cycle of poverty exacerbated by income loss, and recalling that the
aim of road safety policies should be to guarantee protection to all users,
Recognizing that road safety requires addressing broader issues of equitable access to mobility and that the
promotion of sustainable modes of transport, in particular safe public transport and safe walking and cycling, is a key
element of road safety,
Taking into account the importance of strengthening institutional capacity and continuing international
cooperation, including South-South and triangular cooperation, cooperation between countries that share roads across
borders and cooperation among regional and international organizations, to further support efforts to improve road
safety, particularly in developing countries, and providing, as appropriate, support to meet the goals of the Decade of
Action and those of the 2030 Agenda,
Emphasizing that, while each country has primary responsibility for its own economic and social development
and the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized in the context of reaching the
Sustainable Development Goals, international public finance plays an important role in complementing the efforts of
countries to mobilize public resources domestically, especially in the poorest and most vulnerable countries with
limited domestic resources,
Expressing its concern that the number of road traffic crashes remains unacceptably high, and that crashes
represent a leading cause of death and injury around the world, killing more than 1.3 million people and injuring as
many as 50 million people a year, with 90 per cent of those casualties occurring in developing countries, and
concerned also that road traffic crashes are the leading cause of death around the world for children and young people
between 15 and 29 years of age,
Expressing its concern also that, at the current rate of progress, target 3.6 of Sustainable Development Goal 3
will not be met,
Expressing its concern further that the adoption and implementation of road safety measures remain inadequate
in many countries,
Acknowledging the leading role of Oman and the Russian Federation in drawing the attention of the international
community to the global road safety crisis,
Commending Member States that have taken a leadership role by adopting comprehensive legislation on key
risk factors, including the non-use of seat belts, child restraints and helmets, the drinking of alcohol and driving, and
speeding, and drawing attention to other risk factors, such as low visibility, medical conditions and medicines that
affect safe driving, fatigue and the use of narcotic drugs and psychotropic and psychoactive substances, mobile phones
and other electronic and texting devices,
Encouraging Member States to promote multi-stakeholder partnerships to address the safety of vulnerable road
users, the delivery of first aid to victims of road traffic accidents or crashes, training and education, notably in
developing and least developed countries,
Recognizing the progress made by some Member States in providing road traffic crash victims and their families
with universal access to health care in the pre-hospital, hospital, post-hospital and rehabilitation and reintegration phases,
Acknowledging the work of the United Nations system, in particular the leadership of the World Health
Organization, in close cooperation with the United Nations regional commissions, in establishing, implementing and
monitoring various aspects of the Global Plan for the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, and the
commitment of the United Nations Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), the United Nations Environment
Programme, the United Nations Children’s Fund and the International Labour Organization, among other entities, to
supporting those efforts as well as that of the World Bank and regional development banks to implementing road
safety projects and programmes, in particular in developing countries,
8

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Commending the World Health Organization for its leadership role in preventing road traffic injury and for its
role in implementing the mandate conferred upon it by the General Assembly to act, in close cooperation with the
United Nations regional commissions, as a coordinator on road safety issues within the United Nations system,9 and
anticipating the next Global Status Report on Road Safety, which will be the fourth in a series of reports to monitor
progress over the period of the Decade of Action, as requested in Assembly resolution 62/244,
Commending also the United Nations regional commissions for their work in increasing road safety activities
and advocating increased political commitment to road safety, and in working towards setting regional and national
road traffic casualty reduction targets, in particular the work of the Economic Commission for Europe in elaborating
global road safety-related legal instruments, including international conventions and agreements, technical standards,
resolutions and good practice recommendations, as well as in servicing 58 global and regional legal instruments that
provide a commonly accepted legal and technical framework for the development of international road, rail, inland
water and combined transport,
Emphasizing the role of the United Nations Road Safety Collaboration as a consultative mechanism to facilitate
international road safety cooperation,
Commending the work of two Economic Commission for Europe groups of experts, namely, on road signs and
signals and on improving safety at level crossings, and recognizing the continuous work of the Global Forum for
Road Traffic Safety and the World Forum for Harmonization of Vehicle Regulations to improve vehicle and road
safety,
Noting with approval the road safety performance review projects of the Economic Commission for Europe,
carried out in collaboration with the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific and the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean under the United Nations Development Account and with the
Economic Commission for Africa with support from the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Road Safety, as
well as the work of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia on prioritizing road safety to strengthen
the national road safety management capacity of selected countries, and commending the development and
implementation of road traffic safety management systems for different types of organizations, such as the extensive
work of the International Organization for Standardization in developing the requirements for road traffic safety
management systems,10
Acknowledging a number of other important international efforts on road safety, including the development by
the International Road Transport Union of harmonized and internationally recognized standards for the vocational
training of road transport professionals, as well as the development of an updated Road Safety Manual by the World
Road Association to offer guidance to officials at various levels on measures that can enhance the safety of road
infrastructure,
Welcoming the efforts of the Special Envoy for Road Safety, with secretariat support from the Economic
Commission for Europe, in effectively mobilizing sustained high-level commitment to road safety by advocating
adherence to and raising awareness of the United Nations legal instruments on road safety, sharing good practices,
including through participation in global and regional conferences, and advocating for increased funds for road safety,
Taking note of the report of the International Transport Forum of the Organization for Economic Cooperation
and Development entitled Zero Road Deaths and Serious Injuries: Leading a Paradigm Shift to a Safe System and
the letter of intent of the International Transport Forum, the World Bank and the International Automobile Federation
to develop regional road safety data observatories, and noting the promotion by the International Transport Forum of
effective road traffic injury prevention at the forthcoming Summit on Transport Safety and Security, to be held in
Leipzig, Germany, from 23 to 25 May 2018,
Recognizing the commitment of Member States and civil society to road safety, as demonstrated by their
participation in United Nations Global Road Safety Week, including during the fourth Week, held from 8 to 14 May
2017, which highlighted the dangers of speed in order to generate action on measures to reduce speed and improve
safety on the world’s roads,
_______________
9

See resolution 58/289.
See International Organization for Standardization, ISO 39001:2012.

10

9

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing also Member States and civil society for their continued commitment to road safety, as
demonstrated by their observance of the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday
of November every year,
Acknowledging the efforts of Member States in contributing to international road safety by conducting research
and collecting evidence that will inform policies, as well as by encouraging the sharing of best practices that enhance
vehicle and infrastructure safety as well as human behaviour in road traffic,
Recognizing that providing basic conditions and services to address road safety is primarily a responsibility of
Governments, especially in view of the decisive role that legislative bodies can play in the adoption of comprehensive
and effective road safety policies and laws and their implementation, while recognizing nonetheless that there is a
shared responsibility to move towards a world free from road traffic fatalities and serious injuries and that addressing
road safety demands multi-stakeholder collaboration among the public and private sectors, academia, professional
organizations, non-governmental organizations and the media,
Commending the World Health Organization, along with the regional commissions and other United Nations
system agencies, for facilitating a process to develop voluntary global performance targets and corresponding
indicators for road safety, as requested by the General Assembly in its resolution 70/260, as well as by the World
Health Assembly in its resolution 69.7, adopted on 28 May 2016,11
1. Reiterates its invitation to Member States and the international community to intensify national, regional
and international collaboration, with a view to meeting the ambitious road safety-related targets in the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development;12
2. Welcomes the adoption by the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III) of the New Urban Agenda,13 which, taking into account that the majority of road traffic
deaths and injuries take place in urban areas, gives appropriate consideration to road safety and access to safe,
affordable, accessible and sustainable public transport and non-motorized modes of transport, paying special attention
to the needs of those in vulnerable situations, women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons;
3. Also welcomes the approval by consensus of the 12 voluntary global performance targets for road safety
risk factors and service delivery mechanisms at the meeting of States members of the World Health Organization held
in Geneva on 20 and 21 November 2017, notes the work of the World Health Organization in developing
corresponding indicators intended to help measure progress towards achieving these targets, encourages the
application of these indicators, when appropriate, and in this respect encourages the World Health Organization to
carry out activities to support countries, especially countries in Africa and the least developed countries, in the
implementation of targets and measurement of progress;
4. Encourages Member States to take steps, following good practices, towards achieving the voluntary
global performance targets for road safety;
5. Invites Member States that have not already done so to develop and implement national road safety plans,
as appropriate, and to consider adopting comprehensive legislation in line with the Global Plan for the Decade of
Action for Road Safety 2011–2020, with a view to meeting the target of increasing the percentage of countries with
comprehensive legislation on key risk factors, including the non-use of seat belts, child restraints and helmets, the
drinking of alcohol and driving, and speeding, from 15 per cent to at least 50 per cent by 2020, as agreed in resolution
64/255, and to consider implementing appropriate, effective and evidence- and/or science-based legislation on other
risk factors related to distracted or impaired driving;
6. Reaffirms the role and importance of the United Nations legal instruments on road safety, such as the 1949
Convention on Road Traffic,14 the 1968 Convention on Road Traffic,15 the 1968 Convention on Road Signs and

_______________
11

See World Health Organization, document WHA69/2016/REC/1.
Resolution 70/1.
13
Resolution 71/256, annex.
14
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 125, No. 1671.
15
Ibid., vol. 1042, No. 15705.
12

10

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Signals,16 the 1958 and 1998 agreements on technical vehicle regulations, the 1997 agreement on periodic technical
inspection of vehicles and the 1957 agreement on the transport of dangerous goods, in facilitating road safety at the
global, regional and national levels, and commends Member States that have acceded to these international legal
instruments on road safety;
7. Encourages Member States that have not yet done so to consider becoming contracting parties to the
United Nations legal instruments on road safety and, beyond accession, applying, implementing and promoting their
provisions or safety regulations;
8. Encourages Member States to make efforts to ensure the safety and protection of all road users through
safer road infrastructure, especially on the highest-risk roads with high rates of crashes involving both motorized and
non-motorized modes of transport, through a combination of proper planning and safety assessment, design, building
and maintenance of roads, taking into consideration the geography of the country;
9. Invites Member States that have not already done so to consider adopting policies and measures to
implement United Nations vehicle safety regulations or equivalent national standards to ensure that all new motor
vehicles meet applicable minimum regulations for the protection of occupants and other road users, with seat belts,
airbags and active safety systems fitted as standard equipment;
10. Invites Member States that have not yet done so to address road safety holistically, starting with the
implementation or continuation of a road safety management system, including, as appropriate, interdepartmental
cooperation and the development of national road safety plans in line with the Global Plan for the Decade of Action;
11. Invites Member States to consider establishing mechanisms for the periodic assessment of vehicles in
order to ensure that all new and in-use vehicles comply with basic vehicle safety regulations;
12. Encourages Member States to provide consumer information on vehicle safety through new car
assessment programmes that are independent from vehicle manufacturers, and also encourages Member States to
share such consumer information with, inter alia, the World Health Organization and other countries, in particular
developing and least developed countries;
13. Also encourages Member States to promote environmentally sound, safe, accessible and affordable modes
of quality transport, particularly public and non-motorized transport, as well as safe intermodal integration, as a means
of improving road safety, social equity, public health and urban planning, including the resilience of cities and urbanrural linkages, and in this regard to take into account road safety and mobility as part of the effort to achieve sustainable
development;
14. Further encourages Member States to adopt, implement and enforce policies and measures to actively
protect and promote pedestrian safety and cycling mobility, with a view to also improving road safety and broader
health outcomes, particularly the prevention of injuries and non-communicable diseases;
15. Invites Member States to develop and implement appropriate social marketing campaigns to raise
awareness and commemorate the World Day of Remembrance for Road Traffic Victims on the third Sunday of
November every year;
16. Encourages Member States to strengthen pre-hospital care, including emergency health services and the
immediate post-crash response, hospital and ambulatory guidelines for trauma care and rehabilitation services, and
requests the World Health Organization to support Member States in these endeavours;
17. Invites Member States to share best practices and standards bilaterally, regionally and internationally, as
appropriate, including through the World Health Organization, upon the request of Member States, on the causes of
road traffic accidents and crashes and their prevention, which could be instrumental in addressing information gaps
and shortcomings;
18. Urges Member States to implement road safety policies for the protection of vulnerable persons among
road users, in particular children, youth, older persons and persons with disabilities, in line with relevant United
_______________
16

Ibid., vol. 1091, No. 16743.

11

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations legal instruments, including the Convention on the Rights of the Child17 and the Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities;18
19. Encourages Member States and private sector entities that have not yet done so to establish an effective
mechanism to reduce the number of crashes, road traffic fatalities and injuries caused by professional drivers,
including drivers of commercial vehicles, owing to job-specific hazards, including fatigue;
20. Invites Member States to fully integrate a gender perspective into all policymaking and policy
implementation related to mobility and road safety, especially regarding roads and surrounding areas and public
transport;
21. Encourages Member States to develop and implement comprehensive legislation and policies on
motorcycles, including on training, driver licensing, vehicle registration, working conditions and the use by
motorcyclists of helmets and personal protection equipment, within the existing international standards, given the
disproportionally high and increasing numbers of motorcycle deaths and injuries globally, particularly in developing
countries;
22. Invites Member States to develop public policies to decrease work-related road traffic crashes, with the
participation of employers and workers, in order to enforce international standards on safety and health at work, road
safety and adequate road and vehicle conditions, giving particular attention to the issue of professional drivers,
including the working conditions of commercial vehicle drivers;
23. Also invites Member States to provide early rehabilitation and social reintegration, including in the world
of work, to persons with injuries and disabilities caused by road traffic crashes and comprehensive support to victims
of road traffic crashes and their families;
24. Further invites Member States to continue to implement professional driver qualification frameworks,
established on the basis of internationally recognized standards, including training, certification and licensing,
restricted hours of driving and working conditions that focus on addressing the main causes of accidents or crashes
involving heavy commercial vehicles, recognizing that distraction is a significant cause of accidents or crashes;
25. Invites Member States to support, as appropriate, the activities of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Road Safety;
26. Welcomes the measures taken by the Secretary-General and the United Nations system to enhance road
safety through the United Nations system road safety strategy so as to reduce road traffic crashes and casualties and
injuries resulting from such incidents among United Nations personnel and the civilian population in host countries;
27. Requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions, as well as other
relevant United Nations agencies, to continue the activities aimed at supporting the implementation of the objectives
and goals of the Decade of Action for Road Safety 2011–2020 and the road safety-related targets in the 2030 Agenda,
while ensuring system-wide coherence;
28. Reiterates its invitation to Governments to take a leading role in implementing activities in support of the
voluntary global performance targets for road safety risk factors and service delivery mechanisms, as well as road
safety-related targets in the 2030 Agenda, while fostering multisectoral and multi-stakeholder collaboration that
includes the efforts of academia, the private sector, professional associations and civil society, including national Red
Cross and Red Crescent societies, and encouraging further partnership activities and initiatives, such as the Global
Road Safety Partnership, hosted by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, and those
of other non-governmental organizations, as well as victims’ organizations, youth organizations and the media;
29. Requests the United Nations system, including the regional commissions, the World Health Organization
and other relevant United Nations agencies, to support Member States, upon their request, in applying voluntary
global performance targets for road safety when appropriate;
30. Requests the World Health Organization to continue to monitor, through its global status reports on road
safety, progress towards the achievement of the goals of the Decade of Action;
_______________
17
18

12

Ibid., vol. 1577, No. 27531.
Ibid., vol. 2515, No. 44910.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

31. Requests the World Health Organization and the United Nations regional commissions to facilitate the
organization of activities during 2019 for the fifth United Nations Global Road Safety Week;
32. Invites all relevant stakeholders, international organizations, development banks and funding agencies,
foundations, professional associations and private sector companies to scale up funding to support the implementation
of measures required to meet the voluntary global performance targets;
33. Welcomes the establishment of the United Nations road safety trust fund to support progress towards
achieving road safety-related Sustainable Development Goals and relevant global targets, and encourages all road
safety stakeholders to contribute to the fund;
34. Stresses the need, in view of the approaching end, in 2020, of the Decade of Action, the target date of 2020
for the achievement of target 3.6 of Sustainable Development Goal 3 and the relevant road safety target dates set out
in the 2030 Agenda, to define a new time frame for a reduction in road traffic deaths and injuries, taking into account
the voluntary global performance targets for road safety risk factors and service delivery mechanisms;
35. Welcomes the offer by the Government of Sweden to host the third high-level global conference on road
safety, to be held in 2020, building on the work on the first United Nations Global Road Safety Week done in Muscat
in 2007, the Global Ministerial Conference on Road Safety, held in Moscow in 2009, and the Second Global Highlevel Conference on Road Safety, held in Brasilia in 2015, to bring together delegations of ministers and
representatives dealing with transport, health, education, safety and related traffic law enforcement issues and other
relevant stakeholders in the interest of reducing or eliminating road traffic fatalities and serious injuries, reviewing
progress in achieving the goals of the Decade of Action and the relevant targets of the 2030 Agenda and providing an
opportunity for Member States to further discuss ways to achieve the goals of the Agenda so as to prepare a forwardlooking declaration on the period leading up to 2030;
36. Recommends that a high-level meeting on improving global road safety be held, at an appropriate time
after 2020, with a view to assessing the progress made in attaining the objectives of the road safety-related targets
contained in the 2030 Agenda;
37. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fourth session the item entitled “Improving
global road safety”, and requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at that session on the
progress made in the attainment of the objectives of the Decade of Action.
RESOLUTION 72/272
AR
/ ES/72/272

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.43 and
A/72/L.43/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Angola, Argentina, Australia, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan,
Burkina Faso, Canada, Chad, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Maldives, Monaco,
Morocco, Myanmar, Netherlands, Pakistan, Palau, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Serbia,
Singapore, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

72/272. World Bicycle Day
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the contribution of sport to the realization of the Millennium Development Goals, as declared in
its resolutions 60/1 of 16 September 2005 and 65/1 of 22 September 2010,
Recalling that, in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,19 inter alia, sport was recognized as an
important enabler of sustainable development,
Recognizing the need to strengthen and further coordinate efforts, including multi-stakeholder partnerships, at all
levels to maximize the potential of the bicycle to contribute to the achievement of the internationally agreed development
goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals and targets of the 2030 Agenda, and a culture of peace,
_______________
19

Resolution 70/1.

13

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries, in particular paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the proclamation of
international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or year should not
be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Recalling the New Urban Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban
Development (Habitat III), held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,20
Acknowledging the uniqueness, longevity and versatility of the bicycle, which has been in use for two centuries,
and that it is a simple, affordable, reliable, clean and environmentally fit sustainable means of transportation, fostering
environmental stewardship and health,
Recognizing that the synergy between the bicycle and the user fosters creativity and social engagement and
gives the user an immediate awareness of the local environment, and recognizing also that the bicycle can serve as a
tool for development and as a means not just of transportation but also of access to education, health care and sport,
Emphasizing that the bicycle is a symbol of sustainable transportation and conveys a positive message to foster
sustainable consumption and production, and has a positive impact on climate,
Acknowledging the role of the United Nations system and its country programmes in supporting Member States,
upon request, in promoting social development through sport and physical education, including cycling,
Emphasizing the extremely important role of productive public-private partnerships in financing programmes
for organizing bicycle rallies to promote peace and development, preservation of the environment, institutional
development and physical and social infrastructure,
Noting that major international and local cycling competitions should be organized in the spirit of peace, mutual
understanding, friendship, tolerance and inadmissibility of discrimination of any kind and that the unifying and
conciliative nature of such events should be respected,
1.

Decides to declare 3 June World Bicycle Day;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other relevant international
organizations, international, regional and national sports organizations, civil society, including non-governmental
organizations and the private sector, and all other relevant stakeholders to cooperate in observing World Bicycle Day,
to celebrate the Day and to promote awareness of it;
3. Encourages Member States to devote particular attention to the bicycle in cross-cutting development
strategies and to include the bicycle in international, regional, national and subnational development policies and
programmes, as appropriate;
4. Also encourages Member States to improve road safety and integrate it into sustainable mobility and
transport infrastructure planning and design, in particular through policies and measures to actively protect and
promote pedestrian safety and cycling mobility, with a view to broader health outcomes, particularly the prevention
of injuries and non-communicable diseases;
5. Encourages stakeholders to emphasize and advance the use of the bicycle as a means of fostering
sustainable development, strengthening education, including physical education, for children and young people,
promoting health, preventing disease, promoting tolerance, mutual understanding and respect and facilitating social
inclusion and a culture of peace;
6. Encourages Member States to adopt best practices and means to promote the bicycle among all members
of society, and in this regard welcomes initiatives to organize bicycle rides at the national and local levels as a means
of strengthening physical and mental health and well-being and developing a culture of cycling in society;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States and the
organizations of the United Nations system;
8. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions.
_______________
20

14

Resolution 71/256, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/273
A/RES7/2/273

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.42 and
A/72/L.42/Add.1, sponsored by: Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Canada, China, Ecuador, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Guinea,
Kazakhstan, Latvia, Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, South Africa, Tajikistan, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan

72/273. Cooperation between the United Nations and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
The General Assembly,
Referring to the Articles of the Charter of the United Nations that encourage measures for regional cooperation
to advance the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Referring also to its resolution 63/133 of 11 December 2008, by which it granted the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea observer status in the General Assembly,
Acknowledging that the negative humanitarian, environmental and socioeconomic consequences of the Aral Sea
basin tragedy go well beyond the region and represent a global concern,
Welcoming the efforts of the States members of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea to attain objectives
consistent with the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Convinced that the activities of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea and its bodies should take into
account the interests and needs of all the countries of Central Asia,
Reaffirming that achieving international cooperation in solving international problems of an economic, social
or humanitarian nature is one of the purposes of the United Nations,
Referring to the relevant resolutions of the Security Council, including resolution 1631 (2005) of 17 October
2005, as well as statements by the President of the Council in which the Council emphasized the importance of
developing effective partnerships between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations, in
accordance with the Charter,
Welcoming the commitment of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea to intensifying and deepening its
cooperation with the agencies, programmes and funds of the United Nations system,
Convinced that strengthening cooperation between the United Nations and the International Fund for Saving
the Aral Sea will advance the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
1. Notes the need for further improvement of the activities of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea
to strengthen regional cooperation in such areas as social and economic development; environmental protection and
response to natural disasters; water resources management; adaptation to climate change and mitigation of its
consequences; exchange of information; science and innovation; and other related areas;
2. Also notes the importance of strengthening cooperation and coordination between the United Nations
system and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea, and invites the Secretary-General to hold for that purpose
regular consultations with the Chair of the Executive Committee of the International Fund, making use of appropriate
inter-agency forums and formats, including consultations between the Secretary-General and the heads of regional
organizations;
3. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations, programmes and funds of the United Nations
system, as well as international financial institutions, to develop their cooperation with the International Fund for
Saving the Aral Sea;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session on the
implementation of the present resolution;
5. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session, under the item entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and regional and other organizations”, a sub-item entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations and the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea”.
15

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/274
AR
/ ES/72/274

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.46, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

72/274. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly
on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 66/2 of 19 September 2011 containing the political declaration of the high-level meeting
of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
Recalling also its resolution 68/300 of 10 July 2014, in which it decided to hold a comprehensive review, in
2018, of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
Recalling further resolution 66.10 of 27 May 2013 adopted by the World Health Assembly, in which it endorsed
the Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control of Non-communicable Diseases 2013–2020,21
Welcoming the convening of the World Health Organization Global Conference on Non-communicable
Diseases, in Montevideo from 18 to 20 October 2017, and taking note of its outcome document, which highlights
non-communicable diseases as a sustainable development priority,
Recognizing that through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development22 and its Sustainable
Development Goals in September 2015, Heads of State and Government made a bold commitment to reduce by one
third, by 2030, premature mortality from non-communicable diseases through prevention and treatment and promote
mental health and well-being,
Recognizing also that through the adoption of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development,23 Heads of State and Government supported research and development
of vaccines and medicines, as well as preventive measures and treatments for communicable and non-communicable
diseases, in particular those that disproportionately impact developing countries,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General on progress on the prevention and control of noncommunicable diseases,24
Taking note also of the report of the Director General of the World Health Organization on preparation for the
third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, to be
held in 2018,
Mindful of the need to maintain strong national, regional and international political commitment towards the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases,
1. Decides to hold a one-day high-level meeting to undertake a comprehensive review of the prevention and
control of non-communicable diseases, to be convened by the President of the General Assembly in New York on the
third day of the general debate of the Assembly at its seventy-third session, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.,
consisting of an opening segment, a plenary segment for general discussion, two multi-stakeholder panels and a brief
closing segment;
2. Also decides that the overall theme of the high-level meeting will be “Scaling up multi-stakeholder and
multisectoral responses for the prevention and control of non-communicable diseases in the context of the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”;

_______________
21

See World Health Organization, document WHA66/2013/REC/1.
Resolution 70/1.
23
Resolution 69/313, annex.
24
A Member State expressed a reservation on document A/72/662.
22

16

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

3.

Further decides that:

(a) The opening segment, to be held from 10 to 11 a.m., will feature statements by the President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session, the Secretary-General, the Director General of the World Health Organization,
a member of the World Health Organization Independent High-level Commission on Non-communicable Diseases,
and an eminent champion of the fight against non-communicable diseases, selected, in consultation with Member
States, by the President of the General Assembly, giving due consideration to gender equity;
(b) The plenary segment, to be held from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and 3 to 5:30 p.m. will comprise statements by
Member States and observers of the General Assembly; a list of speakers will be established in accordance with
established practices of the Assembly and the time limits for these statements will be three minutes for individual
delegations and five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group of States;
4.

Decides that the organizational arrangements for the two multi-stakeholder panels will be as follows:

(a) Two consecutive multi-stakeholder panels will be held in parallel to the plenary segment, one from
11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and the other from 3 to 5 p.m.;
(b)

The multi-stakeholder panels will address two themes:

Panel 1: Strengthening health systems and financing for the prevention and control of non-communicable
diseases, on each country’s path towards achieving universal health coverage, including through sharing
evidence-based best practices, scientific knowledge and lessons learned;
Panel 2: Opportunities and challenges in engaging Governments, civil society and the private sector at the
global, regional and national levels to promote multisectoral partnerships for the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases and the promotion of healthy lifestyles;
(c) Each of the two multi-stakeholder panels will be co-chaired by two representatives, to be appointed by the
President of the General Assembly from among the Heads of State or Government attending the high-level meeting,
in consultation with the regional groups;
(d) The President of the General Assembly may invite parliamentarians, local governments, the heads or
senior representatives of relevant United Nations entities, civil society, the private sector, philanthropic foundations,
academia, medical associations, indigenous leadership and community organizations to serve as speakers on the
panels, taking into account gender equity, level of development and geographical representation;
5. Also decides that the closing segment by the President of the General Assembly will comprise summaries
of the multi-stakeholder panels and concluding remarks by the President of the General Assembly;
6. Further decides that the high-level meeting shall approve a concise and action-oriented outcome
document which builds on the opportunities and challenges in the implementation of previous commitments, agreed
in advance by consensus through intergovernmental negotiations, to be submitted by the President of the General
Assembly for adoption by the Assembly;
7. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with the support of the World Health Organization, to
organize and preside over an interactive hearing, before the end of July 2018, with the active participation of
appropriate senior-level representatives of Member States, observers of the General Assembly, parliamentarians,
representatives of local government, relevant United Nations entities, non-governmental organizations in consultative
status with the Economic and Social Council, invited civil society organizations, philanthropic foundations, academia,
medical associations, the private sector and broader communities, ensuring the participation and voices of women,
children and indigenous leadership, as part of the preparatory process for the high-level meeting, and also requests the
President to prepare a summary of the hearing prior to the high-level meeting;
8. Encourages all Member States to participate in the high-level meeting, including the multi-stakeholder
panels, at the highest possible level;
9.

Invites all observers of the General Assembly to be represented at the highest possible level;

10. Invites the United Nations system, including funds, programmes and specialized agencies, including the
World Health Organization, regional commissions and relevant envoys of the Secretary-General, as well as the United
Nations Inter-Agency Task Force on the Prevention and Control on Non-Communicable Diseases, to participate in
17

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the high-level meeting, as appropriate, and urges them to consider initiatives in support of the preparatory process and
the meeting, particularly with regard to sharing evidence and good practices, challenges and lessons learned from
responses related to non-communicable diseases;
11.

Invites the Inter-Parliamentary Union to contribute to the high-level meeting;

12. Invites non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council with
relevant expertise to register with the Secretariat to attend the meeting;
13. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of other relevant representatives of
relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who
may attend the high-level meeting and participate in the interactive hearing and the multi-stakeholder panels, taking
into account the principles of transparency and equitable geographical representation, with due regard to the
meaningful participation of women, and to submit the list to Member States for their consideration on a non-objection
basis;25
14. Encourages Member States to consider including in their national delegations representatives such as
parliamentarians, mayors and governors, representatives of civil society, including non-governmental organizations,
indigenous leadership, community organizations and faith-based organizations, academia, philanthropic foundations
and the private sector, with due regard to gender equity;
15. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session, in consultation with
Member States, to finalize the organizational arrangements for the high-level meeting.
RESOLUTION 72/275
A/RES/72/275

Adopted at the 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.45 and
A/72/L.45/Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Bangladesh, Belarus, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Cuba, Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nepal, Netherlands, Pakistan, Qatar,
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, United Arab Emirates, Viet Nam

72/275. International Association of Permanent Representatives to the United Nations
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations,
Mindful of the importance of the atmosphere of trusting and respectful dialogue and interaction among the
permanent representatives of States Members of the United Nations for the successful promotion of the noble
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United Nations,
Willing to facilitate the exchange and proliferation of good diplomatic practices, experience and insight, as well
as the preservation of the institutional memory of the United Nations diplomatic community,
Recalling that the International Association of Permanent Representatives to the United Nations was established
on 2 February 1988 in New York upon the initiative of the Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia to the United
Nations, Mr. Samir Shihabi, as an informal forum and a framework for regular communication and consultation
among former and current permanent representatives to the United Nations,
Bearing in mind the close personal ties of amity and friendship that are forged between permanent
representatives to the United Nations in their common pursuit of the shared objectives of the United Nations,
Wishing to promote informal interpersonal communication among former and current permanent representatives
to the United Nations and to ensure the continuity thereof,
_______________
25

The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.

18

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

1. Acknowledges with appreciation the role played by the former Permanent Representative of Saudi Arabia
to the United Nations, Mr. Samir Shihabi, and all subsequent presidents of the International Association of Permanent
Representatives to the United Nations in leading and developing the Association and guiding it towards the
achievement of its goals and objectives;
2. Recognizes the important role played by the Association and its positive contribution to the activity of the
Organization through the promotion of better interpersonal connectedness and a climate of trust and openness, as well
as the exchange of good practices and experience;
3. Invites the States Members of the United Nations to support the work of the Association and encourage
the participation of former and current permanent representatives to the United Nations in the events and forums of
the Association;
4. Authorizes the Secretary-General to continue to provide the Association, from within existing resources,
with facilities on a non-remuneration basis and to replace its current office with a more suitable space to enable the
Association to convene its meetings;
5. Calls upon the Secretary-General to provide the Association with a separate web page, to be hosted on the
delegates section of the United Nations web site, with content provided by the Association and updated from time to
time with information on its recent activities;
6. Authorizes the use by the Association of the United Nations emblem alongside the emblem of the
Association, provided that guidelines for the use thereof are followed.
RESOLUTION 72/276
A/RES/72/276

Adopted at the 87th plenary meeting, on 26 April 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.49, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

72/276. Follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
The General Assembly,
Guided by the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the relevant mandates, decisions and resolutions of the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Reaffirming General Assembly resolution 70/262 and Security Council resolution 2282 (2016), of 27 April
2016, taking note of the efforts and the progress made to date, and encouraging further action by Member States and
the United Nations system to implement the resolutions,
Welcoming the consultations with Member States undertaken by the Secretary-General with respect to his
reform proposals, and taking note of the ongoing work in this regard,
Taking note of the discussions at the high-level meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace, held on 24 and
25 April 2018,
1. Welcomes the presentation of the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining peace,26
takes note with appreciation of the recommendations and options contained therein, and decides to discuss them further;
2. Invites the relevant United Nations bodies and organs, including the Peacebuilding Commission, to further
advance, explore and consider implementation, as appropriate, of the recommendations and options contained in the
report of the Secretary-General, in accordance with the established procedures, during the seventy-second and
seventy-third sessions of the General Assembly;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly, during its seventy-third session, an
interim report further elaborating on his recommendations and options, including those on financing for United
Nations peacebuilding activities;
_______________
26

A/72/707-S/2018/43.

19

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, during its seventy-fourth session,
a detailed report in connection with the next comprehensive review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture,
focusing on continued implementation of resolution 70/262 and progress in the implementation of the
recommendations and options contained in his report on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
RESOLUTION 72/277
A/RES/72/277

Adopted at the 88th plenary meeting, on 10 May 2018, by a recorded vote of 143 to 6, with 6 abstentions,* on the basis of draft
resolution A/72/L.51 and A/72/L.51/Add.1, as amended in A/72/L.53, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Jordan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Sweden, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Georgia, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica,
Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Maldives, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, New Zealand, Niger, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sudan, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Yemen
Against: Iran (Islamic Republic of), Philippines, Russian Federation, Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey, United States of
America
Abstaining: Belarus, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia, Tajikistan

72/277. Towards a Global Pact for the Environment
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling the Declaration of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment,27 the Rio Declaration
on Environment and Development,28 Agenda 21,29 the Programme for the Further Implementation of Agenda 21,30
the Johannesburg Declaration on Sustainable Development31 and the Plan of Implementation of the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (Johannesburg Plan of Implementation)32 and the outcome document of the United

_______________
27

See Report of the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment, Stockholm, 5–16 June 1972 (A/CONF.48/14/Rev.1), part one,
chap. I.
28
Report of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3−14 June 1992, vol. I, Resolutions Adopted
by the Conference (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.93.I.8 and corrigendum), resolution 1, annex I.
29
Ibid., annex II.
30
Resolution S-19/2, annex.
31
Report of the World Summit on Sustainable Development, Johannesburg, South Africa, 26 August–4 September 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. 03.II.A.1 and corrigendum), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
32
Ibid., resolution 2, annex.

20

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, entitled “The future we want”,33 as well as the outcomes of all the
major United Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and environmental fields,
Recognizing existing obligations and commitments under international environmental law,
Reaffirming all the principles of the Rio Declaration,
Reaffirming also its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda
for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal
and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Noting the convening of the high-level event held on the sidelines of the seventy-second session of the General
Assembly on 19 September 2017, entitled “Summit on a Global Pact for the Environment”,
Stressing the need to continue to address, in a comprehensive and coherent manner, the challenges posed by
environmental degradation in the context of sustainable development,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session in 2018 a
technical and evidence-based report that identifies and assesses possible gaps in international environmental law and
environment-related instruments with a view to strengthening their implementation;
2. Decides to establish an ad hoc open-ended working group, under the auspices of the General Assembly,
to consider the report and discuss possible options to address possible gaps in international environmental law and
environment-related instruments, as appropriate, and, if deemed necessary, the scope, parameters and feasibility of an
international instrument, with a view to making recommendations, which may include the convening of an
intergovernmental conference to adopt an international instrument, to the Assembly during the first half of 2019;
3. Also decides that the ad hoc open-ended working group shall be open to participation by all States
Members of the United Nations and all members of the specialized agencies;
4. Further decides that attendance at the sessions of the ad hoc open-ended working group as observers will
be opened to relevant non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council
in accordance with the provisions of Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, as well as to those that were
accredited to relevant conferences and summits,34 on the understanding that participation means attending formal
meetings, unless otherwise decided by the working group in specific situations, receiving copies of the official
documents, making available their materials to delegates and addressing the meetings, through a limited number of
their representatives, as appropriate;
5. Decides that the ad hoc open-ended working group shall hold the following sessions, with the provision
of interpretation services, in accordance with established practice:
(a) An organizational session, to be held for a duration of three working days, by the end of the seventysecond session of the General Assembly, in New York, in order to examine matters related to the organization of the
work of the ad hoc open-ended working group, including the duration and number of its substantive sessions;
(b) Substantive sessions, to be held in Nairobi, the first of which at least one month after the submission of
the report of the Secretary-General;
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session to appoint two co-chairs of
the ad hoc open-ended working group, one from a developing country and one from a developed country, to oversee
_______________
33

Resolution 66/288, annex.
Reference is made to the non-governmental organizations that were accredited to the following relevant conferences and summits: the
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, the World Summit on Sustainable Development, the United Nations
Conference on Sustainable Development and the United Nations summit for the adoption of the post-2015 development agenda.
34

21

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

its consultations, in regular coordination and consultation with all Member States, regional groups and all relevant
stakeholders, and underlines that the work of the working group must be open, transparent and inclusive;
7. Decides that the costs associated with the work of the ad hoc open-ended working group shall be met from
voluntary contributions;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for substantive support to be provided by the United Nations
Environment Programme, on the basis of voluntary contributions, without prejudice to the current voluntary funded
programmatic activities of the Programme, including all assistance necessary for the performance of the work
of the ad hoc open-ended working group, secretariat services and the provision of essential background information
and relevant documents, complemented, as appropriate, by other relevant United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes;
9. Recognizes that the process indicated above should not undermine existing relevant legal instruments and
frameworks and relevant global, regional and sectoral bodies;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to establish a special voluntary trust fund in support of the process, and
invites Member States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to the voluntary
trust fund;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to establish a special voluntary trust fund for the purpose of assisting
developing countries, in particular, the least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island
developing States, in attending the sessions of the ad hoc open-ended working group, including daily subsistence
allowance, in addition to defraying the costs of economy-class travel for one delegate per State for each session, and
invites Member States, international financial institutions, donor agencies, intergovernmental organizations,
non-governmental organizations and natural and juridical persons to make financial contributions to the voluntary
trust fund.
RESOLUTION 72/278
A/RES/72/278

Adopted at the 89th plenary meeting, on 22 May 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.54 and
A/72/L.54/Add.1, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chile,
China, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Egypt, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco,
Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Serbia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sudan, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Uruguay, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe

72/278. Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union
The General Assembly,
Recalling the 2005 World Summit Outcome,35 in which Heads of State and Government resolved to strengthen
further cooperation between the United Nations and national parliaments through their world organization, the InterParliamentary Union, in all fields of the work of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 57/32 of 19 November 2002, in which the Inter-Parliamentary Union was invited
to participate in the work of the General Assembly in the capacity of observer, and recalling further its resolution
70/298 of 25 July 2016, in which the Assembly, inter alia, decided to strengthen the modalities of the cooperation
between United Nations entities and the global parliamentary community,

_______________
35

22

Resolution 60/1.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking into consideration the Cooperation Agreement between the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary
Union of 1996,36 which laid the foundation for cooperation between the two organizations, and taking note of the
revised Cooperation Agreement of 2016,
Taking note of the resolutions adopted by the Inter-Parliamentary Union, in particular the resolution entitled
“Sharing our diversity: the twentieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration on Democracy”, adopted at the
137th Assembly of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, held in Saint Petersburg, Russian Federation, from 14 to
18 October 2017, and the many activities undertaken by that organization in support of the United Nations,
Noting the outcomes of the World Conferences of Speakers of Parliament held in 2000, 2005, 2010 and 2015,
which affirm the commitment of national parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to support the work of the
United Nations and continue efforts to bridge the democracy gap in international relations,
Welcoming the annual parliamentary hearings at the United Nations, as well as other specialized parliamentary
meetings organized by the Inter-Parliamentary Union in cooperation with the United Nations to correspond to major
United Nations conferences and events,
Recognizing the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in mobilizing parliamentary action towards the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,37 the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
Reduction 2015–203038 and the Paris Agreement adopted under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change,39
Recognizing also the growing role of the Inter-Parliamentary Union Standing Committee on United Nations
Affairs in providing a platform for regular interaction between parliamentarians and United Nations officials,
including on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, reviewing implementation of international
commitments, facilitating closer ties between the United Nations country teams and national parliaments and helping
to shape parliamentary input to major United Nations processes,
Recognizing further the work of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the areas of democracy and human rights,
gender equality, the empowerment of women, combating violence against women, including against women in
politics, youth empowerment, peace and security, disarmament, non-proliferation, sustainable development and
interfaith and inter-ethnic dialogue, as well as countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism as and when
conducive to terrorism,
Taking note of the work carried out upon the request of Member States by agencies and programmes of the
United Nations system, including the United Nations Development Programme, in support of national parliaments
around the world,
Acknowledging the role and responsibility of national parliaments in regard to national plans and strategies, as
well as in ensuring greater transparency and accountability at both the national and the global levels,
1. Welcomes the actions taken by the Inter-Parliamentary Union to pursue a more systematic engagement
with the United Nations, and encourages both organizations to enhance their cooperation in meeting their common
objectives;
2. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to continue to work closely in various
fields, including sustainable development, peacebuilding and sustaining peace, international law, human rights, gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls, youth empowerment, democracy and good governance, information
and communications technologies, disaster risk reduction, capacity-building and financing for development;
3. Also encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to strengthen cooperation by
engaging parliamentarians in efforts to maintain support for the implementation of relevant United Nations
agreements;

_______________
36

A/51/402, annex.
Resolution 70/1.
38
Resolution 69/283, annex II.
39
See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
37

23

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

4. Encourages the continued active involvement of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in promoting the
enhanced contribution of parliaments at the national, regional and global levels in support of the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals;
5. Welcomes the practice of including parliamentarians as members of national delegations to major United
Nations meetings and events, as appropriate, and invites Member States to continue this practice in a more regular
and systematic manner;
6. Invites Member States to further consider ways to work regularly with the Inter-Parliamentary Union in
facilitating a parliamentary component to major United Nations conferences so as to help to inform such deliberations
from a parliamentary perspective;
7. Encourages Member States to consider applying the practice of the joint United Nations-InterParliamentary Union parliamentary hearing to other parliamentary meetings convened in conjunction with major
United Nations conferences and processes, such as the parliamentary meeting organized on the occasion of the annual
session of the Commission on the Status of Women, with a view to including the outcome of these parliamentary
meetings as a formal contribution to the respective United Nations processes;
8. Welcomes the enhanced contribution of parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to the work of the
Human Rights Council and the human rights treaty bodies, and acknowledges the crucial role that parliaments play
in translating international commitments into national policies and laws;
9. Encourages the United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women (UN-Women)
and other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to work closely with national parliaments and the InterParliamentary Union in accordance with their respective mandates and, upon request, in such areas as gender equality
and the empowerment of women, including in conflict prevention and peace processes, institutional gender
mainstreaming, support to parliaments in promoting gender-sensitive legislation, increasing the representation of
women in parliaments, combating violence against women, including women in politics, and implementing relevant
United Nations resolutions;
10. Encourages the relevant entities of the United Nations system to work closely with national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union, inter alia, in areas such as youth empowerment and participation of young men
and women in politics, as appropriate, rapid technological change, as well as countering terrorism and preventing
violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism;
11. Welcomes the contribution of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to the work of the high-level political forum
on sustainable development, through the participation of parliamentarians, in convening a regular parliamentary side
event on the work of parliaments to institutionalize the Sustainable Development Goals, as well as through its efforts
to encourage parliaments to engage in the voluntary national reviews of participating countries;
12. Also welcomes the efforts of the Inter-Parliamentary Union to raise parliamentary support for health, in
particular women’s, adolescent and child health and nutrition, and invites the World Health Organization and other
relevant agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to enhance cooperation with the InterParliamentary Union in this regard;
13. Invites the Inter-Parliamentary Union and the relevant bodies of the United Nations system to continue
and enhance their cooperation in supporting Governments in facilitating the orderly, safe, regular and responsible
migration and mobility of people, including through the implementation of planned and well-managed migration
policies, and recognizes the contribution of the Inter-Parliamentary Union in the preparatory process for the Global
Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration;
14. Encourages the United Nations and the Inter-Parliamentary Union to develop closer cooperation with
parliaments at the national level, including in terms of strengthening parliamentary capacities, inter alia, in regard to
the allocation of budgetary resources for the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,37 as
appropriate, and in reinforcing the rule of law and helping to align national legislation with international commitments;
15. Takes note of the Common Principles for Support to Parliaments pioneered by the Inter-Parliamentary
Union and the United Nations Development Programme and endorsed by 96 national parliaments and 5 parliamentary
assemblies with a view to further strengthening the capacity of parliaments to perform their functions;
24

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

16. Calls upon United Nations country teams to develop, within their mandates and at the request of national
authorities, a more structured and integrated manner of working with national parliaments, through appropriate
mechanisms, inter alia, by involving parliaments in consultations on national development strategies and on
development aid effectiveness, where applicable;
17. Encourages the United Nations system to help to facilitate greater South-South and triangular cooperation
between parliaments and parliamentarians, within existing resources, in cooperation with the Inter-Parliamentary
Union;
18. Calls upon United Nations entities to avail themselves more systematically of the unique expertise of the
Inter-Parliamentary Union and its member parliaments in strengthening parliamentary institutions, particularly in
countries emerging from conflict and/or in transition to democracy;
19. Calls for regular annual exchanges and meetings at both the political and the operational levels between
senior officials of the United Nations and of the Inter-Parliamentary Union, with a view to building greater coherence
in the work of the two organizations and helping to forge a more robust strategic partnership between them;
20. Encourages the United Nations system to reflect more systematically the role and contribution of
parliaments in its reports and draft strategic plans;
21. Decides, with effect from its seventy-second session, to observe on 30 June of each year the International
Day of Parliamentarism, invites all Member States, national parliaments, organizations of the United Nations system
and other relevant international organizations, civil society, including non-governmental organizations, and all other
relevant stakeholders to observe the Day and to promote awareness of it, and stresses that the cost of all activities that
may arise from the observance of the Day by the United Nations should be met from voluntary contributions;
22. Acknowledges the invitation to the Inter-Parliamentary Union to organize a world conference on interfaith
and inter-ethnic dialogue with the participation of Heads of State, parliaments and representatives of world religions,
and encourages the conduct of preparations in cooperation with the United Nations;
23. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,40 and requests that he submit to the General Assembly
at its seventy-fourth session a report under the item entitled “Interaction between the United Nations, national
parliaments and the Inter-Parliamentary Union”, with a special focus on best practices to support the role of
parliaments in translating international commitments into national policies.
RESOLUTION 72/279
AR
/ ES/72/279

Adopted at the 91st plenary meeting, on 31 May 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.52, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

72/279. Repositioning of the United Nations development system in the context of the quadrennial
comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of
operational activities for development of the United Nations system and its general guidelines and principles for the
United Nations development system, to better position the United Nations operational activities for development to
support countries in their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,41
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review,42 and welcoming his efforts on the repositioning of the United Nations development system,
_______________
40

A/72/791.
Resolution 70/1.
42
A/72/124-E/2018/3, A/72/684-E/2018/7 and A/73/63-E/2018/8.
41

25

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

I
A new generation of United Nations country teams
1. Welcomes a revitalized, strategic, flexible and results- and action-oriented United Nations Development
Assistance Framework as the most important instrument for the planning and implementation of United Nations
development activities in each country, in support of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development,41 to be prepared and finalized in full consultation and agreement with national Governments;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to lead the efforts of the entities of the United Nations development system
to collaboratively implement a new generation of United Nations country teams, with needs-based tailored country
presence, to be built on the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and finalized through open and
inclusive dialogue between the host Government and the United Nations development system, facilitated by the
resident coordinator, to ensure the best configuration of support on the ground, as well as enhanced coordination,
transparency, efficiency and impact of United Nations development activities, in accordance with national
development policies, plans, priorities and needs;
3. Also requests the Secretary-General to work, through the United Nations Sustainable Development Group
and in consultation with the Member States concerned, to determine appropriate criteria with regard to the presence
and composition of United Nations country teams, based on country development priorities and long-term needs and
the approved United Nations Development Assistance Framework, in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations and United Nations norms and standards;
4. Further requests the Secretary-General, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 71/243, to conduct
a review of the configuration, capacity, resource needs, role and development services of multi-country offices, in full
consultation with the countries involved, to improve the contribution of the offices to country progress in achieving
the 2030 Agenda, to be presented to the Economic and Social Council at the operational activities for development
segment of its 2019 session;
5. Calls upon the entities of the United Nations development system to strengthen capacities, resources and
skill sets to support national Governments in achieving the Sustainable Development Goals and, where relevant, build
capacities and expertise across United Nations agencies, funds and programmes to promote progress on those Goals
lagging behind, in line with respective mandates and building on comparative advantages, and reducing gaps, overlaps
and duplication across entities;
6. Welcomes measures by the Secretary-General to advance common business operations, where
appropriate, including common back-offices, and with the target of 50 per cent common premises by 2021, to enable
joint work and generate greater efficiencies, synergies and coherence, and requests the implementation of those
measures in accordance with resolution 71/243;
II
Reinvigorating the role of the resident coordinator system
7. Reaffirms that the focus of the resident coordinator system should remain sustainable development, with
the eradication of poverty in all its forms and dimensions as its overarching objective, consistent with the integrated
nature of the 2030 Agenda and in line with the United Nations Development Assistance Framework and national
leadership and ownership;
8. Decides to create a dedicated, independent, impartial, empowered and sustainable development-focused
coordination function for the United Nations development system by separating the functions of the resident
coordinator from those of the resident representative of the United Nations Development Programme, drawing on the
expertise and assets of all United Nations development system entities, including non-resident agencies;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to strengthen the authority and leadership of resident coordinators, as the
highest-ranking representatives of the United Nations development system, over United Nations country teams, and
system-wide accountability on the ground for implementing the United Nations Development Assistance Framework
and supporting countries in their implementation of the 2030 Agenda, through:
(a) Enhanced authority for the resident coordinator to ensure alignment of both agency programmes and interagency pooled funding for development with national development needs and priorities, as well as with the United
Nations Development Assistance Framework, in consultation with the national Government;
26

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(b) Full mutual and collective performance appraisals to strengthen accountability and impartiality, with
resident coordinators appraising the performance of United Nations country team heads and United Nations country
team heads informing the performance assessment of resident coordinators;
(c) The establishment of a clear, matrixed, dual reporting model, with United Nations country team members
accountable and reporting to their respective entities on individual mandates, and periodically reporting to the resident
coordinator on their individual activities and on their respective contributions to the collective results of the United
Nations development system towards the achievement of the 2030 Agenda at the country level, on the basis of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
(d) Reporting by the resident coordinator to the Secretary-General and to the host Government on the
implementation of the United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
(e)

A collectively owned internal dispute resolution mechanism;

10. Emphasizes that adequate, predictable and sustainable funding of the resident coordinator system is
essential to delivering a coherent, effective, efficient and accountable response in accordance with national needs and
priorities, and in this regard decides to provide sufficient funding in line with the report of the Secretary-General,43 on
an annual basis starting from 1 January 2019, through:
(a) A 1 per cent coordination levy on tightly earmarked third-party44 non-core contributions to United Nations
development-related activities, to be paid at source;
(b) Doubling the current United Nations Development Group cost-sharing arrangement among United
Nations development system entities;
(c)

Voluntary, predictable, multi-year contributions to a dedicated trust fund to support the inception period;

11. Strongly urges all Member States to contribute to the trust fund, in particular as front-loaded contributions
for the inception of the reinvigorated resident coordinator system, and in a timely manner, to ensure necessary,
predictable and sustainable funding for the inception period;
12. Calls upon all Member States in the relevant governing bodies of all United Nations development system
entities to ensure that all entities double their agreed contributions under the current United Nations Development
Group cost-sharing arrangement;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the United Nations development system entities, to
present an implementation plan for the inception of the reinvigorated resident coordinator system, including on the
operationalization of its funding arrangements, to the General Assembly, before the end of the seventy-second session;
14. Emphasizes the need to ensure full achievement of the efficiency gains envisioned in the report of the
Secretary-General43 in a timely manner and to redeploy these efficiency gains for development activities, including
coordination;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to report annually, starting in 2019, to the Economic and Social Council
at its operational activities for development segment on the implementation of the reinvigorated resident coordinator
system, including its funding, to ensure accountability towards Member States;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit for the consideration of the General Assembly, before the
end of its seventy-fifth session, a review with recommendations on the functioning of the reinvigorated resident
coordinator system, including its funding arrangement;
17. Endorses the transformation of the Development Operations Coordination Office to assume managerial
and oversight functions of the resident coordinator system under the leadership of an Assistant Secretary-General and
under the collective ownership of the members of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, as a standalone coordination office within the Secretariat, reporting to the Chair of the Group, and requests the Chair to present
a comprehensive report on an annual basis, including on the operational, administrative and financing aspects of the
activities of the Office, to the Economic and Social Council at its operational activities for development segment;
_______________
43
44

A/72/684-E/2018/7.
The levy would not be charged on local government cost-sharing and cooperation among programme countries.

27

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

III
Revamping the regional approach
18. Reaffirms the role and functions of the United Nations development system at the regional level, including
the regional economic commissions and the regional teams of the United Nations development system, and underlines
the need to continue to make them fit for purpose in supporting the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, and to revamp
the regional structures, recognizing the specificities of each region and bearing in mind that no one size fits all;
19. Emphasizes the need to address gaps and overlaps at the regional level, and endorses a phased approach
to revamping the United Nations development system at the regional level, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral:
(a) To implement, as part of the first phase, the proposed measures to optimize functions and enhance
collaboration at the regional and subregional levels;
(b) To provide options, on a region-by-region basis, for longer-term reprofiling and restructuring of the
regional assets of the United Nations to the Economic and Social Council at the operational activities for development
segment of its 2019 session;
IV
Strategic direction, oversight and accountability for system-wide results
20. Takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General on the repositioning of the operational activities for
development segment of the Economic and Social Council, and looks forward to the outcome of the ongoing review
of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 of 20 September 2013;
21. Also takes note of the proposal of the Secretary-General to gradually merge the New York-based
Executive Boards of funds and programmes, and urges Member States to continue making practical changes to further
enhance the working methods of the Boards with the aim of improving the efficiency, transparency and quality of
governance structures, including through deciding on ways to improve the functions of the joint meeting of the
Boards;
22. Stresses the need to improve monitoring and reporting on system-wide results, and in this regard welcomes
the strengthening of independent system-wide evaluation measures by the Secretary-General, including improving
existing capacities;
23. Welcomes the decision by the Secretary-General to brief the Economic and Social Council in his capacity
as Chair of the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, to ensure full transparency in the
activities of the Board and improve its effective interaction with, and its responsiveness to, the Member States;
V
Funding the United Nations development system
24. Recognizes that significantly improving its voluntary and grant-based funding is vital to the successful
repositioning of the United Nations development system, as well as to the strengthening of its multilateral nature, with
the aim of better supporting countries in their efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda in line with national needs and
priorities in a coherent and integrated manner;
25. Welcomes the call by the Secretary-General for a funding compact as a critical tool to maximize the
investments of Member States in the United Nations development system and the system’s transparency and
accountability for system-wide actions and results, and, recognizing the need to address the imbalance between core
and non-core resources, takes note of the proposals of the Secretary-General to bring core resources to a level of at
least 30 per cent in the next five years and double both inter-agency pooled funds to a total of 3.4 billion United States
dollars and entity-specific thematic funds to a total of 800 million dollars by 2023;
26. Also welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General to establish a dedicated coordination fund, and in
this regard invites Member States to provide voluntary contributions in the amount of 35 million dollars to the resident
coordinator system, in support of system-wide activities on the ground associated with the implementation of the
United Nations Development Assistance Framework;
28

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

27. Invites Member States to contribute, on a voluntary basis, to the capitalization of the Joint Fund for the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development at 290 million dollars per annum;
28. Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to repositioning the United Nations development
system in accordance with calls by Member States set out in resolution 71/243 and in the present resolution,
recognizes that that commitment to reform is an essential component of a funding compact, and therefore requests
the United Nations development system, as the starting point for its commitment to the funding compact:
(a) To provide annual reporting on system-wide support to the Sustainable Development Goals and present
aggregated information on system-wide results by 2021;
(b) To comply with the highest international transparency standards to enhance transparency and access to
financial information in all United Nations development system entities;
(c)
levels;

To undergo independent system-wide evaluations of results achieved, at the global, regional and country

(d) To comply with existing full-cost recovery policies and further harmonize cost recovery by individual
United Nations development system entities through differentiated approaches;
(e)

To allocate, where applicable, at least 15 per cent of non-core resources for development to joint activities;

(f)
results;

To enhance the visibility of Member State contributions to core resources and pooled funds, and related

(g)

To achieve efficiency gains as envisioned by the Secretary-General in his report;43

(h)

To achieve common results at the country level;

29. Also welcomes the proposal of the Secretary-General to launch a funding dialogue in 2018 with a view to
finalizing a funding compact in the form of a commitment between the United Nations development system and
Member States, and requests the Secretary-General to report on the outcome of the funding dialogue at the operational
activities for development segment of the 2019 session of the Economic and Social Council, noting that the funding
compact relates to voluntary funding of the United Nations development system, as well as to other contributions;
VI
Following up on the repositioning efforts of the United Nations development system at the global, regional
and country levels
30. Requests the heads of the entities of the United Nations development system, under the leadership of the
Secretary-General, to submit to the Economic and Social Council at the operational activities for development
segment of its 2019 session, for consideration by Member States, a system-wide strategic document, in the light of
the present resolution and in line with resolution 71/243, and to ensure that it is specific, concrete and targeted in
addressing gaps and overlaps;
31. Reaffirms the role of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat, and looks forward
to the update by the Secretary-General to the Member States on the alignment of the Department with the 2030
Agenda, in accordance with General Assembly resolution 70/299 of 29 July 2016;
32. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure an effective and efficient transition to a repositioned United
Nations development system, in particular to a reinvigorated resident coordinator system, including by giving due
consideration to the role of a responsive United Nations Development Programme as the support platform of the
United Nations development system providing an integrator function in support of countries in their efforts to
implement the 2030 Agenda;
33. Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the Economic and Social Council on progress made in the
implementation of the mandates contained in the present resolution and the mandates contained in resolution 71/243,
as part of his annual reporting to the Council at the operational activities for development segment of its 2019 session,
and to the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session for further consideration by the Assembly and to inform the
next cycle of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review to be launched in 2020.
29

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/280
AR
/ ES/72/280

Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 12 June 2018, by a recorded vote of 81 to 16, with 62 abstentions,* on the basis of
draft resolution A/72/L.55, sponsored by Georgia
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Antigua and Barbuda, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Bulgaria,
Canada, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Estonia, Eswatini, Finland, France, Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kiribati,
Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malawi, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated
States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Sao Tome and
Principe, Saudi Arabia, Sierra Leone, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Yemen
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Myanmar, Nauru, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russian Federation, South Sudan, Sudan, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of),
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Central African Republic, Chile, China, Colombia,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cyprus, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Israel,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malaysia, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, Nigeria,
Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore, Sri Lanka,
Suriname, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uzbekistan, Zambia

72/280. Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia, Georgia, and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, Georgia
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions on the protection of and assistance to internally displaced persons, including
its resolutions 62/153 of 18 December 2007, 62/249 of 15 May 2008, 63/307 of 9 September 2009, 64/162 of
18 December 2009, 64/296 of 7 September 2010, 65/287 of 29 June 2011, 66/165 of 19 December 2011, 66/283 of
3 July 2012, 67/268 of 13 June 2013, 68/180 of 18 December 2013, 68/274 of 5 June 2014, 69/286 of 3 June 2015,
70/165 of 17 December 2015, 70/265 of 7 June 2016, 71/290 of 1 June 2017 and 72/182 of 19 December 2017,
Recalling also all relevant Security Council resolutions on Georgia relating to the need for all parties to work
towards a comprehensive peace and the return of internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin,
and stressing the importance of their full and timely implementation,
Recognizing the Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement45 as the key international framework for the
protection of internally displaced persons,
Concerned by forced demographic changes resulting from the conflicts in Georgia,
Concerned also by the humanitarian situation caused by armed conflict in August 2008, which resulted in the
further forced displacement of civilians,
Mindful of the urgent need to find a solution to the problems related to forced displacement in Georgia,
Underlining the importance of the discussions that commenced in Geneva on 15 October 2008 and of
continuing to address the issue of the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of internally displaced persons
and refugees on the basis of internationally recognized principles and conflict-settlement practices,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of resolution 71/290,46
1. Recognizes the right of return of all internally displaced persons and refugees and their descendants,
regardless of ethnicity, to their homes throughout Georgia, including in Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South
Ossetia;
_______________
45
46

30

E/CN.4/1998/53/Add.2, annex.
A/72/847.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. Stresses the need to respect the property rights of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by
the conflicts in Georgia and to refrain from obtaining property in violation of those rights;
3.

Reaffirms the unacceptability of forced demographic changes;

4. Underlines the urgent need for unimpeded access for humanitarian activities to all internally displaced
persons, refugees and other persons residing in all conflict-affected areas throughout Georgia;
5. Calls upon all participants in the Geneva discussions to intensify their efforts to establish a durable peace,
to commit to enhanced confidence-building measures and to take immediate steps to ensure respect for human rights
and create favourable security conditions conducive to the voluntary, safe, dignified and unhindered return of all
internally displaced persons and refugees to their places of origin;
6. Underlines the need for the development of a timetable to ensure the voluntary, safe, dignified and
unhindered return of all internally displaced persons and refugees affected by the conflicts in Georgia to their homes;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a
comprehensive report on the implementation of the present resolution;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Protracted
conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and development”.
RESOLUTION 72/281
A/RES/72/281

Adopted at the 95th plenary meeting, on 12 June 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.56 and
A/72/L.56/Add.1, sponsored by: Algeria, Australia, Bangladesh, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia,
Ireland, Jamaica, Madagascar, Malawi, Mexico, Morocco, Myanmar, Nepal, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Paraguay, Philippines,
Republic of Moldova, Russian Federation, Samoa, Singapore, Sudan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Tunisia, Uruguay, Viet Nam

72/281. International Day of Family Remittances
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 53/199 of 15 December 1998 and 61/185 of 20 December 2006 on the proclamation
of international years, and Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67 of 25 July 1980 on international years
and anniversaries, particularly paragraphs 1 to 10 of the annex thereto on the agreed criteria for the proclamation of
international years, as well as paragraphs 13 and 14, in which it is stated that an international day or year should not
be proclaimed before the basic arrangements for its organization and financing have been made,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete
policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating
an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Recalling its resolution 71/237 of 21 December 2016 on international migration and development, in which it
noted the adoption of resolution 189/XXXVIII by the Governing Council of the International Fund for Agricultural
Development, on 16 February 2015, in which the Governing Council proclaimed 16 June as the International Day of
Family Remittances,
Welcoming the work of the International Fund for Agricultural Development to develop and promote innovative
investment mechanisms to increase the development impact of remittances and diaspora investment for sustainable
31

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

development, including through the Global Forum on Remittances, Investment and Development, bringing together
representatives of the private and public sectors and of civil society,
Considering that in many developing countries international remittances constitute an important source of
income for poor families and are projected to exceed a cumulative 6.5 trillion United States dollars, of which half will
reach rural areas, during the 2015–2030 time frame for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals,
Noting that 1 billion people are directly impacted by remittances annually, either as senders or as recipients, and
that 75 per cent of annual remittance flows go to meet the immediate needs of recipients and the remainder – over
100 billion dollars a year – is either saved or invested,
Recognizing the transformative impact that remittances, including those from migrants, have across the
Sustainable Development Goals and in supporting long-term development strategies, particularly on poverty
reduction and access to basic services at the household level, and that remittances foster local investments that can
encourage entrepreneurship and financial inclusion, especially in rural areas of developing countries where poverty
rates are highest, and in times of crisis and disaster,
Conscious that millions of families in rural areas are also supported by domestic remittances sent by family
members typically living in urban locations,
Recognizing the work done by Member States, the United Nations system, the World Bank and the Group of 20
and the role of civil society organizations in promoting the development impact of migration and family remittances,
Recognizing also the role of the private sector in developing cost-effective and accessible money transfer
services, including by linking them to other financial services for remittance senders and their families, and the role
of all relevant stakeholders in realizing by 2030 the objective of target 10.c of Sustainable Development Goal 10, to
reduce to less than 3 per cent the transaction costs of migrant remittances and eliminate remittance corridors with costs
higher than 5 per cent,
Acknowledging that innovative digital technologies such as mobile money transfers can effectively reduce the
cost of the transfer of remittances, which enables efficiency and cost savings for senders and recipients of remittances,
1.

Decides to proclaim 16 June the International Day of Family Remittances;

2. Invites all Member States, organizations of the United Nations system and other international and regional
organizations, as well as civil society, including non-governmental organizations, individuals, the private sector and
academia, to observe and actively support the International Day in an appropriate manner and in accordance with
national priorities, in order to raise awareness of the impact of remittances;
3. Calls upon the International Fund for Agricultural Development to facilitate the observance of the
International Day, including through the Global Forum on Remittances, Investment and Development and mindful of
the provisions contained in the annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 1980/67;
4. Stresses that the cost of all activities that may arise from the implementation of the present resolution
should be met from voluntary contributions;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of Member States, the
organizations of the United Nations system and all relevant stakeholders for observance.
RESOLUTION 72/282
A/RES/72/282

Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2018, by a recorded vote of 64 to 15, with 83 abstentions,* on the basis of
draft resolution A/72/L.58 and A/72/L.58/Add.1, sponsored by: Canada, Czechia, Estonia, Georgia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
* In favour: Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Belgium, Belize, Botswana, Bulgaria, Canada,
Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, El Salvador, Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Papua
New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Vanuatu

32

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
Against: Armenia, Belarus, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Burundi, Cuba, Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Iran
(Islamic Republic of), Myanmar, Nicaragua, Russian Federation, South Sudan, Sudan, Syrian Arab Republic, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Zimbabwe
Abstaining: Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bhutan, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso, Cabo Verde, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Ghana,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, India, Indonesia, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco,
Namibia, Nauru, Nepal, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Rwanda, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Sri Lanka, Suriname, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Viet Nam

72/282. Complete and unconditional withdrawal of foreign military forces from the territory
of the Republic of Moldova
The General Assembly,
Recalling the obligations of all Member States under Article 2 of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recalling also its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October 1970, in which it approved the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations,
Reaffirming the need for all Member States to adhere strictly to the principles of the Charter, which include the
sovereign equality of all Members of the United Nations, the obligation to refrain from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations, and the obligation to settle international disputes by peaceful means,
Referring to its relevant resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development – GUAM aimed, inter alia, at promoting the purposes and principles of the
United Nations in the GUAM area,
Bearing in mind that the Constitution of the Republic of Moldova proclaims the permanent neutrality of the
country and expressly prohibits the stationing of foreign troops on its territory,
Recognizing that the stationing of foreign military forces on the territory of the Republic of Moldova, without
its consent, violates its sovereignty and territorial integrity, and that this is a problem that must be resolved in good
faith, unconditionally, without further delay and in a peaceful manner,
Recalling the repeated past calls of the Republic of Moldova, which were reiterated at the twenty-fourth meeting
of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe Ministerial Council, held in Vienna in December 2017,
for the full withdrawal of Russian military forces and armaments from its territory,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by the States participating in the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe aimed at facilitating the completion of the withdrawal process of the Russian military forces
and armaments from the territory of the Republic of Moldova, in accordance with the relevant decisions of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe,
Emphasizing the commitment by the Russian Federation to complete the withdrawal of its military forces and
armaments from the territory of the Republic of Moldova within a specific timetable, as agreed at the summit of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe held in Istanbul, Turkey, in 1999,
Recalling its relevant resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, particularly resolutions 54/117 of 15 December 1999, 55/179 of 19 December 2000,
56/216 of 21 December 2001 and 57/298 of 20 December 2002, emphasizing the commitments undertaken by the
Russian Federation at the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe summit held in Istanbul in 1999 on
the withdrawal of its military forces and armaments from the territory of the Republic of Moldova,
Stressing that the Operational Group of Russian Forces is not a part of the military component of the Joint
Control Commission established under the 1992 ceasefire agreement,47 which also includes a rotating Russian
contingent, and, as such, has not been entrusted with any peacekeeping or other legal mandate,
_______________
47

See S/24369.

33

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking note with concern of the continuous illegal joint military exercises of the Operational Group of Russian
Forces with the paramilitaries of the separatist entity in the eastern part of the country, which endangers the security
situation, disregards the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova and undermines the
international efforts aimed at the peaceful resolution of the protracted Transnistrian conflict,
Recognizing that the completion of the withdrawal of the Operational Group of Russian Forces, and the
armaments that it guards, from the territory of the Republic of Moldova will demonstrate respect for its sovereignty,
territorial integrity and permanent neutrality,
1. Expresses deep concern about the continued stationing of the Operational Group of Russian Forces and
its armaments on the territory of the Republic of Moldova without the consent of that State Member of the United
Nations;
2. Urges the Russian Federation to complete, unconditionally and without further delay, the orderly
withdrawal of the Operational Group of Russian Forces and its armaments from the territory of the Republic of
Moldova;
3. Expresses support for and further encourages the facilitation by the States participating in the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe of the completion of the process of withdrawal of the Russian
forces and armaments from the territory of the Republic of Moldova, in accordance with the relevant decisions of the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and as agreed at its summit held in Istanbul in 1999;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session an item entitled “Complete
withdrawal of foreign military forces from the territory of the Republic of Moldova”.
RESOLUTION 72/283
A/RES/72/283

Adopted at the 98th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.61 and
A/72/L.61/Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by: Afghanistan, Albania, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Belgium,
Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Cyprus, Czechia, Djibouti, Ecuador, Estonia, Georgia, Germany, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Kazakhstan, Kiribati, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Morocco,
Nigeria, Norway, Palau, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Samoa, Singapore,
Slovakia, Sudan, Switzerland, Tajikistan, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, United
Arab Emirates, Uzbekistan, Viet Nam

72/283. Strengthening regional and international cooperation to ensure peace, stability and sustainable
development in the Central Asian region
The General Assembly,
Guided by the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations that encourage measures for regional cooperation
to advance the purposes and principles of the United Nations,
Recognizing the important role of the Central Asian countries in ensuring peace, stability and sustainable
development in the region as well as in promoting regional and international cooperation,
Keeping in mind modern challenges and threats faced by the countries of Central Asia,
Acknowledging the major regional and international initiatives of the Central Asian States in the fields of security
and development, including:
(a) The establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central Asia as an effective measure towards the
achievement of a world free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction,48
(b) The declaration by the General Assembly of 29 August as the International Day against Nuclear Tests as
one of the key means of achieving the goal of a nuclear-weapon-free world,49
_______________
48
49

34

See resolutions 65/49, 67/31, 69/36 and 71/65, entitled “Treaty on a Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in Central Asia”.
See resolution 64/35 on the International Day against Nuclear Tests.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

(c) The adoption of the first regional Joint Plan of Action for the Implementation of the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy in Central Asia and the Ashgabat Declaration,50
(d)

The elimination of risks from uranium tailings, the legacy of nuclear tests and radioactive waste,51

(e) The proclamation of the period 2018–2028 as the International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable
Development”,52
(f) Ensuring reliable and stable transit in respect of energy carriers and energy resources, including through
the effective implementation of existing regional energy projects,53
(g) The development of sustainable, best-value infrastructure supporting transport and transit corridors and
the strengthening of links between all modes of transport, including by opening new roads and railways, as well as
flight routes, as well as the implementation of transport and transit agreements encompassing Central Asia,54,55,56
(h)

Ensuring the protection of ecosystems, biodiversity and critical species of flora and fauna,

Welcoming the efforts of the Governments of Central Asian countries to implement the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development57 and the Sustainable Development Goals contained therein at the national level,
Referring to the results of the international conference on the theme “Central Asia: shared past and common
future, cooperation for sustainable development and mutual prosperity”, held in Samarkand, Uzbekistan, on 10 and
11 November 2017,58 at which the countries of Central Asia reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening bilateral
and regional cooperation,
Noting with satisfaction the regional support for the initiative to convene regular consultative meetings of the
Heads of State of the Central Asian countries,
Recognizing the importance of preventive diplomacy, and noting in this context the role of the United Nations
Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia,59
Recognizing also the efforts of the United Nations Special Programme for the Economies of Central Asia, which
Afghanistan has joined,
Stressing the importance of the Afghan-led Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan and
other such important regional initiatives, aimed at promoting regional cooperation, and welcoming the outcomes of
the seventh Regional Economic Cooperation Conference on Afghanistan, held in Ashgabat on 14 and 15 November
2017, aimed at further economic cooperation, and encouraging the efforts and contribution by Central Asian States to
the development of Afghanistan,
Recognizing the outcomes of the ministerial debate of the Security Council on building regional partnership in
Afghanistan and Central Asia as a model to link security and development, held on 19 January 2018 during the
presidency of Kazakhstan as the first Central Asian country on the Council,
Acknowledging the efforts of the Central Asian States to actively promote education as an important condition
for effectively counteracting violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism,

_______________
50

A/71/982-S/2017/600, annex.
See resolution 68/218 on the role of the international community in averting the radiation threat in Central Asia.
52
See resolution 71/222 on the International Decade for Action, “Water for Sustainable Development”, 2018–2028.
53
See resolution 63/210 on reliable and stable transit of energy and its role in ensuring sustainable development and international
cooperation.
54
See resolution 69/213 on the role of transport and transit corridors in ensuring international cooperation for sustainable development.
55
See resolution 70/197, entitled “Towards comprehensive cooperation among all modes of transport for promoting sustainable multimodal
transit corridors”.
56
See resolution 72/212 on strengthening the links between all modes of transport to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals.
57
Resolution 70/1.
58
See A/C.2/72/3, annex.
59
See resolution 72/7 on the role of the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia.
51

35

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Taking into account the outcome of the high-level international conference on countering terrorism and
preventing violent extremism, held in Dushanbe on 3 and 4 May 2018,60
Supporting the holding of the World Nomad Games on a regular basis, thereby contributing to intercultural
dialogue,
1. Notes with satisfaction the significant practical contribution and efforts of the Central Asian States in
strengthening regional security and stability, as well as in fostering sustainable development;
2. Expresses its support for the ongoing regional efforts and initiatives to strengthen stability and economic
cooperation in Central Asia;
3. Reaffirms that threats to stability and sustainable development in the region require closer and more
coordinated cooperation between the States of Central Asia, as well as between them and international and regional
organizations, and also reaffirms the importance of regional cooperation involving regional and international
organizations in addressing these threats;
4. Calls upon the countries of the region to make effective use of the platform of regular consultations of
Heads of State and other forums to promote cooperation in the region and beyond in ensuring peace, stability and
sustainable development;
5. Supports the active cooperation of the Central Asian countries in implementing the initiatives outlined in
the final communiqué of the international conference on the theme “Central Asia: shared past and common future,
cooperation for sustainable development and mutual prosperity”;58
6.

Welcomes the first summit of Central Asian Heads of State, held in Astana on 15 March 2018;

7. Also welcomes the holding by Turkmenistan in 2018 of the summit of the Heads of the participating States
of the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea;
8. Encourages the efforts of the Central Asian States to promote the peace process and social and economic
development in Afghanistan and their participation in the regional political and economic processes, and underscores
the importance of the Kabul process as a main forum and vehicle for peace initiatives on Afghanistan, as well as other
regional and international conferences, including the Tashkent Conference on Afghanistan: Peace Process, Security
Cooperation and Regional Connectivity, held on 26 and 27 March 2018, as ongoing efforts of the international
community to support the Afghan-led peace and reconciliation process;
9. Notes the importance of developing and strengthening bilateral and regional cooperation in the sphere of
the rational and integrated use of water and energy resources in Central Asia, taking into account the interests of all
States of the region, and for that purpose calls for the holding of regular consultations to promptly develop mutually
beneficial long-term sustainable mechanisms in this field;
10. Calls upon Member States to support the efforts of the Central Asian States aimed at mitigating the
environmental and socioeconomic consequences of the drying up of the Aral Sea;
11. Supports the further strengthening of good-neighbourly and friendly relations among the Central Asian
States through deepening relations in the fields of education, science, technology, innovation, tourism, culture, the arts
and sports, and for continued mutual assistance in emergency situations;
12. Notes the importance of developing an advanced transportation system in the vast area of Central Asia
and the wide use of the transit potential of the region as a necessary condition for sustainable development and free
movement of people, goods and services;
13. Calls upon the specialized agencies, funds and programmes of the United Nations system to harmonize
their programmes and activities in support of the priorities for regional cooperation, integration and sustainable
development in Central Asia, as identified by the countries of the region;
_______________
60

36

See A/72/864, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

14. Encourages the United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia to continue
its efforts to promote peace, stability, security and prosperity in the region, within its mandate, in promoting preventive
diplomacy in cooperation with relevant regional and international organizations;
15. Encourages the efforts of the partners of the Central Asian States and the international community as a
whole to strengthen and expand cooperation with the countries of the region in the fields of regional security and
sustainable development.
RESOLUTION 72/284
A/RES/72/284

Adopted at the 101st plenary meeting, on 26 June 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.62, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

72/284. The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, contained in its resolution 60/288 of
8 September 2006, and recalling its resolution 68/276 of 13 June 2014, which called for, inter alia, an examination of
the report of the Secretary-General on the progress made in the implementation of the Strategy and of the
implementation of the Strategy by Member States and for consideration to be given to updating the Strategy to respond
to changes,
Recalling the pivotal role of the General Assembly in following up the implementation and the updating of the
Strategy,
Recalling also its resolution 71/291 of 15 June 2017, in which it decided to establish the Office of CounterTerrorism, and underscoring the competencies and functions of the Office as set out in the report of the Secretary-General
on the capability of the United Nations system to assist Member States in implementing the Strategy61 and endorsed in
resolution 71/291, including providing leadership on the General Assembly counter-terrorism mandates entrusted to the
Secretary-General, enhancing coordination and coherence across the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force
(Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities) to ensure the balanced implementation of the four pillars
of the Strategy, strengthening the delivery of United Nations counter-terrorism capacity-building assistance to
Member States, improving visibility, advocacy and resource mobilization for United Nations counter-terrorism
efforts, and ensuring that due priority is given to counter-terrorism across the United Nations system and that the
important work on preventing violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism is firmly rooted in the Strategy,
Recalling further its resolution 66/10 of 18 November 2011, recognizing the important work carried out by the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, established within the Office of Counter-Terrorism, and its role in building
the capacity of Member States to counter and respond to terrorism, noting with appreciation its continued contribution
to strengthening United Nations counter-terrorism efforts, and encouraging Member States to provide resources and
voluntary contributions to the Centre in this regard,
Renewing its unwavering commitment to strengthening international cooperation to prevent and combat
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and reaffirming that any acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable,
regardless of their motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed,
Reaffirming that terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism cannot and should not be
associated with any religion, nationality, civilization or ethnic group,
Recalling the Declaration and Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace,62
Noting with appreciation the continued contribution of United Nations entities and the subsidiary bodies of the
Security Council to the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities),
_______________
61
62

A/71/858.
Resolutions 53/243 A and B.

37

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming its respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and unity of all States in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations,
Recognizing that international cooperation and any measures taken by Member States to prevent and combat
terrorism, as well as to prevent violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, must fully comply with their
obligations under international law, including the Charter, in particular the purposes and principles thereof, and
relevant international conventions and protocols, in particular human rights law, refugee law and international
humanitarian law,
Convinced that the General Assembly is the competent organ, with universal membership, to address the issue
of international terrorism,
Mindful of the need to enhance the role of the United Nations and the specialized agencies, within their
mandates, in the implementation of the Strategy,
Reaffirming that the acts, methods and practices of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations are activities
aimed at the destruction of human rights, fundamental freedoms and democracy, at threatening territorial integrity and
the security of States and at destabilizing legitimately constituted Governments, and that the international community
should take the steps necessary to enhance cooperation to prevent and combat terrorism in a decisive, unified,
coordinated, inclusive and transparent manner,
Reiterating the obligation of Member States to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorist acts and to
criminalize the wilful provision or collection, by any means, directly or indirectly, of funds by their nationals or in
their territories, with the intention that the funds be used, or with the knowledge that they are to be used, in order to
carry out terrorist acts,
Recognizing the importance of preventing, combating and eradicating the illicit use of small arms and light
weapons by terrorists,
Expressing concern that terrorist attacks on critical infrastructure could significantly disrupt the functioning of
government and the private sector alike and cause knock-on effects beyond the infrastructure sector, and therefore
underlining the growing importance of protecting critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks and of fostering
comprehensive preparedness for such attacks, including through public-private partnership, as appropriate,
Recognizing the role of the partnerships of regional and subregional organizations with the United Nations in
combating terrorism, and encouraging the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities), in accordance with its mandate, to closely cooperate and coordinate with regional
and subregional organizations in their efforts to combat terrorism,
Alarmed by the acts of intolerance, violent extremism conducive to terrorism, violence, including sectarian
violence, and terrorism in various parts of the world, which claim innocent lives, cause destruction and displace
people, and rejecting the use of violence, regardless of motivation,
Expressing grave concern over the continued acute and growing threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters,
namely, individuals who travel to a State other than their States of residence or nationality for the purpose of the
perpetration, planning or preparation of, or participation in, terrorist acts or providing or receiving terrorist training,
including in connection with armed conflict, as well as individuals returning or relocating, particularly from conflict
zones, to their countries of origin or nationality or to third countries, emphasizing the need for States to address this
issue, including through the implementation of their international obligations, and underlining the importance of
United Nations capacity-building and facilitation of capacity-building, in accordance with existing mandates, to assist
States, including those in the most affected regions, upon their request,
Underlining the importance of strengthening international cooperation to address the threat posed by foreign
terrorist fighters, including on information-sharing, border security, investigations, judicial processes, extradition,
improving prevention and addressing conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, preventing and countering
incitement to commit terrorist acts, preventing radicalization to terrorism and recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters,
disrupting and preventing financial support to foreign terrorist fighters, developing and implementing risk assessments
on returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters and their families, and prosecution, rehabilitation and
reintegration efforts, consistent with applicable international law,
38

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Expressing concern that terrorists may benefit from transnational organized crime in some regions, including from
the trafficking of arms, persons, drugs and cultural property and from the illicit trade in natural resources, including oil,
and in oil products, modular refineries and related material, gold and other precious metals and stones, minerals, charcoal
and wildlife, as well as from kidnapping for ransom and other crimes, including extortion, money-laundering and
bank robbery, and condemning the destruction of cultural heritage perpetrated by terrorist groups in some countries,
Strongly condemning the systematic recruitment and use of children to perpetrate terrorist attacks, as well as the
violations and abuses committed by terrorist groups against children, including killing and maiming, abduction and
rape and other forms of sexual violence, and noting that such violations and abuses may amount to war crimes or
crimes against humanity,
Expressing deep concern that acts of sexual and gender-based violence are known to be part of the strategic
objectives and ideology of certain terrorist groups and are used as a tactic of terrorism and as an instrument to increase
their power by supporting financing and recruitment and through the destruction of communities,
Expressing deep concern also about the connections, in some cases, between some forms of transnational
organized crime and terrorism, and emphasizing the need to enhance cooperation at the national, subregional, regional
and international levels in order to strengthen responses to this evolving challenge,
Recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace, and determined to condemn acts of violent extremism
conducive to terrorism and incitement to commit terrorist acts that spread hate and threaten lives,
Taking note of the report of the Special Rapporteur of the Human Rights Council on the promotion and
protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while countering terrorism,63 including the conclusions and
recommendations contained therein,
Encouraging Member States to work together to ensure that terrorists do not find safe haven online, while
promoting an open, interoperable, reliable and secure Internet that fosters efficiency, innovation, communication and
economic prosperity, and while respecting international law, including human rights law,
Recognizing the role that victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations can play, including in countering
the appeal of terrorism, and emphasizing the need to promote international solidarity in support of victims of terrorism
and to ensure that victims of terrorism are treated with dignity and respect,
Recalling, in this regard, its proclamation of 21 August as the International Day of Remembrance of and Tribute
to the Victims of Terrorism, in order to honour and support the victims and survivors of terrorism and to promote and
protect the full enjoyment of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Affirming the importance of education as a tool to help to prevent terrorism and violent extremism conducive to
terrorism, and welcoming the engagement of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
with Member States to implement strategies to prevent violent extremism conducive to terrorism through education,
Noting the important contribution of women to the implementation of the Strategy, and encouraging Member
States, United Nations entities and international, regional and subregional organizations to ensure the participation
and leadership of women in efforts to prevent violent extremism and counter terrorism,
Noting also the important and positive contribution of youth in efforts to counter terrorism and prevent violent
extremism conducive to terrorism, as well as for the promotion of peace and security, and in this regard expressing
concern about the danger of recruitment and radicalization to terrorism, including in prisons,
Stressing the importance of the development and maintenance of effective, fair, humane, transparent and
accountable criminal justice systems, taking into account, inter alia, the rights and needs of children, in accordance
with applicable international law, as a fundamental basis of any strategy to counter terrorism, calling for Member
States’ continued efforts to combat terrorism through national legislation and establish such justice systems, and
stressing the need for training of professionals in the criminal justice systems of Member States, upon their request,
including through bilateral and multilateral programmes and experience-sharing with a view to developing a common
understanding of threats and providing an effective response,
_______________
63

A/HRC/37/52.

39

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing that achieving the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,64 which comprises universal goals
and targets that involve the entire world, developed and developing countries alike, can contribute to the
implementation of the Strategy, and recognizing also the importance of regional development frameworks in this
regard, such as the African Union Agenda 2063,
Stressing that a national criminal justice system based on respect for human rights and the rule of law, due
process and fair trial guarantees is one of the best means for effectively countering terrorism and ensuring
accountability,
Reaffirming the determination of Member States to continue to do all that they can to resolve conflict, end
foreign occupation, confront oppression, eradicate poverty, promote sustained economic growth, sustainable
development, global prosperity, good governance, human rights for all and the rule of law, improve intercultural
understanding and ensure respect for all religions, religious values, beliefs and cultures,
Reaffirming also the commitment of Member States to take measures aimed at addressing the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism, including but not limited to prolonged unresolved conflicts, dehumanization of
victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, lack of the rule of law and violations of human rights, ethnic,
national and religious discrimination, political exclusion, socioeconomic marginalization and lack of good
governance, while recognizing that none of these conditions can excuse or justify acts of terrorism,
Noting the importance of continuing to strive towards achieving a world free of terrorism,
1. Reiterates its strong and unequivocal condemnation of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations,
committed by whomever, wherever and for whatever purposes;
2. Reaffirms the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy65 and its four pillars, which constitute
an ongoing effort, and calls upon Member States, the United Nations and other appropriate international, regional and
subregional organizations to step up their efforts to implement the Strategy in an integrated and balanced manner and
in all its aspects;
3. Stresses the importance of keeping the Strategy relevant and contemporary in the light of emerging new
threats and evolving trends of international terrorism;
4. Affirms the importance of the integrated and balanced implementation of all pillars of the Strategy,
recognizing the need to redouble efforts for even attention to be paid to and the even implementation of all the pillars
of the Strategy;
5. Recognizes the principal responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy, while encouraging
the further elaboration and development of national, subregional and regional plans, as appropriate, to support the
implementation of the Strategy;
6.

Recalls the establishment of the Office of Counter-Terrorism in its resolution 71/291;

7. Calls upon States that have not done so to consider becoming parties in a timely manner to the existing
international conventions and protocols against terrorism, and upon all States to make every effort to conclude a
comprehensive convention on international terrorism, and recalls the commitments of Member States with regard to
the implementation of General Assembly and Security Council resolutions relating to international terrorism;
8. Recalls all the resolutions of the General Assembly on measures to eliminate international terrorism and
the relevant resolutions of the Assembly on the protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms while
countering terrorism and all resolutions of the Security Council relating to international terrorism, and calls upon
Member States to cooperate fully with the relevant bodies of the United Nations in the fulfilment of their tasks,
recognizing that many States continue to require assistance in implementing these resolutions;
9. Stresses the significance of a sustained and comprehensive approach, including through stronger efforts,
where necessary, to address conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism, bearing in mind that terrorism will not
be defeated by military force, law enforcement measures and intelligence operations alone;
_______________
64
65

40

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 60/288.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10. Also stresses that, when counter-terrorism efforts neglect the rule of law at the national and international
levels and violate international law, including the Charter of the United Nations, international humanitarian law and
refugee law, human rights and fundamental freedoms, they not only betray the values that they seek to uphold, but
they may also further fuel violent extremism that can be conducive to terrorism;
11. Encourages Member States to engage with relevant local communities and non-governmental actors,
where appropriate, in developing tailored strategies to counter the violent extremist narrative that can incite
recruitment to terrorist groups and the commission of terrorist acts and to address the conditions conducive to the
spread of violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism;
12. Encourages Member States, United Nations entities, regional and subregional organizations and relevant
actors to consider instituting mechanisms to involve youth in the promotion of a culture of peace, tolerance and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue and develop, as appropriate, an understanding of respect for human dignity,
pluralism and diversity, including, as appropriate, through education programmes, that could discourage their
participation in acts of terrorism, violent extremism conducive to terrorism, violence, xenophobia and all forms of
discrimination, also encourages Member States to empower youth through the promotion of media and information
literacy by including youth in decision-making processes and considering practical ways to include youth in the
development of relevant programmes and initiatives aimed at preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
and urges Member States to take effective measures, in conformity with international law, to protect young people
affected or exploited by terrorism or violent extremism conducive to terrorism;
13. Deeply deplores the suffering caused by terrorism to the victims of terrorism in all its forms and
manifestations and to their families, expresses its profound solidarity with them, and encourages Member States to
provide them with proper support and assistance while taking into account, inter alia, when appropriate, considerations
regarding remembrance, dignity, respect, justice and truth, in accordance with international law;
14. Acknowledges the importance of building the resilience of victims and their families as an integral part of
a counter-terrorism strategy, and encourages Member States to include this aspect in their national counter-terrorism
strategies, including by providing victims and their families with proper support and assistance immediately after an
attack and in the long term and sharing on a voluntary basis best practices and lessons learned related to the protection
of victims of terrorism, including regarding the provision of legal, medical, psychosocial or financial support;
15. Emphasizes that tolerance, pluralism, respect for diversity, dialogue among civilizations and the
enhancement of interreligious and intercultural understanding and respect among peoples, including at the national,
regional and global levels, while avoiding the escalation of hatred, are among the most important elements in
promoting cooperation, in combating terrorism and in countering violent extremism as and when conducive to
terrorism, and welcomes the various initiatives to this end;
16. Urges all Member States and the United Nations to unite against violent extremism as and when conducive
to terrorism, encourages the efforts of leaders to discuss within their communities the drivers of violent extremism
conducive to terrorism and to evolve strategies to address them, and underlines that States, regional organizations,
non-governmental organizations, religious bodies and the media have an important role to play in promoting tolerance
and facilitating understanding, inclusive dialogue and respect for religious and cultural diversity and human rights;
17. Recognizes the difficulties faced by the international community in addressing the conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism, which can be conducive to terrorism, and urges Member States and
the United Nations system to take measures, pursuant to international law and while ensuring national ownership, to
address all drivers of violent extremism conducive to terrorism, both internal and external, in a balanced manner;
18. Also recognizes the importance of preventing violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism and
in this regard recalls its resolution 70/254 of 12 February 2016, in which it welcomed the initiative by the SecretaryGeneral and took note of his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent Extremism,66 recommends that Member States consider
the implementation of relevant recommendations of the Plan of Action, as applicable to the national context,
encourages United Nations entities, in line with their mandates, to implement relevant recommendations of the Plan
of Action, including by providing technical assistance to Member States upon their request, and invites Member States
and regional and subregional organizations to consider developing national and regional plans of action to prevent
_______________
66

See A/70/674.

41

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, in accordance with their priorities and taking into account, as
appropriate, the Secretary-General’s Plan of Action, as well as other relevant documents;
19. Urges all States to respect and protect the right to privacy, as set out in article 12 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights67 and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,68 including
in the context of digital communication, also while countering terrorism, in accordance with international law, in
particular international human rights law, and to take measures to ensure that interferences with or restrictions on that
right are not arbitrary or unlawful and are subject to effective oversight and to appropriate redress, including through
judicial review or other legal means;
20. Calls upon States, while countering terrorism and preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism,
to review their procedures, practices and legislation regarding the surveillance of communications, their interception
and the collection of personal data, including mass surveillance, interception and collection, with a view to upholding
the right to privacy, as set out in article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and article 17 of the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, by ensuring the full and effective implementation of all their
obligations under international human rights law;
21. Stresses that it is essential to address the threat posed by narratives used by terrorists and that, in this regard,
the international community should consider developing an accurate understanding of how terrorists motivate others
to commit terrorist acts or recruit them, and develop the most effective means to counter terrorist propaganda,
incitement and recruitment, including through the Internet, in compliance with international law, including
international human rights law;
22. Notes that terrorists may craft distorted narratives that are based on the misinterpretation and
misrepresentation of religion to justify violence, which are utilized to recruit supporters and foreign terrorist fighters,
mobilize resources and garner support from sympathizers, in particular by exploiting information and
communications technologies, including through the Internet and social media, and also notes in this regard the urgent
need for the international community to globally counter such activities;
23. Stresses that States should consider engaging, where appropriate, with religious authorities and
community leaders with relevant expertise, including in crafting and delivering effective counter-narratives and in
countering narratives used by terrorists and their supporters, and also stresses that counter-narratives should aim not
only to rebut terrorists’ messages but also to amplify positive narratives, provide credible alternatives and address
issues of concern to vulnerable audiences who are subject to terrorist narratives;
24. Encourages civil society, including non-governmental organizations, to engage, as appropriate, in efforts
to enhance the implementation of the Strategy, including through interaction with Member States and the United
Nations system, and encourages Member States and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities) to enhance engagement with civil society in accordance with their
mandates, as appropriate, and to support its role in the implementation of the Strategy;
25. Calls upon all Member States, given the complex global security context today, to highlight the important
role of women in countering terrorism and violent extremism as and when conducive to terrorism, and urges Member
States and United Nations entities to integrate a gender analysis on the drivers of radicalization of women to terrorism
into their relevant programmes, to consider, when appropriate, the impacts of counter-terrorism strategies on women’s
human rights and women’s organizations and to seek greater consultations with women and women’s organizations
when developing strategies to counter terrorism and violent extremism conducive to terrorism;
26. Recognizes the need for Member States to prevent the abuse of non-governmental, non-profit and
charitable organizations by and for terrorists, and calls upon non-governmental, non-profit and charitable
organizations to prevent and oppose, as appropriate, attempts by terrorists to abuse the status of those organizations,
while reaffirming the need to fully respect the rights to freedom of expression and association of individuals in civil
society and to freedom of religion or belief of all persons;
27. Reaffirms the need for enhanced dialogue and coordination among the counter-terrorism officials,
including among law enforcement entities and financial intelligence units, of Member States to promote international,
_______________
67
68

42

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

regional and subregional cooperation and wider dissemination of knowledge of the Strategy in order to counter
terrorism, and in this regard recalls the role of the United Nations system, in particular the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities), in promoting international
cooperation and capacity-building as elements of the Strategy;
28. Calls upon all Member States, in accordance with their obligations under applicable international law,
including the Charter, to deny terrorist groups safe haven, freedom of operations, movement and recruitment and
financial, material or political support, which endanger national, regional and international peace and security, and to
bring to justice or, where appropriate, extradite, on the basis of the principle of extradite or prosecute, the perpetrators
of terrorist acts or any person who supports, facilitates or participates or attempts to participate in the financing,
planning or preparation of terrorist acts;
29. Urges Member States to provide full coordination and afford one another the greatest measure of
assistance, in accordance with their obligations under international law, in criminal investigations or criminal
proceedings relating to the financing or support of terrorist acts, especially with those States where, or against whose
citizens, terrorist acts are committed, including obtaining evidence for the proceedings involving terrorist
organizations, terrorist entities or foreign terrorist fighters, and recalls that all States must cooperate fully in the fight
against terrorism on the basis of mutual legal assistance and the principle of extradite or prosecute, welcoming their
efforts to elaborate on the existing extradition and mutual legal assistance mechanisms;
30. Calls upon Member States to prevent refugee status from being abused by the perpetrators, organizers or
facilitators of terrorist acts, and also calls upon Member States to take appropriate measures to ensure, before granting
asylum, that the asylum seeker has not planned, facilitated or participated in the commission of terrorist acts, while
reaffirming the importance of protecting refugees and asylum seekers in accordance with States’ obligations under
international law, in particular international human rights law, refugee law and humanitarian law;
31. Urges Member States to ensure no tolerance for terrorism, regardless of the targets or motives, and
reaffirms its call to refrain from organizing, instigating, facilitating, participating in, financing, encouraging or
tolerating terrorist activities and to take appropriate practical measures to ensure that their respective territories are not
used for terrorist installations or training camps or for the preparation or organization of terrorist acts intended to be
committed against other States or their citizens;
32. Expresses concern over terrorist acts committed by lone terrorists in various parts of the world,
acknowledges the specific challenges created by lone terrorists as they are difficult to detect, and recognizes the need
to address this issue expeditiously;
33. Condemns the failure to take all feasible precautions to protect the civilian population and civilian objects
against the effects of attacks when using civilian objects, in particular schools and hospitals, for military purposes such
as launching attacks and storing weapons, and strongly condemns the use of civilians to shield military objectives
from attacks;
34. Encourages Member States to consider better ways to cooperate to exchange information, assist one
another, prosecute those who use information and communications technologies for terrorist purposes and implement
other appropriate cooperative measures to address such threats;
35. Expresses concern at the increasing use, in a globalized society, by terrorists and their supporters, of
information and communications technologies, in particular the Internet and other media, and the use of such
technologies to commit, incite, recruit for, fund or plan terrorist acts, notes the importance of cooperation among
stakeholders in the implementation of the Strategy, including among Member States, international, regional and
subregional organizations, the private sector and civil society, to address this issue, while respecting human rights and
fundamental freedoms and complying with international law and the purposes and principles of the Charter, and
reiterates that such technologies can be powerful tools in countering the spread of terrorism, including by promoting
tolerance and dialogue among peoples and peace;
36. Recalls Security Council resolutions 2178 (2014) of 24 September 2014 and 2396 (2017) of 21 December
2017, and reaffirms the need to strengthen efforts to address the evolving threat of foreign terrorist fighters;
37. Calls upon Member States to strengthen cooperation at the international, regional, subregional and
bilateral levels to counter the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, including through enhanced operational and
timely information-sharing, recalling in this regard that Member States should notify the relevant authorities, in a
43

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

timely manner, upon travel, departure, arrival or deportation of captured or detained individuals whom they have
reasonable grounds to believe are foreign terrorist fighters, pursuant to Security Council resolution 2396 (2017),
logistical support, as appropriate, and capacity-building activities, to share and adopt best practices to identify foreign
terrorist fighters, to prevent the travel of foreign terrorist fighters from, into or through Member States, to prevent the
financing, mobilization, recruitment and organization of foreign terrorist fighters, and to strengthen international and
regional cooperation in information-sharing and evidence-gathering, and calls upon law enforcement and criminal
justice authorities to better counter the threat of returning and relocating foreign terrorist fighters, to counter violent
extremism conducive to terrorism and radicalization to terrorism, to enhance efforts to implement deradicalization
programmes and to ensure that any person who participates in the financing, planning, preparation or perpetration of
terrorist acts or in the supporting of terrorist acts or in providing funds to terrorists is brought to justice, in compliance
with obligations under international law, as well as applicable domestic law;
38. Calls upon all States to use applicable international instruments to which they are parties, as appropriate,
as a basis for mutual legal assistance and, as appropriate, for extradition in terrorism cases, and encourages States, in
the absence of applicable conventions or provisions, to cooperate where possible on the basis of reciprocity or on a
case-by-case basis;
39. Calls upon all Member States, in accordance with their obligations under international law, to cooperate
in efforts to address the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, including by preventing the radicalization to terrorism
and recruitment of foreign terrorist fighters, preventing the movement of foreign terrorist fighters across their borders,
including through enhanced border security and controls on issuance of identity papers and travel documents,
disrupting and preventing financial support to foreign terrorist fighters and developing and implementing prosecution,
rehabilitation and reintegration strategies, taking into account gender and age dimensions, for returning and relocating
foreign terrorist fighters and their families, underscores in this regard the importance of a whole-of-government
approach, recognizes the role that civil society organizations can play as they may have relevant knowledge of, access
to and engagement with local communities, to be able to confront the challenges of recruitment and radicalization to
terrorism, notes that children may be especially vulnerable to radicalization to violence and in need of particular
psychosocial support, such as post-trauma counselling, while stressing that children need to be treated in a manner
that respects their rights and protects their dignity, in accordance with applicable international law, and in this regard
encourages all Member States to develop effective strategies to deal with returnees, including through repatriation, in
accordance with relevant international obligations and national law;
40. Expresses concern that international networks have been established by terrorist organizations that
facilitate the travel of foreign terrorist fighters to conflict zones, and calls upon all Member States to take appropriate
measures to dismantle such networks, in accordance with their international obligations;
41. Also expresses concern at the increasing flow of international recruits to terrorist organizations, including
foreign terrorist fighters, and at the threat that it poses for all Member States, including countries of origin, transit and
destination, encourages all Member States to address this threat by enhancing their cooperation and developing
relevant measures to prevent and tackle this phenomenon, including information-sharing, border management to
detect travel, including through the implementation of obligations on the use of advance passenger information,
passenger name record and biometric data, with full respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, calls upon
Member States to make effective use of the databases of the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL),
as appropriate, by connecting to law enforcement, border security and customs agencies through their national central
bureaux, requests Member States to help to build the capacity of other Member States, upon their request, to address
the threat posed by foreign terrorist fighters, notes in this regard that some Member States may require technical
assistance and capacity-building support, and encourages the provision of assistance to help to address such gaps, and
the consideration of the use of United Nations instruments, such as sanctions regimes, as well as cooperation;
42. Calls upon Member States to strengthen efforts to improve the security and protection of particularly
vulnerable targets, such as infrastructure and public places, as well as resilience to terrorist attacks, in particular in the
area of civil protection, and encourages Member States to consider developing or further improving their strategies
for reducing risks to critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks, which should include, inter alia, assessing and raising
awareness of the relevant risks, taking preparedness measures, including effective responses to such attacks, as well
as promoting better interoperability in security and consequence management and facilitating the effective interaction
of all stakeholders involved;
43. Expresses concern at the increase, in some regions, in incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking
committed by terrorist groups, for any purpose, including with the aim of raising funds or gaining political
44

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

concessions, notes that ransoms paid to terrorists are used as one of the sources of funding for their activities, including
further kidnappings, calls upon all Member States to prevent terrorists from benefiting from ransom payments and
political concessions and to secure the safe release of hostages, in accordance with applicable legal obligations, and
encourages Member States to cooperate, as appropriate, during incidents of kidnapping and hostage-taking committed
by terrorist groups;
44. Recognizes the need to continue to take measures to prevent and suppress the financing of terrorism, in
this regard encourages United Nations entities to cooperate with Member States and to continue to provide assistance,
upon their request, in particular, to help them to fully implement their respective international obligations to combat
the financing of terrorism, and encourages Member States to further build the capacity of their financial oversight and
regulatory systems around the world in order to deny terrorists the space to exploit and raise funds, including by
cooperating with the private sector through public-private partnerships with financial institutions and by taking into
account the assessments thereof by relevant entities such as the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate;
45. Calls upon Member States to engage with domestic financial institutions and share information on terrorist
financing risks to provide greater context for their work in identifying potential terrorist financing activity through
multiple authorities and channels, including law enforcement, intelligence, security services and financial intelligence
units, and also calls upon Member States to improve the integration and utilization of financial intelligence to more
effectively counter the terrorist financing threats;
46. Also calls upon Member States to enhance their efforts in the fight against the financing of terrorism by
addressing the anonymity of transactions and by tracing, detecting, sanctioning and effectively dismantling illegal
money transmitters and tackling the risks associated with the use of cash, informal remittance systems, prepaid credit
and debit cards, cryptoassets and other anonymous means of monetary or financial transactions, as well as to anticipate
and address, as appropriate, the risk of new financial instruments being abused for the purpose of terrorist financing;
47. Recognizes the importance of sharing information within and between Governments to effectively counter
the financing of terrorism, calls upon Member States, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2368 (2017) of
20 July 2017, to continue to exercise vigilance over relevant financial transactions and improve information-sharing
capabilities and practices within and between Governments through multiple authorities and channels, including law
enforcement, intelligence, security services and financial intelligence units, and also calls upon Member States to
improve the integration and utilization of financial intelligence with other types of information available to national
Governments in order to more effectively counter the terrorist financing threats posed by Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and entities;
48. Calls upon all States to adopt such measures as may be necessary and appropriate, and in accordance with
their obligations under international law, to prohibit by law incitement to commit a terrorist act or acts, prevent such
conduct and deny safe haven to any persons with respect to whom there is credible and relevant information giving
serious reasons for considering that they have been guilty of such conduct;
49. Calls upon Member States to collaborate in the pursuit of developing and implementing effective counternarrative strategies, in accordance with Security Council resolution 2354 (2017) of 24 May 2017, and the
comprehensive international framework to counter terrorist narratives,69 including those relating to foreign terrorist
fighters, in a manner compliant with their obligations under international law, including international human rights
law, international refugee law and international humanitarian law;
50. Calls upon all Member States to support international efforts to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of
mass destruction and their means of delivery, urges all Member States to take and strengthen national measures, as
appropriate, to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction, their means of delivery and related
materials, equipment and technologies related to their manufacture, and encourages cooperation among and between
Member States and relevant regional and international organizations for strengthening national capacities in this regard;
51. Recognizes that improvised explosive devices are being increasingly used in terrorist activities, takes note
of the work of the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities) in this regard, and urges its further attention to the issue of improvised explosive devices in line with the
mandates of the entities;
_______________
69

S/2017/375, annex.

45

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

52. Recalls relevant United Nations resolutions, and reaffirms that Member States shall eliminate the supply
of weapons, including small arms and light weapons, to terrorists, as well as prevent, combat and eradicate the illicit
trade in said weapons, including their diversion, to terrorists;
53. Calls upon Member States to establish or strengthen national, regional and international partnerships with
stakeholders, both public and private, as appropriate, to share information and experience in order to prevent, protect
against, mitigate, investigate, respond to and recover from damage from terrorist attacks on critical infrastructure
facilities, and emphasizes the need for States able to do so to assist in the delivery of effective and targeted capacity
development, training and other necessary resources, and technical assistance, where it is needed, to enable all States
to develop appropriate capacity to implement contingency and response plans with regard to attacks on critical
infrastructure and soft targets or public places;
54. Recognizes that Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and its affiliates continue to pose
a widespread challenge in the fight against terrorism, encourages Member States to integrate the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions regime, pursuant to Security Council resolutions 1267 (1999) of
15 October 1999, 1989 (2011) of 17 June 2011 and 2253 (2015) of 17 December 2015, into their national and regional
counter-terrorism strategies, including by proposing for inclusion on the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh)
and Al-Qaida sanctions list the names of individuals, groups, undertakings and entities, reminds Member States of
their obligation to ensure that their nationals and persons in their territory do not make economic resources available
to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and associated individuals, groups, undertakings and
entities, takes note of the significant contribution of the Office of the Ombudsperson, since its establishment, in
providing fairness and transparency to the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (Da’esh) and Al-Qaida sanctions
regime, and stresses the need to continue efforts to ensure that procedures are fair and clear;
55. Encourages Member States and international and regional organizations to enhance knowledge of and
support initiatives to address, in the design and implementation of global, regional and national counter-terrorism
strategies, the linkages between terrorism and transnational organized crime;
56. Encourages all relevant international, regional and subregional organizations and forums involved in the
fight against terrorism to cooperate with the United Nations system and Member States in supporting the Strategy and
to share best practices, and calls for information-sharing, through appropriate channels and arrangements, on
individuals and entities implicated in any type of terrorist activities, their tactics and modus operandi, supply of
weapons and sources of material or any other form of support, specific crimes related to perpetration, planning or
preparation of terrorist acts, narratives used by terrorists to mobilize resources and garner support from sympathizers,
including by exploiting information and communications technologies, and on the ongoing international counterterrorism cooperation, especially among special services, security agencies and law enforcement organizations and
criminal justice authorities;
57. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Activities of the United Nations system in
implementing the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” and the annexes thereto70 and the efforts
deployed by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities), and underlines the importance of providing the resources necessary for the implementation of these projects;
58. Also takes note of the measures that Member States and relevant international, regional and subregional
organizations have adopted within the framework of the Strategy, as referred to in paragraph 51 of the report of the
Secretary-General and considered at the sixth biennial review of the Strategy, on 26 and 27 June 2018, all of which
strengthen cooperation to fight terrorism, including through the exchange of best practices;
59. Reaffirms the principal responsibility of Member States to implement the Strategy, while recognizing the
need to enhance the important role that the United Nations, including the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task
Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities), plays, in coordination with other international,
regional and subregional organizations, as appropriate, in facilitating and promoting coordination and coherence in
the implementation of the Strategy at the national, regional and global levels and in providing assistance, upon request
by Member States, especially in the area of capacity-building;

_______________
70

46

A/72/840.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

60. Recognizes the work done and efforts made by the relevant United Nations bodies and entities and other
international, regional and subregional organizations aimed at supporting, recognizing and protecting the rights of
victims of terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, and urges them to step up their efforts to provide, upon request,
technical assistance for building the capacity of Member States in the development and implementation of
programmes of assistance and support for victims of terrorism;
61. Also recognizes the continued need to enhance the visibility and effectiveness of United Nations counterterrorism activities, underlines the importance of enhancing counter-terrorism efforts undertaken by all relevant
United Nations agencies and bodies in accordance with their existing mandates, and encourages the Office of CounterTerrorism to continue its collaboration with those agencies and bodies while also ensuring overall coordination and
coherence in the counter-terrorism efforts of the United Nations system, with a view to maximizing synergies,
promoting transparency and greater efficiencies and avoiding duplication of their work;
62. Welcomes the efforts of the Office of Counter-Terrorism to increase its transparency, accountability and
effectiveness in enhancing cooperation within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global CounterTerrorism Coordination Compact entities), requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the Office is well organized,
in order to achieve these objectives and to report on an annual basis on progress in this regard, including on
transparency in the selection and funding of projects and their impact, as well as on the efficiency of shared funding
arrangements, with a view to enabling a meaningful review of the United Nations counter-terrorism architecture at
the seventh biennial review of the Strategy, at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly;
63. Takes note of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, a framework between
the Secretary-General and the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities) heads, which aims to strengthen a common-action approach to coordination and
coherence in the work of the United Nations system to prevent and counter terrorism, and to strengthen support to
Member States, at their request and in cooperation with relevant international, regional and subregional organizations,
to identify and share best practices and help in capacity-building, in the implementation of the Strategy and relevant
Security Council resolutions, while ensuring compliance with international law, including international human rights
law and, where applicable, international humanitarian law, and looks forward to the periodic briefings by the Office
of Counter-Terrorism to Member States on the activities of the Compact entities;
64. Recognizes the role of the regional organizations, structures and strategies in combating terrorism, and
encourages those entities to enhance interregional dialogue and cooperation and consider using best practices
developed by other regions in their fight against terrorism, as appropriate, taking into account their specific regional
and national circumstances;
65. Encourages all Member States to collaborate with the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and to
contribute to the implementation of its activities within the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global
Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities), including through the development, funding and implementation
of capacity-building projects in order to mobilize a stronger and more systematic response to terrorism at the national,
regional and global levels;
66. Notes with appreciation the activities undertaken in the area of capacity-building, including in the areas
of countering the financing of terrorism, border control, maritime and aviation security, and preventing the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters, by United Nations entities, including the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre and the
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities), inter alia,
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
and INTERPOL, in coordination with other relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, to assist
Member States, upon their request, in implementing the Strategy, and encourages the Task Force to ensure the focused
delivery of capacity-building assistance, including in the framework of the Integrated Assistance for Countering
Terrorism Initiative;
67. Recalls its resolution 72/194 of 19 December 2017, and notes with appreciation the ongoing work of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime to support Member States in their efforts to prevent and counter terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations in the crime prevention and criminal justice context;
68. Calls upon the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, including its Terrorism Prevention Branch, to
further enhance, in close consultation with the Counter-Terrorism Committee and its Executive Directorate, its
provision of technical assistance, upon request, for building the capacity of Member States to become party to and
47

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

implement the international conventions and protocols related to counter-terrorism and relevant United Nations
resolutions, including through targeted programmes and the training of relevant criminal justice and law enforcement
officials, upon request, to develop their capacity to effectively respond to, prevent, investigate and prosecute terrorist
acts, the development of and participation in relevant initiatives and the development of technical tools and
publications, within its mandate;
69. Requests the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, whenever appropriate, to take into account in its
technical assistance to counter terrorism, upon request, the elements necessary for building national capacity in order
to strengthen criminal justice systems and the rule of law;
70. Stresses the need to continue to provide tangible capacity-building assistance to Member States in counterterrorism matters, recognizes in this regard the need to contribute more resources for capacity-building projects, takes
note of the implementation of the United Nations capacity-building implementation plan for countering the flow of
foreign terrorist fighters by the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism
Coordination Compact entities), and encourages Member States to provide financial and other assistance to the Task
Force and the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre needed for the effective delivery of the projects mentioned
in that plan, in close consultation with Member States;
71. Calls for the enhanced engagement of Member States with the work of the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities);
72. Requests the Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force (Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination
Compact entities) to continue its positive efforts in interacting with Member States, and requests the Office of CounterTerrorism to continue to provide quarterly briefings and to provide a periodic workplan, including the activities of the
United Nations Counter-Terrorism Centre, and to provide full transparency to all Member States on its work and
programmes;
73. Encourages the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact
entities to work closely with Member States and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations to
identify and share best practices to prevent terrorist attacks on potentially vulnerable targets, including critical
infrastructure, and recognizes the importance of developing public-private partnerships in this area;
74. Underscores the role, within the United Nations, of the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate,
including in assessing issues and trends relating to the implementation of Security Council resolutions 1373 (2001) of
28 September 2001, 1624 (2005) of 14 September 2005 and 2178 (2014), in accordance with its mandate and Council
resolution 2395 (2017) of 21 December 2017, and in sharing information, as appropriate, with relevant United
Nations counter-terrorism bodies and relevant international, regional and subregional organizations, and calls upon
the Office of Counter-Terrorism, all other relevant United Nations funds and programmes, Member States, donors
and recipients to use expert assessments and recommendations of the Directorate as they design technical assistance
and capacity-building efforts, including in furthering the balanced implementation of the Strategy across all four of
its pillars, except when requested by the assessed Member States to keep selected information confidential;
75. Calls for greater coordination and coherence among the United Nations entities and with stakeholders,
including donors, host countries and recipients of counter-terrorism capacity-building, including in developing and
maintaining effective and rule of law-based criminal justice systems, and also calls for dialogue to be enhanced among
all stakeholders, with a view to placing national perspectives at the centre of such capacity-building in order to
strengthen national ownership, while recognizing that rule of law activities must be anchored in a national context
and that States have different national experiences in the development of their criminal justice systems, taking into
account their legal, political, socioeconomic, cultural, religious and other local specificities, while also recognizing
that there are common features founded on international norms and standards;
76. Calls upon Member States and the United Nations entities involved in supporting counter-terrorism efforts
to continue to facilitate the promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as due
process and the rule of law, while countering terrorism, and in this regard expresses serious concern at the occurrence
of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms, as well as of international refugee and humanitarian law,
committed in the context of countering terrorism;
77. Reiterates that, given their potential status as victims of terrorism as well as of other violations of
international law, all children alleged to have, accused of having or recognized as having infringed the law, particularly
those who are deprived of their liberty, as well as child victims and witnesses of crimes, should be treated in a manner
48

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

consistent with their rights, dignity and needs, in accordance with applicable international law, in particular obligations
under the Convention on the Rights of the Child,71 and, bearing in mind relevant international standards on human
rights in the administration of justice in this regard, urges Member States to take relevant measures to effectively
reintegrate children formerly associated with armed groups, including terrorist groups;
78. Urges Member States to ensure that any measures taken or means employed to counter terrorism,
including the use of remotely piloted aircraft, comply with their obligations under international law, including the
Charter, human rights law and international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of distinction and
proportionality;
79. Urges States to ensure, in accordance with their obligations under international law and national
regulations, and whenever international humanitarian law is applicable, that counter-terrorism legislation and
measures do not impede humanitarian and medical activities or engagement with all relevant actors as foreseen by
international humanitarian law;
80. Reaffirms the primary responsibility of States to protect the population throughout their territory, and
recalls in this regard that all parties to armed conflict must comply fully with the obligations applicable to them under
international humanitarian law related to the protection of civilians and medical personnel in armed conflict;
81. Underlines the importance of multilateral efforts in combating terrorism and refraining from any practices
and measures inconsistent with international law and the principles of the Charter;
82. Takes note of the initiative of the Secretary-General to convene the first-ever United Nations High-level
Conference of Heads of Counter-Terrorism Agencies of Member States, on 28 and 29 June 2018;
83. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session, no later
than May 2019, a report containing concrete recommendations and options on ways to assess the impact of and
progress in the implementation of the Strategy by the United Nations entities with a view to informing discussion
among Member States in advance of the seventh biennial review of the Strategy, at the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly;
84. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, no
later than February 2020, a report on progress made in the implementation of the Strategy, containing suggestions for
its future implementation by the United Nations system, as well as on progress made in the implementation of the
present resolution;
85. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fourth session the item entitled “The United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” in order to undertake, by June 2020, an examination of the report of the
Secretary-General requested in paragraph 84 above, as well as of the implementation of the Strategy by Member
States, and to consider updating the Strategy to respond to changes.
RESOLUTION 72/305
AR
/ ES/72/305

Adopted at the 107th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.64, submitted by
the President of the General Assembly

72/305. Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening
of the Economic and Social Council
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 68/1 of 20 September 2013 and all previous related resolutions,
Recalling also its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013 and 70/299 of 29 July 2016,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
_______________
71

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1577, No. 27531.

49

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development and its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social
and environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda, supports and
complements it, helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with concrete policies and actions and
reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment
at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the Paris Agreement72 and its early entry into force, as well as the Sendai Declaration and the Sendai
Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030,73
Welcoming also the outcomes of major United Nations conferences and summits, including the New Urban
Agenda, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development (Habitat III),
held in Quito from 17 to 20 October 2016,74 the Istanbul Declaration and the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the Decade 2011–2020,75 the Vienna Programme of Action for Landlocked Developing
Countries for the Decade 2014–202476 and the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway,77
Reaffirming the role that the Charter of the United Nations and the General Assembly have vested in the
Economic and Social Council and recognizing the need for a more effective Council as a principal organ for
coordination, policy review, policy dialogue and recommendations on issues of economic and social development,
and recognizing the key role of the Council in achieving a balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable
development,
Reaffirming also the commitment to strengthen the Economic and Social Council, within its mandate under the
Charter, and reinforce its deliberative function, with an emphasis on accountability, knowledge-sharing and mutual
learning for better results, so that it best supports the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the integrated and
coordinated follow-up to the major United Nations conferences and summits,
Welcoming that a process of intergovernmental consultations is ongoing to enhance synergies and coherence
and reduce overlap where it is found to exist in the agendas of the General Assembly, the Economic and Social Council
and their subsidiary bodies, as well as the high-level political forum on sustainable development and other related
forums in the light of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda, in accordance with paragraphs 28 to 30 of resolution 71/323 of
8 September 2017,
Reaffirming its resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018 on the repositioning of the United Nations development
system in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system,
1. Adopts the text contained in the annex to the present resolution, and calls upon the Economic and Social
Council and other relevant bodies of the United Nations system to implement the measures contained therein in an
expeditious manner;
2. Decides that the arrangements contained in the present resolution and its annex shall be reviewed at its
seventy-fourth session and at subsequent review cycles in conjunction with the review process of the high-level
political forum on sustainable development.
_______________
72

Adopted under the UNFCCC in FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21.
Resolution 69/283, annexes I and II.
74
Resolution 71/256, annex.
75
Report of the Fourth United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries, Istanbul, Turkey, 9–13 May 2011 (A/CONF.219/7),
chaps. I and II.
76
Resolution 69/137, annex II.
77
Resolution 69/15, annex.
73

50

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Annex
Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution 68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic
and Social Council
1. In accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter of the United Nations, the Economic and Social
Council should continue to strengthen its leadership and policy guidance role, and its role as the central mechanism
for coordination of the activities of the United Nations development system and its specialized agencies and
supervision of its subsidiary bodies while integrating their analysis throughout its segments. It should also address
new and emerging issues in the economic, social, environmental and related fields and provide overall support for the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development. It should promote a coordinated follow-up to the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development78 and the outcomes of other major United Nations conferences and summits in
the economic, social, environmental and related fields.
2. The working modalities of the Economic and Social Council should be guided by the principles of inclusiveness,
transparency and flexibility based on the deliberative function of its meetings. It should be a platform for discussion and
the exchange of national experiences. The Council should aim at creating synergy and coherence as well as avoiding
duplication and overlap in its work to ensure efficiency and effectiveness. It should also ensure an adequate division
of labour among its subsidiary bodies and harmonization and coordination of their agendas and work programmes,
while ensuring that the principles, critical aspects and implementation gaps of the 2030 Agenda are addressed.
3. The Economic and Social Council should improve its outcomes and the outcomes of its subsidiary bodies,
making them more relevant, coherent and solution-oriented to address implementation challenges and ensuring their
follow-up so as to strengthen the impact of the work of the Council.
4. The General Assembly shall adopt one main theme for the high-level political forum on sustainable
development and the Economic and Social Council, bearing in mind the provisions of resolution 70/299 of 29 July
2016. The themes of the segments of the Council shall focus on a particular aspect of the one main theme, bearing in
mind their respective functions. The humanitarian affairs segment shall continue to adopt themes based on
humanitarian considerations and that are coherent with the main theme of the Council.
5. The subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council shall similarly adopt their own respective themes,
aligned with the main theme, while continuing to address issues or a theme necessary to discharge their other functions.
6. The themes of the Economic and Social Council segments shall reflect the integrated, indivisible and interlinked
nature of the Sustainable Development Goals and the three dimensions of sustainable development, including crosscutting issues as well as new and emerging issues.
7. The Economic and Social Council cycle shall continue to run from July to July. To promote linkages in their
work and enhance the visibility and impact of the Council, and to encourage focus, coherence and efficiency, Council
segments and forums shall be restructured into three groups per Council cycle.
8. The first group will comprise Economic and Social Council forums. It will include the Development
Cooperation Forum every second year and, annually, the forum on financing for development follow-up, the multistakeholder forum on science, technology and innovation for the Sustainable Development Goals, the partnership
forum and the youth forum, and all other related mandated meetings. These will be organized independently and in a
coordinated manner.
9. The second group will comprise segments that address actions by the United Nations development system and
other actors to implement the 2030 Agenda, along with distinct humanitarian assistance. It will include the operational
activities for development segment, the humanitarian affairs segment and the special event to discuss the transition
from relief to development. These will be organized independently and in a coordinated manner.
10. The third group will comprise segments and forums that provide overall policy guidance and foster progress in
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda, contribute to the overall review of the 2030 Agenda at the high-level political
forum and look to the future of the advancement of sustainable development. It will include, in this order, the
integration segment, the high-level political forum and the high-level segment.

_______________
78

Resolution 70/1.

51

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

11. The integration segment will be held for one day immediately before the high-level political forum. It will
discuss and consolidate all the inputs of Member States, including case studies and lessons learned, the subsidiary
bodies of the Economic and Social Council, the United Nations system and other relevant stakeholders to promote
the balanced integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development. This segment will thus bring together
the key messages from the subsidiary bodies of the Council and the United Nations system on the main theme, develop
action-oriented recommendations for follow-up and feed into the high-level political forum. It will also coordinate the
work of the subsidiary bodies of the Council, promoting a clearer division of labour among them, and the policies and
activities of the specialized agencies relating to the Sustainable Development Goals and other internationally agreed
development goals. The Secretary-General will present to the Council the annual overview report of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination. Heads of United Nations system entities, Chairs of the
subsidiary bodies of the Council and the Executive Secretaries of the regional commissions will also be invited to
participate. A dedicated effort will be made in 2019 to improve the role, functioning and impact of the segment along
these lines. This will be reviewed as part of the broader review of Council segments and meetings at the seventyfourth session of the General Assembly along with the high-level political forum.
12. The final day of the high-level segment of the Economic and Social Council, following the ministerial segment
of the high-level political forum, will focus on future trends and scenarios related to the Council theme, the long-term
impact of current trends, such as the contribution of new technologies, in the economic, social and environmental
areas on the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals, based on the work of the United Nations and other
regional and international organizations and bodies as well as other stakeholders. It should aim at enhancing
knowledge-sharing and regional and international cooperation. The outcome of the high-level political forum and the
high-level segment will continue to be a negotiated ministerial declaration. This will be reviewed as part of the broader
review of Council segments and meetings at the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly along with the highlevel political forum.
13. In preparing the draft programme of work of the high-level political forum under the auspices of the Economic
and Social Council and the high-level segment of the Council, the Bureau of the Council is invited to consider ways
of optimizing the time currently available for countries to present their voluntary national reviews during the
ministerial days of the high-level political forum, with a view to improving the exchange of national experiences on
implementing the Sustainable Development Goals.
14. The strengthened operational activities for development segment should serve as a platform to ensure
accountability for, and acceleration of, system-wide performance and results in relation to the 2030 Agenda and
provide guidance to and overall coordination of the United Nations development system. Such guidance should be
evidence-based and include objectives, priorities and strategies in the United Nations system support to the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and of the policies formulated by the General Assembly, including the
quadrennial comprehensive policy review. As part of the work on reviewing progress in the implementation of
mandates contained in resolution 71/243 of 21 December 2016 on the quadrennial comprehensive policy review, and
as mandated in resolution 72/279 of 31 May 2018, at the segment, Member States will exercise oversight on
implementation of the resolution on repositioning of the United Nations development system.
15. The Economic and Social Council should strive to reinforce the linkages between policy and operational
functions while continuing to focus on improving the overall impact of operational activities for development of the
United Nations system in support of issues relating to national development priorities. The segment should address
cross-cutting and coordination issues related to operational activities for development.
16. The Economic and Social Council should, furthermore, provide improved overall coordination and guidance
on operational activities for development, on a system-wide basis, to the governing bodies of the United Nations
development system, in keeping with the mandates of the quadrennial comprehensive policy review. This includes
holding the segment close to the annual session of the executive boards of the funds and programmes. With a view to
avoiding repetition of discussions, the executive boards that report to the Council should further highlight in their
existing reports to the Council the issues requiring examination and identify actions to be taken, guided by the chosen
theme. The segment should continue to contribute to the preparations for the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review of operational activities for development, through which the General Assembly establishes key system-wide
policy orientations for the development cooperation and country-level modalities of the United Nations system.
17. Through the humanitarian affairs segment, the Economic and Social Council should, in line with
paragraph 11 (b) of the annex to General Assembly resolution 68/1 of 20 September 2013, continue to contribute to
strengthening the coordination and effectiveness of United Nations humanitarian assistance and support and
52

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

complement international efforts aimed at addressing humanitarian emergencies, including natural disasters, in order
to promote an improved, coordinated response by the United Nations. The humanitarian affairs segment should
continue to alternate between Geneva and New York and should be convened preceding the annual session of the
executive boards of the funds and programmes of the United Nations system.
18. The special event on the transition from relief to development, which addresses the linkages between
humanitarian assistance and development, will help the Economic and Social Council to discuss and review more
fully the implications of the transition from relief to development and improve the efforts of the international
community to respond better to transition situations.
19. The Economic and Social Council has an important role as a platform for multi-stakeholder participation and
for engaging all relevant stakeholders in the work of the Council, particularly with respect to its function related to the
integration of the three dimensions of sustainable development.
20. While retaining its intergovernmental nature, the Economic and Social Council should seek to promote the
active participation of major groups, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, youth and other relevant
stakeholders and regional organizations in the activities of the Council and its functional and regional commissions,
in accordance with the provisions of their respective rules of procedure and the provisions of General Assembly
resolution 67/290 of 9 July 2013 insofar as it pertains to the meetings of the high-level political forum under the
auspices of the Council.
21. The Economic and Social Council should consider possible ways of applying to other meetings and segments
certain aspects of the modalities of engagement of major groups and other stakeholders in the high-level political
forum, while retaining its intergovernmental nature and allowing sufficient time to Member States.
22. The Committee on Non-Governmental Organizations is invited to examine in a timely manner how it can
accommodate effectively the growing number of applications of non-governmental organizations for consultative
status, in line with its mandate set out in Economic and Social Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996.
23. The current coordination and management meeting shall be renamed the management segment.
24. The meetings of the management segment will, in principle, last no more than two days, twice per cycle. The
meetings will focus on the adoption of procedural decisions, consideration of recommendations of subsidiary bodies,
as well as the introduction of reports and consideration of draft proposals submitted under relevant agenda items.
25. With a view to ensuring a streamlined consideration of related agenda items and optimal use of available time,
the Bureau of the Economic and Social Council is invited to prepare a focused programme of work, including possible
joint consideration of related items, that enhances deliberation among Member States. The programme of work and
agenda should be circulated as early as possible. The Bureau of the Council should make efforts to ensure that
meetings and informal consultations are planned during United Nations working hours to better facilitate the active
and constructive participation of all permanent missions in the work of the United Nations.
26. Dedicated management meetings will also be held to conduct elections to fill regular and outstanding vacancies
in subsidiary bodies of the Economic and Social Council and related bodies, normally in the first half and last quarter
of the year. In preparing for elections by the Council, Member States should present candidates at least three working
days in advance of elections. The provisions of paragraphs 47 and 48 of resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017 should
be followed, as applicable to the Council.
27. The Economic and Social Council and its Bureau are invited to consider ways to ensure continuity in the work
of the Bureau.
28. The Economic and Social Council should strengthen its oversight and coordination role of its subsidiary bodies.
It should review their work with a view to ensuring their continued relevance. It will also ensure that they produce
technical and expert analysis, assessments and policy recommendations to inform the integrated view of the Council
and inform efforts to implement the 2030 Agenda. It should effectively integrate the outcomes of its subsidiary bodies
into its own work.
29. The Economic and Social Council should request its subsidiary bodies to ensure that they best support the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the work of the Council. Their work should reflect the need for an integrated
and action-oriented approach to the Sustainable Development Goals. Their recommendations should build on a solid
evidence-based review of progress on the 2030 Agenda and of the outcomes of conferences and summits in their
respective area. They should work in an efficient, effective, transparent and inclusive manner.
53

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Each subsidiary body shall consider whether there is a continued need for annual negotiated outcomes and
ensure that, when they produce such outcomes, they are effective and action-oriented and result in increased levels of
cooperation.
31. The Secretariat is requested to consider the need to adjust the calendar of meetings of subsidiary bodies of the
Economic and Social Council and/or make adjustments to their reporting arrangements in the light of agreed changes
to the structure and timing of Council meetings and to make recommendations to the Council for its consideration, as
appropriate.
32. The General Assembly reaffirms the role of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the Secretariat,
and looks forward to the update by the Secretary-General to Member States on the alignment of the Department with
the 2030 Agenda, in accordance with resolution 70/299.
RESOLUTION 72/306
AR
/ ES/72/306

Adopted at the 108th plenary meeting, on 24 July 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.63 and
A/72/L.63/Add.1, sponsored by: Brazil, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Germany, Guatemala, Guinea, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Myanmar, Palau, Russian Federation,
Samoa, Senegal, Singapore, Slovenia, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam

72/306. Implementation of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition (2016–2025)
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 70/259 of 1 April 2016, by which it proclaimed the period 2016–2025 the United
Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition and endorsed the Rome Declaration on Nutrition and the Framework for
Action adopted at the Second International Conference on Nutrition, jointly organized by the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations and the World Health Organization, in Rome from 19 to 21 November 2014,79
Emphasizing the need to eradicate hunger and prevent all forms of malnutrition worldwide, particularly
undernourishment, stunting, wasting, underweight and overweight in children under 5 years of age and anaemia in
women and children, among other micronutrient deficiencies, as well as to reverse the rising trends in overweight and
obesity and reduce the burden of diet-related non-communicable diseases in all age groups,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Expressing concern that the world is not on track to eradicate hunger and malnutrition by 2030 and that, at the
current pace, the targets of Sustainable Development Goal 2 will not be achieved in many parts of the world, and
calling for additional efforts to support the transformational change needed,
Acknowledging the importance of promoting sustainable farming and agriculture, which will contribute to
sustainable food production systems and the conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems and help to eradicate hunger
and malnutrition,
Expressing concern that, at the global level, the number of undernourished people has been on the rise since
2014, reaching an estimated 815 million in 2016,
Recognizing the important contribution that family farming and smallholder farming can play in providing food
security and eradicating poverty in the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals,
_______________
79

54

World Health Organization, document EB 136/8, annexes I and II.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing with concern that women are more likely to be food insecure than men in every region of the world,
that almost one third of women of reproductive age worldwide suffer from anaemia, a persistent problem that also
puts the nutrition and health of many children at risk, that, despite considerable reduction in the global prevalence of
stunting between 2005 and 2017, 150.8 million children under 5 years of age still suffer from stunted growth, and that
wasting, undernutrition, overweight and obesity are recurrent problems for children in several countries,
Recalling the 2011 political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases80 and the 2014 outcome document of the high-level meeting of the
Assembly on the comprehensive review and assessment of the progress achieved in the prevention and control of
non-communicable diseases,81 and looking forward to the third high-level meeting of the Assembly on the prevention
and control of non-communicable diseases, to be held in 2018,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;82

2. Notes the development of the work programme of the United Nations Decade of Action on Nutrition
(2016–2025),83 as a living document developed through an inclusive, continuous and collaborative process, including
the intention of convening open and inclusive dialogues at midterm (2020/21) and at the end (2025) of the Decade,
building upon and connecting initiatives of Governments and their many partners;
3. Recognizes the commitments made by Governments, and acknowledges the contributions by all relevant
stakeholders at the national, regional and international levels, including United Nations organizations, civil society
and the private sector, in advancing the implementation of the Decade;
4. Encourages Governments, United Nations organizations, other international and regional organizations,
civil society, the private sector and academia to make ambitious commitments with a view to intensifying their efforts
and scaling up their activities under the work programme of the Decade;
5. Calls upon the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Health
Organization to further strengthen their efforts in continuing to lead and monitor the implementation of the Decade,
in collaboration with the World Food Programme, the International Fund for Agricultural Development and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, using coordination mechanisms such as the Standing Committee on Nutrition and multistakeholder platforms such as the Committee on World Food Security, in line with its mandate, and in consultation
with other international and regional organizations and platforms;
6. Recalls its invitation to the Secretary-General to inform the General Assembly about the implementation
of the Decade, on the basis of the biennial reports jointly compiled by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations and the World Health Organization.
RESOLUTION 72/307
AR
/ ES/72/307

Adopted at the 109th plenary meeting, on 27 July 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.60/Rev.1,
A/72/L.60/Rev.1/Corr.1 and A/72/L.60/Rev.1/Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Canada, Egypt (on behalf of the States Members
of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China), New Zealand, Palau, Republic of Moldova, Tuvalu

72/307. Modalities for the high-level review of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities
of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 71/225 of 21 December 2016 and 72/217 of 20 December 2017,
1. Decides that the high-level review will be structured around an opening plenary meeting, followed by two
multi-stakeholder round-table sessions, with time provided for an interactive dialogue and a closing plenary meeting;
_______________
80

Resolution 66/2, annex.
Resolution 68/300.
82
A/72/829.
83
Available at www.unscn.org/en/topics/un-decade-of-action-on-nutrition?idnews=1791.
81

55

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2.

Also decides that the high-level review will be chaired by the President of the General Assembly;

3. Reaffirms that the high-level review should provide the international community with an opportunity to
conduct a thorough assessment of the progress made, lessons learned and constraints encountered in the
implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway84 and to agree on what needs to
be done to further address the vulnerabilities of small island developing States;
4. Requests the President of the General Assembly to designate two Co-Chairs, one from a small island
developing State and one from a developed country, to facilitate intergovernmental consultations, which will result in
a concise, action-oriented and intergovernmentally agreed political declaration as the outcome of the high-level
review, based on, inter alia, inputs from the preparatory meetings mandated by the Assembly in its resolution 72/217;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a report on the follow-up to and implementation of the Samoa
Pathway, making it available, on an exceptional basis, in early 2019, following the regional and interregional
preparatory meetings for the high-level review, so that it can serve to support the intergovernmental consultations and
be considered by the General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session;
6. Decides that the report should focus, inter alia, on progress made and continuing challenges faced, and
requests that, in preparing the report, the Secretary-General consult with Member States as well as the relevant United
Nations funds and programmes, specialized agencies and regional commissions, as appropriate, taking into account
the work carried out by the entities of the United Nations system, as well as all relevant national, regional and
subregional organizations, with a view to taking stock and analysing progress, and include a section summarizing
actions taken and planned in order to strengthen the coordination and complementarity of the work of the Department
of Economic and Social Affairs and the Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries,
Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States in support of the sustainable development of
small island developing States;
7. Invites the participation of associate members of regional commissions in the high-level review, subject
to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and in the preparatory process thereof, as observers, in the same
capacity specified for their participation at the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States, held
in Apia from 1 to 4 September 2014;
8. Invites all Member States of the United Nations and all members of the specialized agencies of the United
Nations, relevant regional and international agencies and organizations, in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the high-level political forum on sustainable development and the General Assembly, to participate fully in the
preparatory activities and the high-level review;
9. Urges that representation and participation at the high-level review be at the highest possible level,
including with the participation of Heads of State or Government;
10. Invites heads of the United Nations funds and programmes, the specialized agencies and regional
commissions, as well as heads of intergovernmental organizations and entities having observer status in the General
Assembly, to participate, as appropriate, in the high-level review, in accordance with the rules and procedures as
established by the General Assembly;
11. Decides that attendance at the high-level review as observers will also be opened to relevant nongovernmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council in accordance with the
provisions of Council resolution 1996/31 of 25 July 1996, as well as to those that were accredited to relevant
conferences and summits;85
12. Encourages relevant major groups organizations that are not currently accredited by the Economic and
Social Council to submit applications to participate as observers in the high-level review, as well as its preparatory
_______________
84

Resolution 69/15, annex.
Reference is made to the non-governmental organizations that were accredited to the following relevant conferences and summits: the
World Summit on Sustainable Development, the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development and the previous United Nations
conferences on the sustainable development of small island developing States, held in Barbados, Mauritius and Samoa, as well as the United
Nations Conference to Support the Implementation of Sustainable Development Goal 14: Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas
and marine resources for sustainable development.
85

56

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

meeting, in accordance with the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, following the accreditation procedures
established during the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States;
13. Recognizes the ongoing work of the Small Island Developing States Partnership Framework, established
to monitor and ensure the full implementation of pledges and commitments through partnerships for small island
developing States in order to promote the effective and efficient follow-up to the existing partnerships, and to
encourage new, genuine and durable partnerships for the sustainable development of small island developing States,
and in this regard supports the ongoing review of the Partnership Framework to feed into the high-level review of the
Samoa Pathway in 2019;
14. Urges Governments and all relevant international and regional organizations, United Nations funds and
programmes, the specialized agencies and regional commissions, international financial institutions and the Global
Environment Facility, as well as other intergovernmental organizations and major groups, to take timely action for the
effective implementation of and follow-up to the Samoa Pathway, including the further development and
operationalization of concrete projects and programmes;
15. Calls for the full and effective implementation of the commitments, programmes and targets adopted at
the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States and, to this end, for the fulfilment of the
provisions for the means of implementation, as contained in the Samoa Pathway, and encourages small island
developing States and their development partners to continue to consult widely in order to develop further concrete
projects and programmes for the implementation of the Samoa Pathway;
16. Calls upon the international community to support the efforts to review progress made in addressing the
vulnerabilities of small island developing States through the implementation of the Samoa Pathway, including by
facilitating the participation of small island developing States in review activities;
17. Encourages enhanced, closer and early consultation with small island developing States in the planning
and coordination, as appropriate, of the activities related to the high-level review of the Samoa Pathway, and
emphasizes the importance of enhanced interaction between small island developing States and the relevant agencies
of the United Nations system addressing issues concerning small island developing States.
RESOLUTION 72/308
A/RES/72/308

Adopted at the 110th plenary meeting, on 6 August 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.67, submitted
by the President of the General Assembly

72/308. Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly
and Regular Migration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 72/244 of 24 December 2017 on the modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference
to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration, in which it decided that the Intergovernmental
Conference should elect two Presidents and recommended the provisional rules of procedure set forth in the annex to
that resolution for adoption at the Intergovernmental Conference,
1. Decides that the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and
Regular Migration shall elect from among the representatives of participating States the following officers: one
President and 14 Vice-Presidents,86 one of whom shall be designated as Rapporteur-General, as well as a Chair of the
Main Committee, if established;
2. Also decides to recommend the provisional rules of procedure, adjusted accordingly and set forth in the
annex to the present resolution, for adoption by the Intergovernmental Conference.

_______________
86

Three from each of the following groups: African States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean
States, and Western European and other States. The election of the President will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number
of Vice-Presidents allocated to the region from which the President is elected.

57

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Annex
Provisional rules of procedure for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the Global Compact for Safe,
Orderly and Regular Migration
I.

Representation and credentials

Rule 1
Composition of delegations
The delegation of each State participating in the Conference and that of the European Union shall consist of a
head of delegation and such other representatives, alternate representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 2
Alternates and advisers
The head of delegation may designate an alternate representative or an adviser to act as a representative.
Rule 3
Submission of credentials
The credentials of representatives and the names of alternate representatives and advisers shall be submitted to
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, if possible, not less than one week before the date fixed for the opening
of the Conference. The credentials shall be issued either by the Head of the State or Government or by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs or, in the case of the European Union, by the President of the European Commission.
Rule 4
Credentials Committee
A Credentials Committee of nine members shall be appointed at the beginning of the Conference. Its
composition shall be based on that of the Credentials Committee of the General Assembly of the United Nations at
its seventy-third session. It shall examine the credentials of representatives and report to the Conference without delay.
Rule 5
Provisional participation in the Conference
Pending a decision of the Conference on their credentials, representatives shall be entitled to participate
provisionally in the Conference.
II.

Officers

Rule 6
Elections
The Conference shall elect from among the representatives of participating States the following officers: a
President and 14 Vice-Presidents,87 one of whom shall be designated as Rapporteur-General, as well as a Chair for
the Main Committee established in accordance with rule 46. The officers shall be elected with a view to ensuring the
representative character of the General Committee. The Conference may also elect such other officers as it deems
necessary for the performance of its functions.
Rule 7
General powers of the President
1. In addition to exercising the powers conferred upon him/her elsewhere by these rules, the President shall preside
at the plenary meetings of the Conference, declare the opening and closing of each meeting, direct the discussions,
_______________
87

Three from each of the following groups: African States, Asia-Pacific States, Eastern European States, Latin American and Caribbean
States, and Western European and other States. The election of the President will, however, have the effect of reducing by one the number
of Vice Presidents allocated to the region from which the President is elected.

58

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

ensure observance of these rules, accord the right to speak, put questions to the vote and announce decisions. The
President shall rule on points of order and, subject to these rules, shall have complete control of the proceedings and
over the maintenance of order thereat. The President may propose to the Conference the closure of the list of speakers,
a limitation on the time to be allowed to speakers and on the number of times the representative of each participant in
the Conference may speak on a question, the adjournment or the closure of the debate and the suspension or the
adjournment of a meeting.
2.

The President, in the exercise of his/her functions, remains under the authority of the Conference.

Rule 8
Acting President
1. If the President is absent from a meeting or any part thereof, he/she shall designate one of the Vice-Presidents
to take his/her place.
2.

A Vice-President acting as President shall have the same powers and duties as the President.

Rule 9
Replacement of the President
If the President is unable to perform his/her functions, a new President shall be elected.
Rule 10
Voting rights of the President
The President, or a Vice-President acting as President, shall not vote, but may appoint another member of his/her
delegation to vote in his/her place.
III. General Committee
Rule 11
Composition
The President, the Vice-Presidents, the Rapporteur-General and the Chair of the Main Committee shall constitute
the General Committee. The President or, in his/her absence, one of the Vice-Presidents designated by him/her, shall
serve as Chair of the General Committee. The Chair of the Credentials Committee and other committees established
by the Conference in accordance with rule 48 may participate, without the right to vote, in the General Committee.
Rule 12
Substitute members
If the President or a Vice-President of the Conference is to be absent during a meeting of the General Committee,
he/she may designate a member of his/her delegation to sit and vote in the Committee. In case of absence, the Chair
of the Main Committee shall designate the Vice-Chair of that Committee as his/her substitute. When serving on the
General Committee, a Vice-Chair of the Main Committee shall not have the right to vote if he/she is a member of the
same delegation as another member of the General Committee.
Rule 13
Functions
The General Committee shall assist the President in the general conduct of the business of the Conference and,
subject to the decisions of the Conference, shall ensure the coordination of the work of the Conference.
IV. Secretariat of the Conference
Rule 14
Duties of the Secretary-General of the United Nations
1. The Secretary-General of the United Nations or her/his designated representative shall act in that capacity in all
meetings of the Conference and its subsidiary organs.
59

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

2. The Secretary-General of the United Nations may designate a member of the secretariat to act in her/his place
at these meetings.
3. The Secretary-General of the United Nations or her/his designated representative shall direct the staff required
by the Conference.
Rule 15
Duties of the secretariat of the Conference
The secretariat of the Conference shall, in accordance with the present rules:
(a)

Provide simultaneous interpretation of speeches made at meetings;

(b)

Receive, translate, reproduce and circulate the documents of the Conference;

(c)

Publish and circulate the official documents of the Conference;

(d)

Prepare and circulate records of public meetings;

(e)

Make and arrange for the keeping of sound recordings of meetings;

(f)
Nations;
(g)

Arrange for the custody and preservation of the documents of the Conference in the archives of the United
Generally perform all other work that the Conference may require.

Rule 16
Statements by the Secretariat
The Secretary-General of the United Nations, or any member of the Secretariat designated for that purpose,
may, at any time, make either oral or written statements concerning any question under consideration.
V.

Opening of the Conference

Rule 17
Temporary President
The Secretary-General of the United Nations or, in her/his absence, any member of the Secretariat designated
by her/him for that purpose, shall open the first meeting of the Conference and preside until the Conference has elected
its President.
Rule 18
Decisions concerning organization
The Conference shall, at its first meeting:
(a)

Adopt its rules of procedure;

(b)

Elect its officers and constitute its subsidiary organs;

(c) Adopt its agenda, the draft of which shall, until such adoption, be the provisional agenda of the
Conference;
(d)

Decide on the organization of its work.

VI. Conduct of business
Rule 19
Quorum
The President may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when at least one third of the States
participating in the Conference are present. The presence of a majority of the States so participating shall be required
for any decision to be taken.
60

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 20
Speeches
1. No representative may address the Conference without having previously obtained the permission of the
President. Subject to rules 21, 22 and 25 to 27, the President shall call upon speakers in the order in which they indicate
their desire to speak. The secretariat shall be in charge of drawing up a list of speakers.
2. Debate shall be confined to the question before the Conference, and the President may call a speaker to order if
his/her remarks are not relevant to the subject under discussion.
3. The Conference may limit the time allowed to each speaker and the number of times each participant may speak
on any question. Permission to speak on a motion to set such limits shall be accorded to only two representatives in
favour of and two opposing such limits, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote. In any event,
with the consent of the Conference, the President shall limit each intervention on procedural matters to five minutes.
When the debate is limited and a speaker exceeds the allotted time, the President shall call him/her to order without
delay.
Rule 21
Points of order
During the discussion of any matter, a representative may at any time raise a point of order, which shall be
immediately decided by the President in accordance with the present rules. A representative may appeal against the
ruling of the President. The appeal shall be immediately put to the vote, and the President’s ruling shall stand unless
overruled by a majority of the States present and voting. A representative may not, in raising a point of order, speak
on the substance of the matter under discussion.
Rule 22
Precedence
The Chair or the Rapporteur of the Main Committee, or the representative of a subcommittee or working group,
may be accorded precedence for the purpose of explaining the conclusions arrived at by the body concerned.
Rule 23
Closing of the list of speakers
During the course of a debate, the President may announce the list of speakers and, with the consent of the
Conference, declare the list closed.
Rule 24
Right of reply
1. Notwithstanding rule 23, the President shall accord the right of reply to a representative of any State participating
in the Conference or of the European Union who requests it. Any other representative may be granted the opportunity
to make a reply.
2. The statements made under the present rule shall normally be made at the end of the last meeting of the day, or
at the conclusion of the consideration of the relevant item if that is sooner.
3. Representatives of a State or of the European Union may make no more than two statements under the present
rule at a given meeting on any item. The first shall be limited to five minutes and the second to three minutes;
representatives shall, in any event, attempt to be as brief as possible.
Rule 25
Adjournment of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the adjournment of the
debate on the question under discussion. In addition to the proposer of the motion, permission to speak on the motion
shall be accorded to only two representatives in favour and to two opposing the adjournment, after which the motion
shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
61

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 26
Closure of debate
A representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the closure of the debate on
the question under discussion, whether or not any other representative has signified his/her wish to speak. Permission
to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two representatives opposing the closure, after which the motion
shall, subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 27
Suspension or adjournment of the meeting
Subject to rule 38, a representative of any State participating in the Conference may at any time move the
suspension or the adjournment of the meeting. No discussion on such motions shall be permitted and they shall,
subject to rule 28, be immediately put to the vote.
Rule 28
Order of motions
The motions indicated below shall have precedence in the following order over all proposals or other motions
before the meeting:
(a)

To suspend the meeting;

(b)

To adjourn the meeting;

(c)

To adjourn the debate on the question under discussion;

(d)

To close the debate on the question under discussion.

Rule 29
Submission of proposals and substantive amendments
Proposals and substantive amendments shall normally be submitted in writing to the Secretary-General or
his/her designated representative, who shall circulate copies to all delegations in the languages of the Conference.
Unless the Conference decides otherwise, substantive proposals shall be discussed or put to a decision no earlier than
24 hours after copies have been circulated to all delegations. The President may, however, permit the discussion and
consideration of amendments, even though those amendments have not been circulated or have been circulated only
the same day.
Rule 30
Withdrawal of proposals and motions
A proposal or a motion may be withdrawn by its sponsor at any time before a decision on it has been taken,
provided that it has not been amended. A proposal or a motion thus withdrawn may be reintroduced by any
representative.
Rule 31
Decisions on competence
Subject to rule 28, any motion calling for a decision on the competence of the Conference to adopt a proposal
submitted to it shall be put to the vote before a decision is taken on the proposal in question.
Rule 32
Reconsideration of proposals
When a proposal has been adopted or rejected, it may not be reconsidered unless the Conference, by a twothirds majority of the States present and voting, so decides. Permission to speak on a motion to reconsider shall be
accorded to only two speakers opposing reconsideration, after which the motion shall be immediately put to the vote.

62

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

VII. Decision-making
Rule 33
General agreement
1. The Conference shall adopt an intergovernmental negotiated and agreed outcome, entitled “Global Compact for
Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration”, and make its best endeavour to ensure that all the other work of the Conference
is accomplished by consensus.
2. Notwithstanding any measures that may be taken in compliance with paragraph 1 above, a proposal before the
Conference shall be voted on if a representative of any State participating in the Conference so requests.
Rule 34
Voting rights
Each State participating in the Conference shall have one vote.
Rule 35
Majority required
1. Subject to rule 33, decisions of the Conference on all matters of substance shall be taken by a two-thirds majority
of the States present and voting.
2. Except as otherwise provided in the present rules, decisions of the Conference on all matters of procedure shall
be taken by a majority of the States present and voting.
3. If the question arises whether a matter is one of procedure or of substance, the President of the Conference shall
rule on the question. An appeal against that ruling shall be immediately put to the vote, and the President’s ruling shall
stand unless overruled by a majority of the States present and voting.
4.

If a vote is equally divided, the proposal or motion shall be regarded as rejected.

Rule 36
Meaning of the phrase “States present and voting”
For the purpose of the present rules, the phrase “States present and voting” means States casting an affirmative
or negative vote. States which abstain from voting shall be regarded as not voting.
Rule 37
Method of voting
1. Except as provided in rule 44, the Conference may vote by show of hands, except that a representative may
request a roll call, which shall then be taken in the English alphabetical order of the names of the States participating
in the Conference, beginning with the delegation whose name is drawn by lot by the President. The name of each
State shall be called in all roll calls, and its representative shall reply “yes”, “no” or “abstention”.
2. When the Conference votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall replace a vote by show of hands
and a recorded vote shall replace a roll call. A representative may request a recorded vote, which shall, unless a
representative requests otherwise, be taken without calling out the names of the States participating in the Conference.
3. The vote of each State participating in a roll-call or a recorded vote shall be inserted in any record of or report
on the meeting.
Rule 38
Conduct during voting
After the President has announced the commencement of voting, no representative shall interrupt the voting,
except on a point of order in connection with the process of voting.

63

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 39
Explanation of vote
1. Representatives may make brief statements, consisting solely of explanations of vote, before the voting has
commenced or after the voting has been completed. The President may limit the time to be allowed for such
explanations. The representative of a State sponsoring a proposal or motion shall not speak in explanation of vote
thereon, except if it has been amended.
2. When the same matter is considered successively in several organs of the Conference, a State should, as far as
possible, explain its vote only in one such organ, unless its vote in one organ is different from that in another organ.
Rule 40
Division of proposals
A representative may move that parts of a proposal be decided on separately. If a representative objects, the
motion for division shall be voted upon. Permission to speak on the motion shall be accorded to only two
representatives in favour of and to two opposing the division. If the motion is carried, those parts of the proposal that
are subsequently approved shall be put to the Conference for decision as a whole. If all operative parts of the proposal
have been rejected, the proposal shall be considered to have been rejected as a whole.
Rule 41
Amendments
A proposal is considered an amendment to another proposal if it merely adds to, deletes from or revises part of
that proposal. Unless specified otherwise, the word “proposal” in these rules shall be regarded as including
amendments.
Rule 42
Order of voting on amendments
When an amendment is moved to a proposal, the amendment shall be voted on first. When two or more
amendments are moved to a proposal, the Conference shall vote first on the amendment furthest removed in substance
from the original proposal and then on the amendment next furthest removed therefrom, and so on, until all the
amendments have been put to the vote. Where, however, the adoption of one amendment necessarily implies the
rejection of another amendment, the latter shall not be put to the vote. If one or more amendments are adopted, the
amended proposal shall then be voted upon.
Rule 43
Order of voting on proposals
1. If two or more proposals, other than amendments, relate to the same question, they shall, unless the Conference
decides otherwise, be voted on in the order in which they were submitted. The Conference may, after each vote on a
proposal, decide whether to vote on the next proposal.
2. Revised proposals shall be voted on in the order in which the original proposals were submitted, unless the
revision substantially departs from the original proposal. In that case, the original proposal shall be regarded as
withdrawn and the revised proposal shall be treated as a new proposal.
3. A motion requiring that no decision be taken on a proposal shall be put to the vote before a decision is taken on
the proposal in question.
Rule 44
Elections
All elections shall be held by secret ballot unless, in the absence of any objection, the Conference decides to
proceed without taking a ballot when there is an agreed candidate or slate of candidates.

64

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 45
Balloting
1. When one or more elective places are to be filled at one time under the same conditions, those candidates, in a
number not exceeding the number of such places, obtaining in the first ballot a majority of the votes cast and the
largest number of votes shall be elected.
2. If the number of candidates obtaining such majority is less than the number of places to be filled, additional
ballots shall be held to fill the remaining places, the voting being restricted to the candidates obtaining the largest
number of votes in the previous ballot, to a number not more than twice the places remaining to be filled.
VIII. Subsidiary organs
Rule 46
Main Committee
The Conference may establish a Main Committee.
Rule 47
Representation on the Main Committee
Each State participating in the Conference and the European Union may be represented by one representative
on the Main Committee established by the Conference. They may assign to the Committee such alternate
representatives and advisers as may be required.
Rule 48
Other committees and working groups
1. In addition to the Main Committee referred to above, the Conference may establish such committees and
working groups as it deems necessary for the performance of its functions.
2. Subject to the decision of the plenary of the Conference, the Main Committee may set up subcommittees and
working groups.
Rule 49
Members of committees, subcommittees and working groups
1. The members of the committees and working groups of the Conference, referred to in rule 48, paragraph 1, shall
be appointed by the President, subject to the approval of the Conference, unless the Conference decides otherwise.
2. Members of the subcommittees and working groups of committees shall be appointed by the Chair of the
committee in question, subject to the approval of that committee, unless the committee decides otherwise.
Rule 50
Officers
Except as otherwise provided in rule 6, each committee, subcommittee and working group shall elect its own
officers.
Rule 51
Quorum
1. The Chair of the Main Committee may declare a meeting open and permit the debate to proceed when at least
one quarter of the States participating in the Conference are present. The presence of a majority of the States so
participating shall be required for any decision to be taken.
2. A majority of the members of the General Committee or the Credentials Committee or of any committee,
subcommittee or working group shall constitute a quorum.

65

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 52
Officers, conduct of business and voting
The rules contained in sections II, VI (except rule 19) and VII above shall be applicable, mutatis mutandis, to
the proceedings of committees, subcommittees and working groups, except that:
(a) The Chairs of the General Committee and the Credentials Committee and the Chairs of the committees,
subcommittees and working groups may exercise the right to vote, provided that they are representatives of
participating States;
(b) Decisions of committees, subcommittees and working groups shall be taken by a majority of the members
present and voting, except that the reconsideration of a proposal or an amendment shall require the majority
established by rule 32.
IX. Languages and records
Rule 53
Languages of the Conference
Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish shall be the languages of the Conference.
Rule 54
Interpretation
1.

Speeches made in a language of the Conference shall be interpreted into the other five languages.

2. A representative may speak in a language other than a language of the Conference if the delegation concerned
provides for interpretation into one of the languages of the Conference.
Rule 55
Languages of official documents
Official documents of the Conference shall be made available in the languages of the Conference.
Rule 56
Sound recordings of meetings
Sound recordings of the plenary meetings of the Conference and of the meetings of the Main Committee shall
be made and kept in accordance with the practice of the United Nations. Unless otherwise decided by the Conference
or the Main Committee, no such recordings shall be made of any of the other meetings of the Conference.
X.

Public and private meetings

General principles
Rule 57
The plenary meetings of the Conference and the meetings of any committee shall be held in public unless the
body concerned decides otherwise. All decisions taken by the plenary of the Conference at a private meeting shall be
announced at an early public meeting of the plenary.
Rule 58
As a general rule, meetings of the General Committee, Credentials Committee, subcommittees or working
groups shall be held in private.
Rule 59
Communiqués on private meetings
At the close of a private meeting, the presiding officer of the organ concerned may issue a communiqué through
the Secretary-General of the United Nations or her/his designated representative.
66

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

XI. Other participants and observers
Rule 60
Intergovernmental organizations and other entities having received a standing invitation to
participate as observers in the sessions and work of the General Assembly
Representatives designated by intergovernmental organizations and other entities having received a standing
invitation to participate as observers in the sessions and work of the General Assembly have the right to participate as
observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate,
any other committee or working group.
Rule 61
Associate members of regional commissions88
Representatives designated by the associate members of regional commissions listed in the footnote below may
participate as observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as
appropriate, any other committee or working group.
Rule 62
Representatives of the specialized agencies and related organizations89
Representatives designated by the specialized agencies and related organizations may participate as observers,
without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other
committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 63
Representatives of other intergovernmental organizations
Save where otherwise specifically provided with respect to the European Union in these rules of procedure,
representatives designated by other intergovernmental organizations invited to the Conference may participate as
observers, without the right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate,
any other committee or working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 64
Representatives of interested United Nations organs
Representatives designated by interested organs of the United Nations may participate as observers, without the
right to vote, in the deliberations of the Conference, the Main Committee and, as appropriate, any other committee or
working group on questions within the scope of their activities.
Rule 65
Representatives of non-governmental organizations
1. Non-governmental organizations accredited to participate in the Conference may designate representatives to
attend public meetings of the Conference and the Main Committee as observers.
2. Upon the invitation of the presiding officer of the Conference and subject to the approval of the Conference,
such observers may make oral statements on questions in which they have special competence. If the number of
requests to speak is too large, the non-governmental organizations shall be requested to form themselves into
constituencies, such constituencies to speak through spokespersons.
_______________
88

American Samoa, Anguilla, Aruba, Bermuda, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands,
Curaçao, French Polynesia, Guadeloupe, Guam, Martinique, Montserrat, New Caledonia, Puerto Rico, Sint Maarten, Turks and Caicos
Islands and United States Virgin Islands.
89
For the purpose of the present rules, the term “related organizations” includes the International Atomic Energy Agency, the International
Criminal Court, the International Organization for Migration, the International Seabed Authority, the International Tribunal for the Law of
the Sea, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization and the World Trade Organization.

67

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Rule 66
Written statements
Written statements submitted by the designated representatives referred to in rules 60 to 65 shall be circulated
by the secretariat to all delegations in the quantities and the languages in which the statements are made available to
it at the site of the Conference, provided that a statement submitted on behalf of a non-governmental organization
must be related to the work of the Conference and be on a subject in which the organization has a special competence.
Written statements shall not be made available at United Nations expense and shall not be issued as official documents.
XII. Suspension and amendment of the rules of procedure
Rule 67
Method of suspension
Any of these rules may be suspended by the Conference provided that 24 hours’ notice of the proposal for the
suspension has been given, which may be waived if no representative objects. Any such suspension shall be limited
to a specific and stated purpose and to a period required to achieve that purpose.
Rule 68
Method of amendment
These rules of procedure may be amended by a decision of the Conference taken by a two-thirds majority of
the representatives present and voting, after the General Committee has reported on the proposed amendment.
RESOLUTION 72/309
AR
/ ES/72/309

Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.68 and
A/72/L.68/Add.1, sponsored by: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Brazil, Croatia, Cyprus, Czechia,
Denmark, Ecuador, Estonia, Eswatini (on behalf of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group
of African States), Finland, Georgia, Greece, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Maldives, Malta, Monaco, Myanmar, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Samoa, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland

72/309. Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and eliminate malaria in developing
countries, particularly in Africa, by 2030
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,90 including the resolve of Member States to
eliminate malaria by 2030, and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference on Financing
for Development,91
Recalling that the period 2001–2010 was proclaimed by the General Assembly as the Decade to Roll Back
Malaria in Developing Countries, Particularly in Africa,92 and that combating HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other diseases is included in the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development
Goals,
Recalling also its resolution 71/325 of 11 September 2017 and all previous resolutions concerning the struggle
against malaria in developing countries, particularly in Africa,
Recalling further World Health Assembly resolutions 60.18 of 23 May 2007 and 64.17 of 24 May 2011, urging
a broad range of national and international actions to scale up malaria control programmes,93 resolution 61.18 of
_______________
90

Resolution 70/1.
Resolution 69/313, annex.
92
See resolution 55/284.
93
See World Health Organization, documents WHASS1/2006-WHA60/2007/REC/1 and WHA64/2011/REC/1.
91

68

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

24 May 2008 on monitoring the achievement of health-related Millennium Development Goals94 and resolution 68.2
of 22 May 2015 on the global technical strategy and targets for malaria 2016–2030,95
Welcoming the adoption of the political declaration of the high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
antimicrobial resistance,96 and in this regard noting the impact of antimicrobial resistance,
Recalling the commitment made by African leaders to end the epidemic of malaria by ensuring universal and
equitable access to quality health care and by improving health systems and health financing, contained in the African
Common Position on the post-2015 development agenda,
Bearing in mind the relevant resolutions of the Economic and Social Council relating to the struggle against
malaria and diarrhoeal diseases, in particular resolution 1998/36 of 30 July 1998,
Taking note of declarations and decisions on health issues, in particular those related to malaria, adopted by the
Organization of African Unity and the African Union, including the Abuja Declaration on HIV/AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Other Related Infectious Diseases, containing the pledge to allocate at least 15 per cent of national budgets to the
health sector, the Abuja call for accelerated action towards universal access to HIV and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria
services in Africa, issued by the Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its special summit on HIV
and AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja from 2 to 4 May 2006, the decision of the Assembly of the African
Union at its fifteenth ordinary session, held in Kampala from 25 to 27 July 2010, to extend the Abuja call to 2015 to
coincide with the Millennium Development Goals, and the declaration of the special summit of the African Union on
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria, held in Abuja from 12 to 16 July 2013,
Recognizing the leadership provided by the African Leaders Malaria Alliance and the continued commitment
to help to achieve the 2015 targets and eliminate malaria by 2030, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to
continue to provide political leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in Africa,
Welcoming the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its thirtyfirst ordinary session, held in Nouakchott on 1 and 2 July 2018, to endorse the “Zero Malaria Starts with Me”
campaign, which is a continent-wide public outreach campaign modelled after the successful Senegalese campaign
to engage every person across every sector in every country in malaria control and elimination,
Taking note of the Commonwealth Heads of Government Meeting held in London on 19 and 20 April 2018, at
which member countries committed to halve malaria in the Commonwealth countries by 2023, including the pledge
by stakeholders to raise 4 billion United States dollars in new commitments to malaria control and elimination,
Welcoming the leadership and commitment of the Asia Pacific Leaders Malaria Alliance to eliminate malaria in
the Asia-Pacific region by 2030, and encouraging the members of the Alliance to continue to provide political
leadership at the highest level in the fight against malaria in the region,
Welcoming also the launch in 2017 of the Africa Centres for Disease Control and Prevention to establish early
warning and response surveillance systems, respond to emergencies, build capacity and provide technical expertise
to address health emergencies in a timely and effective manner,
Taking note of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 of the World Health Organization, adopted
by the World Health Assembly in May 2015,95 and the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan of
the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, launched at the third International Conference on Financing for Development,
held in Addis Ababa from 13 to 16 July 2015, which together provide the framework for achieving a reduction in
global malaria incidence and mortality rates by at least 90 per cent by 2030, in line with the 2030 Agenda,
Taking note also of the World Health Organization framework for action for an emergency response to
artemisinin resistance in the Greater Mekong subregion of South-East Asia, launched in April 2013,
Reaffirming the Declaration of Alma-Ata, adopted at the International Conference on Primary Health Care, held
in Alma-Ata from 6 to 12 September 1978, and its central role in launching the vision of the World Health
Organization on health for all,
_______________
94

See World Health Organization, document WHA61/2008/REC/1.
See World Health Organization, document WHA68/2015/REC/1.
96
Resolution 71/3.
95

69

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recognizing the linkages among efforts being made to reach the targets set at the Extraordinary Summit of
Heads of State and Government of the Organization of African Unity, held in Abuja on 24 and 25 April 2000, as
necessary and important for the attainment of the “Roll Back Malaria” goal97 and the targets of the Millennium
Development Goals by 2010 and 2015, respectively, and welcoming in this regard the commitment of Member States
to respond to the specific needs of Africa,
Acknowledging the remarkable progress seen in global malaria control between 2000 and 2015, during which
period mortality decreased in South-East Asia by 44 per cent, in Africa by 37 per cent and in the Americas by
27 per cent, but noting with concern the trend of stalling mortality rates in some countries and that the global malaria
community needs to increase its focus on supporting countries where malaria elimination will be hardest,
Recognizing that continued scale-up of integrated community case management of malaria, pneumonia and
diarrhoea in children under 5 years of age in the highest burden countries, and a strengthening of integrated delivery
systems for malaria prevention tools, would be a cost-effective solution to help in bridging systems gaps until health
systems are further strengthened,98 while also helping to reach populations at highest risk of malaria,
Recalling that the target for malaria reduction under Millennium Development Goal 6 had been achieved, with
the incidence rate decreasing by 18 per cent globally, from 76 to 63 cases per 1,000 population at risk, between 2010
and 2016,
Recognizing the important gains in reversing the malaria burden in Africa, including a 42 per cent decline in
malaria case incidence and a 66 per cent decline in malaria death rates between 2000 and 2015,99
Acknowledging the progress made in parts of Africa in reversing the high burden of malaria through political
engagement and sustainable national malaria control programmes, as well as the success achieved in respect of the
2015 goals concerning malaria control set by the World Health Assembly, the Roll Back Malaria Partnership and the
Abuja Declaration on Roll Back Malaria in Africa,97
Acknowledging also the progress made in Latin America in reducing the incidence of malaria, with 15 out of 21
countries reducing the incidence by 75 per cent by 2015, and in significantly decreasing the number of malaria deaths
by 79 per cent since 2000, owing to the commitment of countries to improving access to medicines and health services
and to sustained efforts in prevention programmes,
Recognizing that, despite the fact that increased global and national investments in malaria control have yielded
significant results in decreasing the burden of malaria in many countries, and that some countries are moving towards
the elimination of malaria, many countries continue to have unacceptably high burdens of malaria and, in order to
reach the internationally agreed development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, must rapidly
increase malaria prevention and control efforts, which rely heavily on medicines and insecticides whose utility is
continuously threatened by the development of resistance to antimalarial agents, as well as resistance of mosquitoes
to insecticides and their shift to outdoor biting and resting,
Aware that recent successes in prevention and control are fragile and can be maintained only with sufficient and
sustained national and international investment to fund global malaria control efforts fully,
Regretting the high number of people still without access to medicines, and underscoring that improving access
to medicines could save millions of lives every year,
Recognizing the serious challenges relating to substandard and falsified medical products, poor malaria
diagnostics and poor quality of vector control products,
Expressing concern about the continued morbidity, mortality and debility attributed to malaria, and recalling
that more efforts are needed as countries implement the Sustainable Development Goals and focus on targets set out
in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 and the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030
plan to reduce malaria mortality rates by 90 per cent by 2030,
_______________
97

See A/55/240/Add.1, annex.
See A/71/881, para. 39.
99
See World Health Organization, World Malaria Report 2016.
98

70

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Aware that a concerted and coordinated global effort will be needed to substantially reduce malaria transmission,
morbidity and mortality by 2030 and achieve the targets set in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030,
Recognizing that progress can be accelerated through a multi-pronged response by expanding currently
available life-saving interventions, making malaria a higher political priority and considering malaria control as an
integrated part of the health system, increasing accountability, strengthening regional and cross-border collaboration,
and ensuring that the development and use of new tools and approaches are maximized,
Gravely concerned about the health burden of malaria worldwide, with 216 million cases and 445,000 deaths
reported in 2016 alone,100 in particular in sub-Saharan Africa, where an estimated 91 per cent of the deaths occur,
affecting mostly young children,
Emphasizing the importance of strengthening health systems to effectively sustain malaria control and
elimination efforts and enable appropriate responses to other health issues and emergencies, including investment in
entomology and vector control for human resources and infrastructures,
Recognizing the critical need to strengthen malaria surveillance and data quality in all regions where malaria is
endemic in order to accurately measure progress, combat resurgence and target resources, particularly in the face of
growing resistance to treatment and preventive measures, and recognizing also that additional financing is needed to
strengthen national and regional surveillance systems and to support the sharing and analysis of best practices to
address urgent programmatic challenges, improve monitoring and evaluation, and conduct regular financial planning
and gap analyses,
Acknowledging that the expansion of malaria interventions can be used as an entry point for strengthening health
systems more broadly, including maternal and child health services and laboratory services, and for building stronger
health information and disease surveillance systems, which will further support the effective case management of
malaria,
Commending the efforts of the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund, the Roll Back
Malaria Partnership, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the World Bank and other partners to
fight malaria over the years,
Taking note that the Global Fund is a primary multilateral funder for malaria control and elimination and that
continued progress on malaria elimination will rely on, among other things, the successful replenishment of the Global
Fund, noting in this regard that the replenishment conference will be held in France in 2019,
Taking note also that existing bilateral donors have made a significant contribution to the progress on malaria
control and elimination, and recognizing the need for other donor countries to increase their investments, including
official development assistance, in anti-malaria efforts,
Recognizing the commitment of countries in which malaria is endemic to fight the disease, and recognizing also
the need for those countries to further increase the domestic resources they make available to combat the disease,
1. Welcomes the report of the World Health Organization transmitted by the Secretary-General,101 and calls
for support for the implementation of the recommendations contained therein;
2. Calls for increased support for the implementation of international commitments and goals pertaining to
the fight against malaria, including Goal 3, target 3.3, of the Sustainable Development Goals,90 as well as the related
targets outlined in the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 of the World Health Organization;95
3. Takes note with appreciation of the Catalytic Framework to End AIDS and Tuberculosis and Eliminate
Malaria in Africa by 2030, adopted by the African Union at its twenty-seventh summit, held in Kigali from 10 to
18 July 2016;
4. Welcomes the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its
twenty-ninth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 3 and 4 July 2017, in which it endorsed the 2 million
_______________
100
101

See World Health Organization, World Malaria Report 2017.
A/72/822.

71

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

community health workers initiative and requested the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS, the World
Health Organization and other partners, such as the Group of 20, to support and facilitate its implementation;
5. Encourages malaria-endemic countries to increase the domestic resources they make available to combat
the disease and to review and strengthen national strategic plans in line with technical recommendations of the World
Health Organization and embed those firmly in national health sector and development plans;
6. Also encourages malaria-endemic countries to adopt a multisectoral approach to malaria control, taking a
whole-of-government approach to fully address its social, environmental and economic determinants and building on
synergies with other development priorities, including progressively achieving universal health coverage;
7. Further encourages malaria-endemic countries to scale up coverage of malaria prevention, diagnosis and
treatment, leverage existing channels for integrated service delivery where possible and strengthen systems to respond
to the needs of local communities;
8. Calls upon Member States, with the support of development partners, to provide universal access to
existing life-saving tools for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of malaria, in particular to the package of core
interventions recommended by the World Health Organization,102 and to ensure equity in access to health services for
all people at risk of contracting malaria, especially for the most vulnerable and hard-to-reach populations, including
by strengthening cross-collaboration;103
9. Encourages Member States, relevant organizations of the United Nations system, international
institutions, non-governmental organizations, the private sector and civil society to continue to observe World Malaria
Day on 25 April, in order to raise public awareness of and knowledge about the prevention, control and treatment of
malaria as well as the importance of meeting the Sustainable Development Goals, and stresses the importance of
engaging local communities in this regard;
10. Acknowledges the urgent need to optimize existing health financing in general, including support for
malaria control through the use of surveillance to increase programmatic impact and efficiency, while also recognizing
that funding should increase substantially if the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030 milestone for 2020
of 6.4 billion United States dollars per year is to be achieved;
11. Also acknowledges the commitments of financial support provided through multilateral and bilateral
channels, and recognizes the need for a substantial increase in financial support to meet the targets of the Global
Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, from an annual investment of 2.5 billion dollars in 2014 to 8.7 billion
dollars by 2030;95
12. Welcomes the commitments of financial support, while recognizing the need for additional funding to
achieve malaria elimination targets, for malaria interventions and for research and development of preventive,
diagnostic and control tools from the international community, through funding from multilateral and bilateral sources
and from the private sector, as well as by making predictable financing available through appropriate and effective
aid modalities and in-country health financing mechanisms aligned with national priorities, which are key to
strengthening health systems, including malaria surveillance, and promoting universal and equitable access to highquality malaria prevention, diagnostic and treatment services, and noting in this regard that a high level of external
assistance per person at risk of contracting malaria is associated with a decrease in the incidence of the disease;
13. Urges the international community, United Nations agencies and private organizations and foundations to
support the implementation of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, including through support for
the complementary Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan and for programmes and activities at
the country level in order to achieve internationally agreed targets on malaria;
14. Calls upon the international community to continue to support the Roll Back Malaria Partnership and
partner organizations, including the World Health Organization, the World Bank and the United Nations Children’s
Fund, as vital complementary sources of support for the efforts of malaria-endemic countries to combat the disease;

_______________
102

The package of core interventions, including quality-assured vector control, chemoprevention and diagnostic testing and treatment, can
dramatically reduce morbidity and mortality (see para. 36 of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030).
103
The call in the Global Malaria Programme of the World Health Organization for universal access to prevention, diagnosis and treatment,
and for equity in access to services, are also key pillars of its Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030.

72

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

15. Urges the international community to work in a spirit of cooperation towards effective, increased,
harmonized, predictable and sustained bilateral and multilateral assistance and research to combat malaria, including
support for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, in order to assist States, in particular malariaendemic countries, to implement sound national plans, in particular health plans and sanitation plans, including
malaria control and elimination strategies which may include evidence-based, cost-effective and context-appropriate
environmental management solutions, and integrated management of childhood illnesses, in a sustained and equitable
way that, inter alia, contributes to strengthening health system development approaches at the district level;
16. Appeals to the malaria partners to resolve the financial, supply chain and delivery bottlenecks that are
responsible for stock-outs of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, insecticides for indoor and outdoor residual
spraying, rapid diagnostic tests and artemisinin-based combination therapies at the national level, whenever they
occur, including through the strengthening of malaria programme management at the country level;
17. Welcomes the contribution to the mobilization of additional and predictable resources for development
by voluntary innovative financing initiatives taken by groups of Member States, and in this regard notes the
contributions of the International Drug Purchase Facility, UNITAID, the International Finance Facility for
Immunization, the advance market commitments for vaccines and Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and expresses support
for the work of the Leading Group on Innovative Financing for Development and its special task force on innovative
financing for health;
18. Urges malaria-endemic countries to work towards financial sustainability, to increase national resources
allocated to malaria control and to create favourable conditions for working with the private sector in order to improve
access to good-quality malaria services, as well as to build on synergies with other development priorities, including
the strengthening of health systems and engagement with development partners on implementing an effective vector
control response,104 as a contribution to the achievement of universal health coverage;
19. Urges Member States to assess and respond to the needs for integrated human resources at all levels of
the health system in order to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, to take action, as appropriate, to effectively
govern the recruitment, training and retention of skilled health personnel, and to give particular focus to the availability
of skilled personnel at all levels to meet technical and operational needs as increased funding for malaria control
programmes becomes available;
20. Stresses the importance of improved community-based systems to control malaria, bearing in mind that
families are often the starting point for effective health care for a child with a fever, and encourages malaria-endemic
countries to extend the reach of public health services by training and deploying community health workers,
particularly in rural and remote areas, and to expand integrated community case management of malaria, pneumonia
and diarrhoea, with a focus on children under 5 years of age;95
21. Affirms that close collaboration with community leaders and implementing partners, including nongovernmental organizations, health workers and volunteers, is an essential factor for success in combating malaria,
and calls upon Member States to introduce integrated, people-centred community services, in coordination with
health-care providers in the public and private sectors, and to continue efforts to collaborate with non-governmental
partners, health workers and volunteers in implementing community-based approaches to reach populations in remote
and hard-to-reach areas;95
22. Calls upon Member States to promote access to medicines, and emphasizes that access to affordable and
quality medicines and medical care in the event of sickness, as well as in the prevention, treatment and control of
diseases, is central to the realization of the right to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of physical and
mental health;
23. Urges the international community, inter alia, to support the work of the Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
Tuberculosis and Malaria to enable it to meet its financial needs and, through country-led initiatives with adequate
international support, to intensify access to affordable, safe and effective antimalarial treatments, including
artemisinin-based combination therapies, intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and
infants, adequate diagnostic facilities, long-lasting insecticide-treated mosquito nets, including, where appropriate,
_______________
104

See A/72/822, para. 44.

73

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

through the free distribution of such nets and, where appropriate, to insecticides for indoor residual spraying for
malaria control, taking into account relevant international rules, including the Stockholm Convention on Persistent
Organic Pollutants105 standards and guidelines;
24. Urges relevant international organizations, in particular the World Health Organization and the United
Nations Children’s Fund, to enhance the assistance efforts of national Governments to provide universal access to
malaria control interventions to address all at-risk populations, in particular young children and pregnant women, in
malaria-endemic countries, particularly in Africa, as rapidly as possible, with due regard to ensuring the proper use of
those interventions, including long-lasting insecticide-treated nets, and sustainability through full community
participation and implementation through the health system;
25. Calls upon Member States, in particular malaria-endemic countries, with the support of the international
community, to establish and/or strengthen national policies, operational plans and research, with a view to scaling up
efforts to achieve internationally agreed malaria targets, in accordance with the technical recommendations of the
World Health Organization;
26. Commends those African countries that have implemented the recommendations of the Abuja Summit in
2000 to reduce or waive taxes and tariffs for nets and other products needed for malaria control,97 and encourages
other countries to do the same;
27. Calls upon United Nations agencies and their partners to continue to provide the technical support
necessary to build and enhance the capacity of Member States to implement the Global Technical Strategy for
Malaria 2016–2030, together with the Action and Investment to Defeat Malaria 2016–2030 plan, to meet the
internationally agreed goals;
28. Expresses deep concern about emerging drug and insecticide resistance in several regions of the world,
calls upon Member States, with support from the World Health Organization and other partners, to implement the
Global Plan for Artemisinin Resistance Containment and the Global Plan for Insecticide Resistance Management in
Malaria Vectors and to strengthen and implement surveillance systems for monitoring and assessing changing patterns
of drug and insecticide resistance, calls upon the World Health Organization to support Member States in the
development of their national insecticide resistance management strategies and to coordinate support at the
international level for countries to ensure that drug efficacy and insecticide resistance testing is fully operational in
order to enhance the use of artemisinin-based combination therapies and insecticides, and stresses that the data
gathered should be utilized to inform local decisions and for further research and development of safe and effective
therapies and new vector control tools;
29. Urges all Member States to prohibit the marketing and use of oral artemisinin-based monotherapies and
to replace them with oral artemisinin-based combination therapies, as recommended by the World Health
Organization, and to develop the financial, legislative and regulatory mechanisms necessary to introduce artemisinin
combination therapies at affordable prices in both public and private facilities;
30. Recognizes the importance of the development of safe, affordable and cost-effective vaccines, new
medicines and diagnostics to prevent and treat malaria and the need for further and accelerated research, including
into safe, effective and high-quality therapies, using rigorous standards, including by providing support to the Special
Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases,106 through effective global partnerships, such as, inter
alia, the various malaria vaccine initiatives and the Medicines for Malaria Venture, where necessary stimulated by
new incentives to secure their development, and through effective and timely support for the pre-qualification of new
antimalarials and their combinations;
31. Also recognizes the importance of innovation in addressing the challenges to eliminating malaria,
including the role of the World Intellectual Property Organization, in particular its Re: Search platform;
32. Calls upon the international community, including through existing partnerships, to increase investment
in and efforts towards research to optimize current tools, develop and validate new, safe and affordable malaria-related
_______________
105

United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2256, No. 40214.
A joint programme of the United Nations Children’s Fund, the United Nations Development Programme, the World Bank and the World
Health Organization.
106

74

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

medicines, products and technologies, such as vaccines, rapid diagnostic tests, insecticides and their delivery modes,
to prevent and treat malaria, especially for at-risk children and pregnant women, and test opportunities for integration
in order to enhance effectiveness and delay the onset of resistance;
33. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries to assure favourable conditions for research institutions, including
the allocation of adequate resources and the development of national policies and legal frameworks, where
appropriate, with a view to, inter alia, informing policy formulation and strategic interventions on malaria;
34. Reaffirms the right to use, to the fullest extent, the provisions contained in the World Trade Organization
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement), the Doha Declaration on
the TRIPS Agreement and Public Health, the decision of the General Council of the World Trade Organization of
30 August 2003 on the implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and Public
Health, and the latest amendment to article 31 of the TRIPS Agreement, which came into effect on 23 January 2017,
and which provides flexibilities for the protection of public health, and in particular to promote access to medicines
for all and to encourage the provision of assistance to developing countries in this regard, and calls for the broad and
timely acceptance of the amendment to article 31 of the Agreement, as proposed by the General Council of the World
Trade Organization in its decision of 6 December 2005, while recognizing that the protection of intellectual property
is important for the development of new medicine;
35. Recognizes the importance in the struggle against malaria of the World Health Organization Global
Strategy and Plan of Action on Public Health, Innovation and Intellectual Property, adopted by the World Health
Assembly on 24 May 2008;94
36. Calls upon malaria-endemic countries, development partners and the international community to support
the timely replacement of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets in accordance with the recommendations of the World
Health Organization on the service lives of the nets, in order to prevent the risk of malaria resurgence and a reversal
of the gains made to date and to make further progress in standardizing nets to reduce the cost of their production;
37. Takes note of the essential contribution of the scientific community and the private sector, and stresses that
new products such as improved diagnostic tools, more effective medicines and vaccines, new insecticides and more
durable insecticide-treated bednets are all fundamental to ensuring sustained progress in efforts to combat the
disease;107
38. Calls upon the international community to support ways to expand access to affordable, effective and safe
products and treatments, such as vector control measures, including indoor residual spraying, long-lasting insecticidetreated nets, including through the free distribution of such nets, adequate diagnostic facilities, intermittent preventive
therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, and artemisinin-based combination therapy for
populations at risk of falciparum malaria infection in endemic countries, particularly in Africa, including through
additional funds and innovative mechanisms, inter alia, for the financing and scaling up of artemisinin production and
procurement, as appropriate, to meet the increased need;
39. Recognizes the impact of the Roll Back Malaria Partnership, and welcomes the increased level of publicprivate partnerships for malaria control and prevention, including the financial and in-kind contributions of private
sector partners and companies operating in Africa, as well as the increased engagement of non-governmental service
providers;
40. Encourages the producers of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets and insecticides to accelerate technology
transfer to developing countries, and invites the World Bank and regional development funds to consider supporting
malaria-endemic countries in establishing factories to scale up production of long-lasting insecticide-treated nets and
insecticides, where appropriate;
41. Calls upon Member States and the international community, especially malaria-endemic countries, in
accordance with existing guidelines and recommendations of the World Health Organization and the requirements of
the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants, including those related to DDT, to become fully
knowledgeable about the technical policies and strategies of the World Health Organization and the provisions of the
Stockholm Convention, including for indoor residual spraying, long-lasting insecticide-treated nets and case
_______________
107

See A/72/822, para. 46.

75

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

management, intermittent preventive therapies for pregnant women, children under 5 and infants, monitoring of in
vivo resistance studies to artemisinin-based combination therapies and monitoring and managing insecticide
resistance and outdoor malaria transmission, as well as to increase capacity for the registration and uptake of new
vector control tools, the safe, effective and judicious use of indoor residual spraying and other forms of vector control,
including quality control measures, in accordance with international rules, standards and guidelines;
42. Requests the World Health Organization, the United Nations Children’s Fund and donor agencies to
provide support to those countries that still use DDT for indoor residual spraying so as to ensure that it is implemented
in accordance with international rules, standards and guidelines, and to provide all possible support to malariaendemic countries to manage the intervention effectively and prevent all contamination, in particular, of agricultural
products with DDT and other insecticides used for indoor residual spraying;
43. Recognizes the importance of a multisectoral strategy to advance global control efforts, invites malariaendemic countries to consider adopting and implementing the Multisectoral Action Framework for Malaria,
developed by the Roll Back Malaria Partnership and the United Nations Development Programme, and encourages
regional and intersectoral collaboration, both public and private, at all levels, especially in education, health,
agriculture, economic development and the environment, to advance malaria control objectives;
44. Also recognizes the need to strengthen malaria surveillance and data quality in all endemic regions, which
is important to the follow-up and review of the progress in implementing target 3.3 pertaining to Sustainable
Development Goal 3 and a key pillar of the Global Technical Strategy for Malaria 2016–2030, to enable Member
States to direct financial resources to populations most in need and to respond effectively to disease outbreaks,
particularly in the face of growing resistance to treatment and preventive measures;
45. Calls upon Member States and the international community to strengthen mechanisms for country-based
coordination of technical assistance to achieve alignment of the best approaches to implement World Health
Organization technical guidance and to mobilize support for the sharing and analysis of best practices to address
urgent programmatic challenges, to improve monitoring and evaluation and to conduct regular financial planning and
gap analysis;
46. Encourages sharing, across regions, of knowledge, experience and lessons learned with regard to the
control and elimination of malaria, particularly between the Africa, Asia-Pacific and Latin America regions;
47. Calls upon the international community to support the strengthening of health systems, national pesticide
and/or pharmaceutical policies and national drug and pesticide regulatory authorities, to monitor and fight against the
trade in substandard and falsified medical products, such as substandard antimalarial medicines, pesticides and/or
nets, and prevent their distribution and use, and to support coordinated efforts, inter alia, by providing technical
assistance for compliance with existing commitments and international regulations on the use of pesticides and to
improve surveillance, monitoring and evaluation systems and their alignment with national plans and systems so as
to better track and report changes in coverage, the need for scaling up recommended interventions and the subsequent
reductions in the burden of malaria;
48. Encourages Member States, the international community and all relevant actors, including the private
sector, to promote the coordinated implementation and enhance the quality of malaria-related activities, in accordance
with national policies and operational plans that are consistent with the technical recommendations of the World
Health Organization and recent efforts and initiatives, including, where appropriate, the Paris Declaration on Aid
Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action, adopted at the Third High-level Forum on Aid Effectiveness, held in
Accra from 2 to 4 September 2008,108 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation, which
make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them, and the Nairobi
outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation;109
49. Recognizes the need for political commitment and financial support to sustain and expand the achievements
in the struggle against malaria and to meet the international malaria targets through prevention and malaria control
efforts to end the epidemic, while acknowledging the remarkable progress in combating malaria to date;
_______________
108
109

76

A/63/539, annex.
Resolution 64/222, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

50. Requests the Secretary-General, in close collaboration with the Director General of the World Health
Organization and in consultation with Member States, to report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session
on the implementation of the present resolution.
RESOLUTION 72/310
A/RES/72/310

Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2018, by a recorded vote of 159 to 2, with no abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/72/L.57/Rev.1 and A/72/L.57/Rev.1/Add.1, as orally revised, sponsored by Egypt (on behalf of the
States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: Dominican Republic, United States of America
Abstaining: None

72/310. New Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 57/2 of 16 September 2002 on the United Nations Declaration on the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development,
Recalling also its resolution 57/7 of 4 November 2002 on the final review and appraisal of the United Nations
New Agenda for the Development of Africa in the 1990s and support for the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development and all its subsequent resolutions, including resolution 71/320 of 8 September 2017, entitled “New
Partnership for Africa’s Development: progress in implementation and international support”,
Reaffirming its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of universal and
transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for the full
implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming also its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015, entitled “Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third
International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis Ababa Action Agenda)”, which is an integral part of
the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, supports and complements it, helps to contextualize its means of
implementation targets with concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address
the challenge of financing and creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit
of global partnership and solidarity,
Welcoming the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union of the
decision proclaiming “Winning the fight against corruption: a sustainable path to Africa’s transformation” as the
theme for 2018, and the appointment of the African Union Champion against Corruption,
77

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling that the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development underscores the special challenges facing the most
vulnerable countries, including African countries, and recalling also that significant challenges remain in achieving
sustainable development in Africa and the importance of fulfilling all commitments to advance action in areas critical
to Africa’s sustainable development,
Recalling also the commitment of the African leaders to Africa’s political, social and economic integration
agenda and to the ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as reaffirmed in the 50th Anniversary Solemn
Declaration adopted on 26 May 2013 on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African
Unity/African Union,
Recognizing the adoption of Agenda 2063 by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at its twenty-fourth ordinary session, held in Addis Ababa on 30 and 31 January 2015, as the African Union
long-term strategy emphasizing industrialization, youth employment, improved natural resource governance and the
reduction of inequalities, and recognizing also the adoption by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the African Union of the first 10-year implementation plan (2014–2023) of the African Union Agenda 2063, which
outlines key African flagship projects, fast-track programmes, priority areas, specific targets and African strategies
and policy measures at all levels to support its implementation,
Noting with appreciation the signing by the Secretary-General and the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission on 27 January 2018 of the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development to promote the integrated and coordinated
implementation, monitoring and reporting of both Agendas through joint activities and programmes,
Recognizing the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared
Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods and the Declaration on Nutrition Security for Inclusive Economic Growth and
Sustainable Development in Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union
at its twenty-third ordinary session, held in Malabo on 26 and 27 June 2014, and recognizing also the African Union
strategy and road map for facilitating the realization of the 2014 Malabo Commitments on Agriculture, launched
during the twenty-fourth ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government, in January 2015,
Recalling the adoption of its resolution 72/207 of 20 December 2017 on the promotion of international
cooperation to combat illicit financial flows in order to foster sustainable development,
Welcoming the Paris Agreement110 and its early entry into force, encouraging all its parties to fully implement
the Agreement, and parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change111 that have not yet
done so to deposit their instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, where appropriate, as soon as
possible,
Recalling the declaration of the high-level meeting of African and international leaders, entitled “Toward
African renaissance: renewed partnership for a unified approach to end hunger in Africa by 2025 under the framework
of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme”,
Recalling also the adoption of General Assembly resolution 71/254 of 23 December 2016 on the Framework for a
Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017–2027,
Welcoming the adoption by the Economic and Social Council of resolution 2018/4 of 17 April 2018 on social
dimensions of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,
Recalling its resolution 70/259 of 1 April 2016, by which it proclaimed 2016–2025 the United Nations Decade
of Action on Nutrition,
Recognizing the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for Shared
Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods, recognizing the need of Africa’s development partners to implement the
commitments contained within, and recalling the African Union strategy and road map for facilitating the realization
of the 2014 Malabo Commitments on Agriculture,
_______________
110
111

78

See FCCC/CP/2015/10/Add.1, decision 1/CP.21, annex.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1771, No. 30822.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012, by which it established a United Nations monitoring
mechanism to review commitments made towards Africa’s development, and looking forward to the third biennial
report of the Secretary-General on the review of the implementation of the commitments made towards Africa’s
development, to be submitted to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session,
Welcoming the high-level events organized by the Office of the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General on
Africa during Africa Week 2017, on the theme “Supporting an integrated, prosperous, people-centred and peaceful
Africa: towards the implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
Bearing in mind that African countries have primary responsibility for their own economic and social
development and that the role of national policies and development strategies cannot be overemphasized, bearing in
mind also the need for their development efforts to be supported by the international community and an enabling
international economic environment, reiterating the need for the international community to implement all
commitments regarding the economic and social development of Africa, and in this regard recalling the support given
by the International Conference on Financing for Development to the New Partnership,112
1.

Takes note with appreciation of the fifteenth consolidated progress report of the Secretary-General;113

2. Recognizes the New Partnership for Africa’s Development,114 and welcomes in this regard the efforts by
development partners to strengthen cooperation with the Partnership and recognizes the progress made, while
acknowledging that much needs to be done in its implementation;
3. Also recognizes the importance of supporting the African Union Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year
implementation plan (2014–2023) and acknowledges the programme of the New Partnership for Africa’s
Development, both of which are integral to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,115 and underscores in this
regard the importance of a coherent and coordinated implementation of Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda;
4. Calls upon developing countries and countries with economies in transition to continue their efforts to
create a domestic environment conducive to encouraging entrepreneurship, promoting the formalization of informal
sector activities in Africa and attracting investments by, inter alia, achieving a transparent, stable and predictable
investment climate with proper contract enforcement and respect for property rights, embedded in sound
macroeconomic policies and institutions;
5. Notes that foreign direct investment is a major source of financing for development, that it has a critical
role in achieving inclusive economic growth and sustainable development, including through the promotion of job
creation and the eradication of poverty and hunger, and that it contributes to the active participation of the African
economies in the global economy and facilitates regional economic cooperation and integration, and in this regard
calls upon, as appropriate, developed countries to continue to devise source-country measures to encourage and
facilitate the flow of foreign direct investment through, inter alia, the provision of export credits and other lending
instruments, risk guarantees and business development services;
6. Emphasizes that economic development, including inclusive industrial development, and policies which
seek to enhance productive capacities in Africa can generate employment and income for the poor and, therefore, be
an engine for poverty eradication and for achieving internationally agreed development goals, including the
Sustainable Development Goals, and recognizes in this regard the adoption by the General Assembly of resolution
70/293 of 25 July 2016 on the Third Industrial Development Decade for Africa (2016–2025);
7. Calls for effective measures and targeted investments to overcome difficulties, to support recovery
priorities and to strengthen national health systems to prevent, protect against and combat outbreaks of diseases, inter
alia, the Ebola outbreak, particularly in the most affected countries, in line with the obligations of the International
Health Regulations (2005)116 and the outcome of the International Ebola Recovery Conference, held in New York on
_______________
112

See Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico, 18–22 March 2002 (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
113
A/72/223.
114
A/57/304, annex.
115
Resolution 70/1.
116
World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.

79

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

10 July 2015, invites development partners to continue to assist African countries in their efforts to strengthen national
health systems, to expand surveillance systems in the health sector, in compliance with the International Health
Regulations (2005), and to eliminate diseases, and in this context calls upon development partners to support the
implementation of the African Health Strategy 2016–2030 and the transition towards universal health coverage
in Africa;
8. Recalls its commitment to broadening and strengthening the voice and participation of developing
countries, including African countries, in international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic
governance;
9. Expresses concern about the increasing challenges posed by climate change, drought, land degradation,
desertification, the loss of biodiversity and floods, and their negative consequences for the fight against poverty,
famine and hunger, which could pose serious additional challenges to the achievement of the internationally agreed
development goals, including the Sustainable Development Goals, particularly in Africa;
10. Notes with concern that gross official development assistance to Africa decreased by 1.3 per cent in 2016;
11. Also notes with concern Africa’s disproportionately low share of the volume of international trade, which
stands at approximately 2.65 per cent for 2016, and expresses concern at the increased debt burden of some African
countries;
12. Reaffirms that achieving gender equality, empowering all women and girls, and the full realization of their
human rights are essential to achieving sustained, inclusive and equitable economic growth and sustainable
development, reiterates the need for gender mainstreaming, including targeted actions and investments in the
formulation and implementation of all financial, economic, environmental and social policies, and recommits to
adopting and strengthening sound policies and enforceable legislation and transformative actions for the promotion
of gender equality and women’s and girls’ empowerment at all levels, to ensure women’s equal rights, access and
opportunities for participation and leadership in the economy and to eliminate gender-based violence, sexual
exploitation and abuse and discrimination in all its forms;
13. Recognizes its commitment to the full implementation of the political declaration on Africa’s development
needs, adopted at the high-level meeting on Africa’s development needs on 22 September 2008;117
I
Actions by African countries and organizations
14. Welcomes the progress made by African countries in fulfilling their commitments in the implementation
of the New Partnership to deepen democracy, human rights, good governance and sound economic management, and
encourages African countries, with the participation of stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, to
continue their efforts towards achieving the Sustainable Development Goals, developing and strengthening
institutions for governance, creating an environment conducive to involving the private sector, including small and
medium-sized enterprises, in the New Partnership implementation process, developing innovative public-private
partnerships for financing infrastructure projects118 and attracting foreign direct investment for development;
15. Notes with appreciation the efforts exerted by the African Union and the regional economic communities
in the area of economic integration, as well as ongoing efforts by the African Union in the operationalization of the
provision contained in all previous General Assembly resolutions on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union, and stresses the key role of the United Nations system in supporting the African Union in the social,
economic and political fields and in the area of peace and security;
16. Recognizes the important role that African regional economic communities can play in the implementation
of the New Partnership and Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year implementation plan in close cooperation with the
African Union, and in this regard encourages African countries and the international community to give regional
economic communities the support necessary to strengthen their capacity;
_______________
117

Resolution 63/1.
Such as the project entitled “Optic fibre link between Algeria and Nigeria via Niger” aimed at connecting Algeria and Nigeria through
the installation of 4,500 kilometres of terrestrial optic fibre.
118

80

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

17. Acknowledges the progress made towards ensuring free movement of persons as well as goods and
services in Africa, and in this regard notes with appreciation the signing of the agreement launching the African
Continental Free Trade Area at the tenth extraordinary summit of the African Union, held in Kigali on 21 March 2018,
which aims at doubling intra-African trade by removing non-tariff and tariff barriers on goods and services;
18. Notes with appreciation the decision to establish the Single African Air Transport Market, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union at its thirtieth ordinary session, held in Addis
Ababa on 28 and 29 January 2018;
19. Encourages African countries to strengthen and expand local and regional infrastructure and to continue
to share best practices with a view to strengthening regional and continental integration, and in this regard notes with
appreciation the work of the high-level subcommittee of the African Union on the Presidential Infrastructure
Champion Initiative, which seeks to further strengthen the development of infrastructure on the African continent in
collaboration with relevant development partners;
20. Also encourages African countries to maintain the trend of increasing both foreign and domestic
investment in infrastructure development, including through strengthened domestic resource mobilization from the
public and private sectors, and improving the efficiency of existing infrastructure investment;
21. Further encourages African countries to accelerate the achievement of the objective of food security and
nutrition in Africa, welcomes the commitment made by African leaders to allocate at least 10 per cent of public
expenditure to agriculture and to ensure its efficiency and effectiveness, in this regard recognizes its support for the
commitments contained in the Malabo Declaration on Accelerated Agricultural Growth and Transformation for
Shared Prosperity and Improved Livelihoods and for the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme, under the strong leadership of African countries, and in this regard notes the important progress made by
the 44 African countries and the 4 regional economic communities that have signed compacts under the Programme;
22. Encourages African countries to continue their efforts in investing in education, science, technology and
innovation to enhance value addition and industrial development;
23. Takes note of the declaration on the theme of the year 2016 adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State
and Government of the African Union at its twenty-seventh ordinary session, held in Kigali on 17 and 18 July 2016,
including the determination to protect and promote women’s human rights, and expresses its appreciation for the
continuing and increasing efforts of African countries in mainstreaming the gender perspective and the empowerment
of women in the implementation of the New Partnership;
24. Welcomes the noteworthy progress that has been achieved in implementing the African Peer Review
Mechanism, in particular the voluntary adherence of 37 African countries to the Mechanism and the completion of
the peer review process in 21 countries, welcomes the progress in implementing the national programmes of action
resulting from those reviews, in this regard urges African States that have not yet done so to consider joining the
Mechanism process, and encourages further strengthening of the Mechanism process for its efficient performance;
25. Reiterates its commitment to further strengthen public policies and the mobilization and effective use of
domestic resources, recognizing that domestic resources are first and foremost generated by economic growth,
supported by an enabling environment at all levels;
26. Welcomes the collaboration between the African Private Sector Forum and the United Nations Global
Compact, and encourages the further enhancement of this partnership in conjunction with the African Union
Commission in support of the development of the African private sector and the achievement of the Sustainable
Development Goals, in line with the relevant executive decisions of the African Union;
27. Also welcomes the efforts of the United Nations and the African Union to align the clusters of the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa119 with the strategic frameworks of the African Union and the New Partnership
_______________
119

The clusters adopted by the Regional Coordination Mechanism at its seventeenth session are (a) sustainable and inclusive economic
growth, industry, trade and regional integration; (b) infrastructure development; (c) human capital development, health, science, technology
and innovation; (d) social development, labour, employment creation, social protection, migration and mobility; (e) women and gender
equality and youth empowerment; (f) humanitarian matters and disaster risk management; (g) environment, urbanization and population;
and (h) advocacy, information, communications and culture.

81

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

for 2014–2017 and Agenda 2063, and invites development partners, including the United Nations system, to continue
to support the Regional Coordination Mechanism for Africa in achieving its objectives, including through the
allocation of necessary funds to support the implementation of its activities;
II
Response of the international community
28. Reiterates that we are setting out together on the path towards sustainable development, devoting
ourselves collectively to the pursuit of global development and of “win-win” cooperation which can bring huge gains
to all countries and all parts of the world;
29. Urges the international community to continue to give due attention to Africa’s priorities, including the
New Partnership, in line with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development;
30. Reiterates that the fulfilment of all official development assistance commitments remains crucial,
including the commitment by many developed countries to achieve the target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income
for official development assistance and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development
assistance to least developed countries, is encouraged by those few countries that have met or surpassed their
commitment to 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance and the target of 0.15 to
0.20 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance to least developed countries, and urges all
others to step up efforts to increase their official development assistance and to make additional concrete efforts
towards official development assistance targets;
31. Underlines the importance of debt crisis prevention and prudent debt management, calls for a
comprehensive and sustainable solution to the external debt problems of African countries, including the challenge of
undeclared or hidden debt, and recognizes the important role, on a case-by-case basis, of debt relief, including debt
cancellation, as appropriate, the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Initiative and debt restructuring;
32. Reiterates that international trade is an engine for inclusive economic growth and can contribute to the
promotion of sustainable development for all, in particular through its contribution to boosting job creation, given the
high youth unemployment in Africa, and to the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals;
33. Also reiterates the need for all countries and relevant multilateral institutions to continue efforts to enhance
coherence in their trade policies towards African countries, and acknowledges the importance of efforts to fully
integrate African countries into the multilateral trading system and to build their capacity to compete through such
initiatives as Aid for Trade and, given the world economic and financial crisis, the provision of assistance to address
the adjustment challenges of trade liberalization;
34. Looks forward to the convening of the third Global Infrastructure Forum in Bali, Indonesia, on 13 October
2018, and in this regard recalls, as outlined in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International Conference
on Financing for Development,120 that a greater range of voices should be heard, particularly from developing
countries, to identify and address infrastructure and capacity gaps, in particular in, inter alia, African countries, and
that it will highlight opportunities for investment and cooperation and work to ensure that investments are
environmentally, socially and economically sustainable;
35. Welcomes the various important initiatives established between African countries and their development
partners, as well as other initiatives, emphasizes the importance of coordination in such initiatives on Africa and the
need for their effective implementation, and in this regard recognizes the important role that North-South, SouthSouth and triangular cooperation can play in supporting Africa’s development efforts, particularly the implementation
of the New Partnership, while bearing in mind that South-South cooperation is not a substitute for but rather a
complement to North-South cooperation;
36. Acknowledges the establishment of the Africa Global Partnership Platform as a mechanism for advancing
Africa’s interests and perspectives into wider global processes;
37. Welcomes the increasing efforts to improve the quality of official development assistance and increase its
development impact, recognizes the Development Cooperation Forum of the Economic and Social Council, notes
_______________
120

82

Resolution 69/313, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

other initiatives, such as the high-level forums on aid effectiveness, which produced, inter alia, the Paris Declaration
on Aid Effectiveness, the Accra Agenda for Action121 and the Busan Partnership for Effective Development
Cooperation, which make important contributions to the efforts of the countries that have made commitments to them,
including through the adoption of the fundamental principles of national ownership, alignment, harmonization,
transparency, accountability and managing for results, and bears in mind that there is no one-size-fits-all formula that
will guarantee effective assistance and that the specific situation of each country needs to be fully considered;
38. Invites all of Africa’s development partners, in particular developed countries, to support the efforts of
African countries to promote and maintain macroeconomic stability, to help African countries to attract investments
and promote policies conducive to attracting domestic and foreign investment, for example by encouraging private
financial flows and supporting small and medium-sized enterprises, especially those owned by women, to promote
investment by their private sectors in Africa, to encourage and facilitate the development and transfer of technology
to African countries, on mutually agreed terms, and to assist in strengthening human and institutional capacities for
the implementation of the New Partnership, consistent with its priorities and objectives and with a view to furthering
Africa’s development at all levels;
39. Underlines the importance of South-South cooperation as an expression of solidarity among peoples and
countries of the South, based on their shared experiences and objectives, and that it should continue to be guided by
the principles of respect for national sovereignty, national ownership and independence, equality, non-conditionality,
non-interference in domestic affairs and mutual benefit, welcomes the increased contributions of South-South
cooperation to poverty eradication and sustainable development, encourages developing countries to voluntarily step
up their efforts to strengthen South-South cooperation and to further improve its development effectiveness in
accordance with the provisions of the Nairobi outcome document of the High-level United Nations Conference on
South-South Cooperation,122 and looks forward to the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation, to be held in Buenos Aires from 20 to 22 March 2019;
40. Considers that innovative mechanisms of financing can make a positive contribution towards assisting
developing countries in mobilizing additional resources for financing for development on a voluntary basis and that
such financing should supplement and not be a substitute for traditional sources of financing, and, while highlighting
the considerable progress on innovative sources of financing for development achieved to date, stresses the
importance of scaling up present initiatives and developing new mechanisms, as appropriate;
41. Underscores the importance of support by Africa’s partners, in particular developed countries, of efforts
by African countries to strengthen domestic resource mobilization, including through capacity-building and
strengthening of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows and enhance asset recovery and return;
42. Reiterates the commitment to redouble efforts to substantially reduce illicit financial flows by 2030, with
a view to eventually eliminating them, including by combating tax evasion and corruption through strengthened
national regulation and increased international cooperation, in line with the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, and the
strengthening of international cooperation to combat illicit financial flows;
43. Recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners to align their efforts in infrastructure investment
towards supporting the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa, and notes in this regard the convening
in Dakar on 14 and 15 June 2014 of the Financing Summit for Africa’s Infrastructure, which adopted the Dakar
Agenda for Action to mobilize investment towards infrastructure development projects, and calls upon development
partners to support the implementation of the Dakar Agenda;
44. Urges continued support of measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication, hunger and
malnutrition, job creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved
market access, support for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development
assistance and increased flows of foreign direct investment, and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
45. Recognizes the need for Africa’s development partners to align their efforts to implement the commitments
contained in the Declaration on Nutrition Security for Inclusive Economic Growth and Sustainable Development in
_______________
121
122

A/63/539, annex.
Resolution 64/222, annex.

83

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Africa, towards supporting the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme and the implementation
of its national and regional investment plans of the Programme for alignment of external funding, and takes note of
the Declaration of the World Summit on Food Security;123
46. Expresses deep concern about the continuing negative effects of desertification, land degradation and
drought on the African continent and underlines the need for short-, medium- and long-term measures, and in this
regard calls for the continued effective implementation of the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa,124 including its
2018–2030 Strategic Framework;125
47. Recognizes that Africa is one of the regions that contribute the least to climate change, yet is extremely
vulnerable and exposed to the adverse impacts of climate change, and in this regard calls upon the international
community, including developed countries, to continue to support Africa to address its adaptation needs through, inter
alia, the development, transfer and deployment of technology on mutually agreed terms, capacity-building and the
provision of adequate and predictable resources, in line with existing commitments, and highlights the need for full
implementation of the agreed outcomes of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change,111
including the Paris Agreement;110
48. Reiterates the need to support developing countries in strengthening the capacity of national statistical
offices and data systems to ensure access to high-quality, timely, reliable and disaggregated data;
49. Stresses that the prevention, management and resolution of conflict and post-conflict consolidation are
essential for the achievement of the objectives of the New Partnership, and welcomes in this regard the cooperation
and support granted by the United Nations and development partners to the African regional and subregional
organizations in the implementation of the New Partnership;
50. Welcomes the continued efforts of the United Nations Peacebuilding Commission in assisting post-conflict
countries in Africa, particularly the six African countries for which the Commission has established country-specific
configurations;
51. Requests the United Nations system to continue to provide assistance to the Planning and Coordinating
Agency of the New Partnership and to African countries in developing projects and programmes within the scope of
the priorities of the New Partnership and to place greater emphasis on monitoring, evaluation and dissemination of
the effectiveness of its activities in support of the New Partnership;
52. Emphasizes African ownership of the African Peer Review Mechanism process, and invites the
international community to support the efforts of African countries, at their request, in implementing their respective
national programmes of action arising from the process;
53. Requests the Secretary-General to promote greater coherence in the work of the United Nations system in
support of the New Partnership, on the basis of the agreed clusters of the Regional Coordination Mechanism for
Africa, and in this regard calls upon the United Nations system to continue to mainstream the special needs of Africa
in all its normative and operational activities;
54. Recalls the establishment of the United Nations monitoring mechanism to review commitments made
relating to Africa’s development, and invites Member States and all relevant entities of the United Nations system,
including funds, programmes, specialized agencies and regional commissions, in particular the Economic
Commission for Africa, and all relevant international and regional organizations, to continue to contribute to the
effectiveness and reliability of the review process by cooperating in the collection of data and the evaluation of
performance;
55. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a comprehensive report on the implementation of the present
resolution to the General Assembly on an annual basis on the provision of inputs from Governments, organizations
of the United Nations system and other stakeholders in the New Partnership.
_______________
123

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, document WSFS 2009/2.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1954, No. 33480.
125
ICCD/COP(13)/21/Add.1, decision 7/COP.13, annex.
124

84

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/311
A/RES/72/311

Adopted at the 113th plenary meeting, on 10 September 2018, by a recorded vote of 158 to 1, with no abstentions,* on the
basis of draft resolution A/72/L.59/Rev.1 and A/72/L.59/Rev.1/Add.1, as amended in A/72/L.70, sponsored by Egypt (on behalf
of the States Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China) and Turkey
* In favour: Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cabo Verde, Cambodia, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Eswatini, Ethiopia, Finland, France,
Gabon, Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritius, Mexico, Micronesia (Federated States of), Monaco, Montenegro, Morocco,
Mozambique, Myanmar, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania,
Russian Federation, Rwanda, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Sierra
Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, South Sudan, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against: United States of America
Abstaining: None

72/311. Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report of the Secretary-General on
the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling the report of the Open-ended Ad Hoc Working Group on the Causes of Conflict and the Promotion
of Durable Peace and Sustainable Development in Africa,126 its resolution 53/92 of 7 December 1998 and subsequent
annual resolutions, including resolutions 67/293 of 24 July 2013, 68/278 of 16 June 2014, 69/291 of 19 June 2015,
70/292 of 7 July 2016 and 71/315 of 19 July 2017, as well as its resolutions 66/286 of 23 July 2012, 67/294 of
15 August 2013, 68/301 of 17 July 2014, 69/290 of 19 June 2015, 70/295 of 25 July 2016 and 71/320 of 8 September
2017 on the New Partnership for Africa’s Development and 59/213 of 20 December 2004, 63/310 of 14 September
2009, 65/274 of 18 April 2011 and 67/302 of 16 September 2013 on cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union,
Recalling also, in this context, Security Council resolutions 1809 (2008) of 16 April 2008 on peace and security
in Africa, 1325 (2000) of 31 October 2000, 1820 (2008) of 19 June 2008, 1888 (2009) of 30 September 2009,
1889 (2009) of 5 October 2009, 1960 (2010) of 16 December 2010, 2106 (2013) of 24 June 2013, 2122 (2013) of
18 October 2013 and 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 on women and peace and security, 2250 (2015) of 9 December
2015 and 2419 (2018) of 6 June 2018 on youth, peace and security, 1366 (2001) of 30 August 2001 on the role of the
Council in the prevention of armed conflicts, 1612 (2005) of 26 July 2005, 1882 (2009) of 4 August 2009,
1998 (2011) of 12 July 2011, 2068 (2012) of 19 September 2012 and 2225 (2015) of 18 June 2015 on children and
armed conflict, 1625 (2005) of 14 September 2005 on strengthening the effectiveness of the role of the Council in
conflict prevention, particularly in Africa, 2195 (2014) of 19 December 2014 on threats to international peace and
security, 1631 (2005) of 17 October 2005, 2033 (2012) of 12 January 2012 and 2320 (2016) of 18 November 2016,
as well as the statements by the President of the Security Council of 16 December 2014127 and 24 May 2016128 on
cooperation between the United Nations and regional and subregional organizations in maintaining international
peace and security, and resolution 2167 (2014) of 28 July 2014 on United Nations peacekeeping operations,

_______________
126

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 45 (A/56/45).
S/PRST/2014/27; see Resolutions and Decisions of the Security Council, 1 August 2014–31 July 2015 (S/INF/70).
128
S/PRST/2016/8.
127

85

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling further the 2005 World Summit Outcome,129 through which world leaders reaffirmed their
commitment to addressing the special needs of Africa, and its resolution 60/265 of 30 June 2006,
Reaffirming the political declaration on Africa’s development needs adopted at the high-level meeting on
22 September 2008,130
Recalling the 2015 high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on the Sustainable Development Goals
and its outcome document,131 and recognizing that development, peace and security and human rights are closely
interlinked and mutually reinforcing,
Recalling also the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, from
20 to 22 June 2012, and its outcome document entitled “The future we want”,132
Recalling further its resolution 66/293 of 17 September 2012 establishing a monitoring mechanism to review
commitments made towards Africa’s development,
Reaffirming the political declaration on the peaceful resolution of conflicts in Africa adopted at the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly held on 25 April 2013,133
Reaffirming also the importance of supporting the African Union Agenda 2063, as a strategic vision and an
action plan for ensuring a positive socioeconomic transformation in Africa by 2063, and acknowledging the emphasis
in Agenda 2063 on peace and security as critical enablers for sustainable development,
Reaffirming further its resolution 70/1 of 25 September 2015, entitled “Transforming our world: the 2030
Agenda for Sustainable Development”, in which it adopted a comprehensive, far-reaching and people-centred set of
universal and transformative Sustainable Development Goals and targets, its commitment to working tirelessly for
the full implementation of the Agenda by 2030, its recognition that eradicating poverty in all its forms and dimensions,
including extreme poverty, is the greatest global challenge and an indispensable requirement for sustainable
development, its commitment to achieving sustainable development in its three dimensions – economic, social and
environmental – in a balanced and integrated manner, and to building upon the achievements of the Millennium
Development Goals and seeking to address their unfinished business,
Reaffirming its resolution 69/313 of 27 July 2015 on the Addis Ababa Action Agenda of the Third International
Conference on Financing for Development, which is an integral part of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development, supports and complements it, and helps to contextualize its means of implementation targets with
concrete policies and actions, and reaffirms the strong political commitment to address the challenge of financing and
creating an enabling environment at all levels for sustainable development in the spirit of global partnership and
solidarity,
Stressing that the responsibility for peace and security in Africa, including the capacity to address the root causes
of conflict and to resolve conflicts in a peaceful manner, lies primarily with African countries, while recognizing the
need for the provision of support by the international community and the United Nations, taking into account the
responsibilities of the Organization in this regard according to the Charter of the United Nations,
Underscoring the importance of continuing the efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to
prevent and settle conflicts and promote human rights, democracy, the rule of law and constitutional order in Africa,
Recognizing, in particular, the capacity of the African Union and subregional organizations to address the causes
of conflict in Africa,
Noting that, despite the positive trends and advances in obtaining durable peace in Africa, the conditions required
for sustainable development have yet to be consolidated throughout the continent and that there is therefore an urgent
need to continue to develop African human and institutional capacities, particularly in countries emerging from conflict,
_______________
129

Resolution 60/1.
Resolution 63/1.
131
Resolution 70/1.
132
Resolution 66/288, annex.
133
Resolution 67/259.
130

86

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Reaffirming the commitment to ensure that there shall be no tolerance for impunity for genocide, war crimes
and crimes against humanity or for violations of international humanitarian law and gross violations of human rights
law, and that such violations shall be properly investigated and appropriately sanctioned, including by bringing the
perpetrators of any crimes to justice, through national mechanisms or, where appropriate, regional or international
mechanisms, in accordance with international law, and for that purpose encouraging States to strengthen national
judicial systems and institutions,
Underscoring the importance of taking into account lessons learned from the 1994 genocide against the Tutsi
in Rwanda, during which Hutu and others who opposed the genocide were also killed,
Reaffirming the need to strengthen the synergy between Africa’s economic and social development programmes
and its peace and security agenda,
Recognizing the importance of aligning international support with Africa’s own priorities, including but not
limited to industrialization, youth employment, the eradication of poverty and the reduction of inequalities, aimed at
the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development through action-oriented efforts,
Underlining the importance of enhancing national and regional initiatives, with international support, to address
the negative implications of the illegal exploitation of natural resources in all its aspects for peace, security and
development in Africa, and condemning the illicit trade in and proliferation of arms, especially small arms and light
weapons,
Acknowledging that the achievement of durable peace and sustainable development in countries in conflict and
post-conflict situations requires that national Governments and international partners continue to develop coordinated
approaches tailored to the peacebuilding needs and challenges faced by those countries,
Emphasizing the importance of a comprehensive approach to sustaining peace, particularly through the
prevention of conflict and addressing its root causes, strengthening the rule of law at the international and national
levels, and promoting sustained and sustainable economic growth, poverty eradication, social development,
sustainable development, national reconciliation and unity, including through inclusive dialogue and mediation,
access to justice and transitional justice, accountability, good governance, democracy, accountable institutions, gender
equality and respect for, and protection of, human rights and fundamental freedoms, recognizing that effective
peacebuilding must involve the entire United Nations system, and in this regard emphasizing the importance of joint
analysis and effective strategic planning across the United Nations system in its long-term engagement in conflictaffected countries and, where appropriate, in cooperation and coordination with regional and subregional
organizations,
Reaffirming, in this regard, the importance of the Peacebuilding Commission as a dedicated mechanism to
address, within its existing mandate and in an integrated manner, the special needs of countries emerging from conflict
towards recovery, reintegration and reconstruction and to assist them in laying the foundation for peace and sustainable
development, taking into consideration national priorities and the principle of national ownership,
Reaffirming also the primary responsibility of national Governments and authorities in identifying, driving and
directing priorities, strategies and activities for sustaining peace, and in this regard emphasizing that inclusivity is key
to advancing national peacebuilding processes and objectives in order to ensure that the needs of all segments of
society are taken into account,
Welcoming the adoption of Security Council resolution 2413 (2018) and General Assembly resolution 72/276,
on 26 April 2018, reaffirming Council resolution 2282 (2016) and Assembly resolution 70/262, both of 27 April 2016,
on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding architecture, affirming the importance of sustaining peace, and
recognizing the importance of their implementation for strengthening the Peacebuilding Commission and enabling it
to realize its full potential, in accordance with Assembly resolution 60/180 and Council resolution 1645 (2005), both
of 20 December 2005, and Assembly resolution 65/7 and Council resolution 1947 (2010), both of 29 October 2010,
and in this regard taking note of the outcome report of the Cairo regional workshop held in November 2014, which
provides perspectives from Africa on the need to consolidate the regional dimension in the activities of the
Peacebuilding Commission in Africa,134
_______________
134

See A/69/654-S/2014/882.

87

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Encouraging the United Nations system, the African Union and subregional organizations to enhance their
interaction with civil society, including women’s and youth associations, academia and research institutions, on issues
relevant to the promotion of peace, security and sustainable development in Africa, and welcoming the ongoing efforts
in this regard, including by the Office of the Special Adviser on Africa,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations
contained in his report on the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development
in Africa;135
2. Welcomes the progress made by African countries, the African Union and subregional organizations in
conflict prevention, peacemaking, peacekeeping, peacebuilding and development, calls for intensified efforts and a
coordinated approach among national Governments, the African Union, subregional organizations, the United
Nations system and relevant partners in addressing those challenges, with a view to achieving further progress towards
the goal of a conflict-free Africa, and in this regard recognizes the important role played by civil society organizations,
including women’s organizations;
3. Recalls the adoption of the African Union Agenda 2063 and its first 10-year implementation plan
(2014–2023), which outlines key African flagship projects, fast-track programmes, priority areas, specific targets and
African strategies and policy measures at all levels, and acknowledges the importance of supporting the
implementation of the plan;
4. Welcomes, in this regard, the high-level events organized during the 2017 Africa Week on the theme
“Supporting an integrated, prosperous, people-centred and peaceful Africa: towards the implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”, organized by the Office of the Special Adviser on
Africa, in close partnership with the African Union Commission, the Planning and Coordination Agency of the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development, the African Peer Review Mechanism, regional economic communities and the
United Nations system;
5. Also welcomes the commitment of the African leaders to Africa’s political, social and economic integration
agenda and to the ideal of pan-Africanism and African renaissance, as well as the pledge to “end all wars in Africa
by 2020” and “achieve the goal of a conflict-free Africa”, as affirmed in the solemn declaration adopted on 26 May
2013 on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary of the Organization of African Unity/African Union, expresses its
readiness to contribute, and calls upon all, in particular relevant United Nations entities, to help to achieve this goal,
including by considering defining a concrete five-year actionable plan in support of the goal of achieving a conflictfree Africa by 2020;
6. Underlines the importance of the strategic partnerships among the United Nations, the African Union and
the regional economic communities, including in promoting an integrated and coherent implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development131 and the African Union Agenda 2063;
7. Notes the ongoing efforts of the African Union, in collaboration with regional economic communities and
development partners, including the United Nations system, to develop an action plan towards implementing the
decision of the 2013 solemn declaration that the continent would “silence the guns by 2020”, and calls upon Member
States and the United Nations system, as appropriate, to intensify their support and cooperation with African countries,
the African Union and the African regional economic communities and relevant regional mechanisms towards the
timely realization of the goal of silencing the guns by 2020;
8. Takes note, in this regard, of the high-level expert group meeting on the theme “Tackling the
socioeconomic root causes of conflict towards achieving the goal of a conflict-free Africa in the context of the
implementation of Africa’s transformative Agenda 2063 and the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development”,
held in Cairo on 16 and 17 November 2015;
9. Reaffirms the need to promote and protect effectively the human rights and fundamental freedoms of all
migrants, regardless of their migration status, especially those of women and children, and to address international
migration through international, regional or bilateral cooperation and dialogue and through a comprehensive and
balanced approach, recognizing the roles and responsibilities of countries of origin, transit and destination in
_______________
135

88

A/72/269-S/2017/780.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

promoting and protecting the human rights of all migrants and avoiding approaches that might aggravate their
vulnerability, and recognizes in this regard the importance of the New York Declaration for Refugees and Migrants,
adopted at the high-level plenary meeting of the General Assembly on addressing large movements of refugees and
migrants, held on 19 September 2016;136
10. Underlines the need to address the economic, social and environmental impact of climate change,
desertification and land degradation in Africa, and highlights the importance of enhancing efforts to strengthen the
implementation of initiatives aimed at enhancing resilience in Africa, in particular the Comprehensive Africa
Agriculture Development Programme and other initiatives launched under the leadership of the African Union
Commission such as the Great Green Wall and the Land Policy Initiative, as well as initiatives launched by African
countries such as the Adaptation of African Agriculture and the Security, Stability and Sustainability initiatives;
11. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union and subregional organizations to strengthen their
peacekeeping capacity in peacekeeping operations on the continent, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter
of the United Nations and in close coordination with the United Nations, through the Peace and Security Council of
the African Union, as well as the ongoing efforts to develop a continental early warning system, strengthen the
readiness of the African Standby Force and enhance mediation capacity and preventive diplomacy, including through
the Panel of the Wise;
12. Recognizes the growing and emerging challenges and risks facing United Nations peacekeeping
operations and political missions, and in this regard takes note of the report of the High-level Independent Panel on
Peace Operations137 and the report of the Secretary-General entitled “The future of United Nations peace operations:
implementation of the recommendations of the High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations”,138 as well as the
recommendations supported by Member States in the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations,139 in particular on prevention, mediation and stronger global regional partnerships, including between the
United Nations and the African Union, and encourages the Security Council, as appropriate, to consult with relevant
regional organizations, particularly the African Union, especially if transitioning from a regional to a United Nations
peacekeeping operation;
13. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the peace consolidation mechanisms
and processes, including the African Peace and Security Architecture, the African Governance Architecture, the
African Union Post-Conflict Reconstruction and Development Framework and the African Union Centre for PostConflict Reconstruction and Development, in order to fully contribute to conflict prevention, peacemaking initiatives,
peacebuilding and post-conflict reconstruction;
14. Calls upon Member States to assist African countries in post-conflict situations, at their request, in
achieving a smooth transition from relief to development and to support relevant United Nations bodies, including
the Peacebuilding Commission;
15. Calls upon the United Nations system, the international community and all partners to support the efforts
of African countries to promote political, social and economic inclusion;
16. Stresses the importance of creating an environment conducive to national reconciliation and social and
economic recovery in countries emerging from conflict;
17. Calls upon the international community to enhance support and fulfil its commitments to take further
action in areas critical to Africa’s economic and social development, in the spirit of win-win cooperation and to create
a shared future, based upon our common humanity, and welcomes the efforts by development partners to strengthen
cooperation with the New Partnership for Africa’s Development;140

_______________
136

Resolution 71/1.
See A/70/95-S/2015/446.
138
A/70/357-S/2015/682.
139
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-first Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/71/19).
140
A/57/304, annex.
137

89

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Invites the United Nations and the donor community to increase efforts to support ongoing regional efforts
to build African mediation and negotiation capacity;
19. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to support the African Union in its effort to
effectively integrate training in international humanitarian law and international human rights law, with particular
emphasis on the rights of women and children, into the training of civilian, police and military personnel of national
standby contingents at both the operational and tactical levels, as set out in article 13 of the Protocol relating to the
Establishment of the Peace and Security Council of the African Union;
20. Recognizes that international and regional efforts to prevent conflict and consolidate peace in Africa
should be channelled towards the sustainable development of Africa and the human and institutional capacity-building
of African countries and organizations, particularly in priority areas identified at the continental level;
21. Welcomes, in this regard, the joint visits of the Secretary-General and the President of the World Bank to the
countries of the Horn of Africa in October 2014, and to the Great Lakes region in May 2013, as well as the joint visit of
the Secretary-General, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission, the President of the World Bank, the President
of the African Development Bank and the European Union Commissioner for Development to the Sahel region in
November 2013, and calls for the fulfilment of all the pledges made to support peace and development in these regions;
22. Also welcomes the adoption of its resolution 71/254 of 23 December 2016 on the Framework for a
Renewed United Nations-African Union Partnership on Africa’s Integration and Development Agenda 2017–2027,
and calls upon the Secretary-General to provide, as appropriate, predictable support for full, effective and efficient
implementation of the Framework;
23. Affirms the importance of the role of the Interdepartmental Task Force on African Affairs and the Regional
Coordination Mechanism for Africa in ensuring greater coherence and coordination of United Nations system support
to Africa, including support to the African Union, particularly in the areas of conflict prevention and conflict
resolution, human rights, governance and the rule of law, and post-conflict reconstruction and development;
24. Stresses the critical importance of a regional approach to conflict prevention, in particular with respect to
cross-border issues such as transnational organized crime, drug trafficking, disarmament, demobilization, repatriation,
resettlement and reintegration programmes, the prevention of illegal exploitation of natural resources and trafficking
in high-value commodities and the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons in all its aspects, and emphasizes in
this regard the central role of the African Union and subregional organizations in addressing such issues;
25. Expresses grave concern about the growing threat posed by terrorism to the peace, security and social and
economic development of Africa, takes note of the communiqué of the Peace and Security Council summit on the
prevention and combating of terrorism and violent extremism in Africa, held in Nairobi on 2 September 2014, and
encourages the United Nations to work with African countries, the African Union and the regional economic
communities to support the development and implementation of regional and national counter-terrorism action plans;
26. Calls upon United Nations counter-terrorism entities, within existing mandates, and Member States to
provide assistance and capacity-building towards Africa’s efforts to counter violent extremism and terrorism;
27. Calls upon the United Nations system, the African Union and the international community to intensify
their cooperation in the global fight against terrorism through the implementation of the relevant international and
regional treaties and protocols and, in particular, the Plan of Action on the Prevention and Combating of Terrorism in
Africa of the African Union, as well as their support for the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism,
based in Algiers;
28. Takes note of the decision on the establishment of the African Union Special Fund on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and Violent Extremism in Africa, adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the African Union at its twenty-seventh ordinary session, held in Kigali on 17 and 18 July 2016, and
encourages the United Nations system and Member States to support the efforts of the African Union in this regard;
29. Welcomes the initiative by the Secretary-General, and takes note of his Plan of Action to Prevent Violent
Extremism;141
_______________
141

90

See A/70/674.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

30. Notes with concern that violence against women and children, including sexual violence, continues and
may increase even as armed conflicts draw to an end, urges further progress in the implementation of policies and
guidelines relating to the protection of and assistance to women and children in conflict and post-conflict situations in
Africa, including more systematic monitoring and reporting, notes the adoption by the General Assembly and the
Security Council of relevant resolutions, and encourages the entities that compose United Nations Action against
Sexual Violence in Conflict, as well as other relevant parts of the United Nations system, to assist the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict in the implementation of her mandate,
including in Africa;
31. Also notes with concern the tragic plight of children in conflict situations in Africa, in particular the
phenomenon of the recruitment and use of children by parties to armed conflicts, as well as other violations and abuses
committed against children, stresses the need for the protection of children in armed conflicts and for ensuring that
the protection and rights of children in armed conflicts are integrated into all peace processes, also stresses the need
for post-conflict counselling, reintegration, rehabilitation and education, with due regard for the relevant resolutions
of the General Assembly and the Security Council, and encourages the relevant parts of the United Nations system to
assist the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict in the implementation of
her mandate, including in Africa;
32. Stresses the importance of addressing the socioeconomic dimension of youth unemployment, as well as
facilitating the enhanced participation of youth in decision-making processes, with a view to addressing social,
political and economic challenges;
33. Calls for the enhancement of the role of youth in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and post-conflict peacebuilding, consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions
2250 (2015) and 2419 (2018) on youth, peace and security;
34. Welcomes the decision of the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union to
proclaim “Winning the fight against corruption: a sustainable path to Africa’s transformation” as the theme for 2018;
35. Calls for the enhancement of the role of women in conflict prevention, conflict resolution, peacekeeping and
post-conflict peacebuilding, consistent with relevant Security Council resolutions, including resolutions 1325 (2000),
1820 (2008) and 2242 (2015) on women and peace and security, and welcomes in this regard the report of the SecretaryGeneral containing the results of the global study on the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000),142 recognizes with
appreciation all the work undertaken for the global study, and encourages follow-up of its recommendations;
36. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of the rights of women in
conflict and post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption and entry into force of the Protocol to the
African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, the Solemn Declaration on Gender
Equality in Africa, the African Union Gender Policy, the African Union five-year Gender, Peace and Security
Programme, 2015–2020, the declaration by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African Union of
2015 as the Year of Women’s Empowerment and Development towards Africa’s Agenda 2063 and the Southern
African Development Community Protocol on Gender and Development, as well as the Framework of Cooperation
concerning the Prevention and Response to Conflict-related Sexual Violence in Africa signed by the African Union
Commission and the United Nations, stresses the significance of those instruments for all countries in Africa for
strengthening the role of women in peace and conflict prevention on the continent, strongly urges the United Nations
and all relevant parties to redouble their efforts and support in this regard, and recalls the decision of the African Union
to declare 2016 as the African Year of Human Rights with Particular Focus on the Rights of Women;
37. Also welcomes the ongoing efforts of the African Union to ensure the protection of children in conflict and
post-conflict situations, recalls in this regard the adoption and entry into force of the African Charter on the Rights and
Welfare of the Child, as well as the declaration signed on 17 September 2013 by the Office of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Children and Armed Conflict and the Peace and Security Department of
the African Union Commission, in order to mainstream protection mechanisms in all peace and security activities of
the African Union, in close partnership with the United Nations Children’s Fund, and stresses the significance of those
instruments for all countries in Africa in protecting children affected by armed conflicts on the continent;
_______________
142

S/2015/716.

91

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

38. Takes note of the African Union Convention for the Protection and Assistance of Internally Displaced
Persons in Africa, which entered into force on 6 December 2012, and the Kampala Declaration on Refugees,
Returnees and Internally Displaced Persons in Africa, adopted on 23 October 2009;
39. Calls for the safeguarding of the principle of refugee protection in Africa and the resolution of the plight
of refugees, including through support for efforts aimed at addressing the causes of refugee movement and bringing
about the voluntary, dignified, safe and sustainable return and reintegration of those populations, and calls upon the
international community, including Member States, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and other relevant United Nations organizations, within their respective mandates, to take concrete action
to meet the protection and assistance needs of refugees, returnees and displaced persons and to contribute generously
to projects and programmes aimed at alleviating their plight, facilitating durable solutions for refugees and displaced
persons and supporting vulnerable local host communities;
40. Recognizes the important contribution of the African Peer Review Mechanism since its inception in
improving governance and supporting socioeconomic development in African countries;
41. Takes note of the decision adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union at its summit in January 2017 on the revitalization of the African Peer Review Mechanism, expanding the
monitoring and evaluation mandate of the Mechanism, and invites the United Nations system and Member States to
provide voluntary substantial financial and capacity-building support to the Mechanism to advance its activities;
42. Welcomes African-led initiatives to strengthen political, economic and corporate governance, such as the
African Charter on Democracy, Elections and Governance and the African Peer Review Mechanism, encourages
more African countries to participate in this process, and calls upon the United Nations system and Member States to
assist African countries and regional and subregional organizations, upon their request, in their ongoing efforts to
promote democracy, constitutional order and the rule of law, to enhance good governance and to continue to fight
against impunity, as well as in the holding of free, fair, inclusive, peaceful and transparent elections;
43. Recognizes the role of the Peacebuilding Commission in ensuring that national ownership of the
peacebuilding process in conflict-affected countries is observed and that nationally identified priorities are at the core
of international and regional efforts in peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the countries under consideration, notes
the important steps taken by the Commission in engaging with a broad range of country and regional situations,
including Burundi, the Central African Republic, the Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Sierra Leone, the Sahel and
the Great Lakes, and calls for sustained regional and international commitment to the implementation of nationally
identified peacebuilding priorities;
44. Also recognizes the progress made by the Peacebuilding Commission in enhancing its relationship with
regional and subregional organizations in Africa, in particular the African Union, including among others through
visits of the Chair of the Commission to the headquarters of the African Union in 2016 and 2017 and through a joint
event of the Commission and the Peace and Security Council held on 18 July 2018, and in this regard welcomes the
signing of a memorandum of understanding on peacebuilding between the Peacebuilding Support Office and the
African Union Commission on 18 September 2017 with a view to strengthening the collaboration between the United
Nations and the African Union to provide a framework and strengthen cooperation in support of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts in Africa;
45. Further recognizes the profound socioeconomic impact of diseases, inter alia, the Ebola virus disease, in
Central and West Africa, including on the capacity to provide basic services and economic activities, expresses deep
concern about the potential reversal, due to the Ebola outbreak, of the gains made by the affected countries in
development, peacebuilding, political stability and the reconstruction of socioeconomic infrastructure in recent years,
and encourages effective measures and targeted investments to overcome these difficulties and to support recovery
priorities, including the importance of maintaining strong surveillance and response systems and building strong and
resilient national health systems, particularly in the most affected countries, in line with the outcome of the
International Ebola Recovery Conference, held in New York on 10 July 2015 and the International Health Regulations
(2005) adopted by the World Health Assembly;143
_______________
143

92

World Health Organization, document WHA58/2005/REC/1, resolution 58.3, annex.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

46. Acknowledges the particular challenges infectious disease outbreaks pose in conflict-affected areas and
their effect on health crisis management, as health systems in areas of conflict are often compromised and ill-equipped
to deal with the threat posed by infectious disease outbreaks, and strongly condemns violence attacks and threats
directed against medical personnel and facilities, which have long-term consequences for the civilian population and
the health-care systems of the countries concerned, as well as for the neighbouring regions, and have a negative impact
on sustainable development;
47. Calls upon the United Nations system, and invites Member States, to assist African countries emerging
from conflict, upon their request as appropriate, in their efforts to build national capacities, including through national
security sector reform strategies, the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration of ex-combatants, including
children formerly associated with armed forces or armed groups, the provision for the safe return of internally
displaced persons and refugees, the launch of income-generation activities, particularly for youth and women, and the
delivery of basic public services;
48. Urges continued support for measures to address the challenges of poverty eradication and hunger, job
creation and sustainable development in Africa, including, as appropriate, debt relief, improved market access, support
for the private sector and entrepreneurship, fulfilment of commitments on official development assistance and
increased flows of foreign direct investment and transfer of technology on mutually agreed terms;
49. Recognizes the need for African countries to make continued efforts to create enabling environments for
inclusive growth in support of sustainable development and for the international community to make continued efforts
to increase the flow of new and additional resources for financing for development from all sources, public and private,
domestic and foreign, to support those development efforts by African countries, and welcomes the various important
initiatives established between African countries and their development partners in this regard;
50. Calls upon the United Nations system and Member States, bilateral and multilateral partners and new
partners to deliver expeditiously on commitments and to ensure the full and speedy implementation of the provisions
of the political declaration on Africa’s development needs,130 as well as the implementation of the New Partnership
for Africa’s Development;
51. Encourages African Governments to strengthen structures and policies in order to create an environment
conducive to the promotion of inclusive economic growth and to attracting foreign direct investment, by, inter alia,
continuing to achieve a transparent, stable and predictable investment climate, with proper contract enforcement and
respect for property rights, and to promote socioeconomic development and social justice, calls upon African Member
States and regional and subregional organizations to assist the African countries concerned, at their request, by
enhancing their capacity to devise and improve their national natural resources and public revenue management
structures, and in this regard invites the international community to assist in that process by providing adequate
financial and technical assistance and by renewing its commitment to efforts aimed at combating the illegal
exploitation of the natural resources of those countries, in conformity with international law;
52. Recalls relevant resolutions on the strengthening of cooperation and communication between the
United Nations and regional and subregional organizations or arrangements, and encourages coordination and
cooperation between the United Nations system and regional and subregional organizations and regional economic
communities in advocacy and in the mobilization of the support of the international community for African
countries and towards the priorities of their continental and regional institutions;
53. Welcomes the convening of the first United Nations-African Union annual conference at the level of
the Secretary General and the Chairperson of the African Union Commission at United Nations Headquarters on
19 April 2017 and the signing of the Joint United Nations-African Union Framework for Enhanced Partnership in
Peace and Security, and the signing of the African Union-United Nations Framework for the Implementation of
Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development on 27 January 2018, and underlines the
importance of enhancing the partnership between the two organizations in all areas of peace, security and
sustainable development;
54. Emphasizes the importance of deepening cooperation between the United Nations and the African
Union, based on consultations, regular meetings at all levels, shared analysis, comparative advantages and division
of labour to better address today’s challenges, in accordance with Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations;
93

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

55. Notes the completion of the review of the implementation of the recommendations contained in the 1998
report of the Secretary-General,144 and requests the Secretary-General to develop, in consultation with relevant
partners, policy proposals on issues identified in his report, including enhancing cooperation among the United
Nations, the African Union and subregional organizations, particularly in conflict prevention and resolution,
peacekeeping, post-conflict peacebuilding and recovery, and promoting socioeconomic development, good
governance, the rule of law and human rights;
56. Takes note of the recommendations presented by the Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its
sixty-seventh session on possible ways to strengthen the interdepartmental task force on African affairs,145
including through enhancing joint advocacy for international support to Africa, assisting in the mobilization of
support for the implementation of relevant programmes and initiatives in Africa and championing approaches and
solutions that take into account the enabling environment that peace and security provide for development, and
reaffirms the need to ensure further coherence and an integrated approach for United Nations support to Africa,
including in following up on the implementation of all global summit and conference outcomes related to Africa;
57. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor and report to the General Assembly on an annual
basis on persistent and emerging challenges to the promotion of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa,
including the root causes of conflict and conditions to promote sustainable development, as well as on the approach
and support of the United Nations system.
RESOLUTION 72/312
A/RES/72/312

Adopted at the 115th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2018, without a vote, on the basis of draft resolution A/72/L.69 and
A/72/L.69/Add.1, sponsored by: Bangladesh, Belarus, Burundi, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Guatemala, Indonesia, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Russian Federation,
Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, Uruguay, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of)

72/312. United Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse
The General Assembly,
Recalling the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations and international law,
Recalling also its resolutions 71/278 of 10 March 2017 on United Nations action on sexual exploitation and
abuse, 72/304 of 13 July 2018 on the comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in
all their aspects, 71/297 of 30 June 2017 on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and abuse
and 72/112 of 7 December 2017 on criminal accountability of United Nations officials and experts on mission, and
taking note of Security Council resolutions 2242 (2015) of 13 October 2015 and 2272 (2016) of 11 March 2016,
1. Reaffirms its commitment to the zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse throughout the
United Nations system, including the agencies, funds and programmes, and takes note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral;146
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Sexual
exploitation and abuse: implementing a zero-tolerance policy”, and requests the Secretary-General to continue to
report, pursuant to resolution 57/306 of 15 April 2003, on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation
and abuse, including on progress made in implementing a zero-tolerance policy within the United Nations system,
for consideration by the General Assembly, in line with existing mandates and procedures.

_______________
144

A/52/871-S/1998/318.
See A/67/205/Add.1-S/2012/715/Add.1.
146
A/72/751 and A/72/751/Corr.1.
145

94

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

RESOLUTION 72/313
AR
/ ES/72/313

Adopted at the 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, without a vote, on the basis of the report of the Ad Hoc Working
Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General Assembly (A/72/896, para. 89)

72/313. Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly
The General Assembly,
Reaffirming its resolution 71/323 of 8 September 2017 and all other previous resolutions relating to the
revitalization of the work of the General Assembly,147
Acknowledging that resolution 71/323 constitutes an important contribution to the strengthening of the role,
authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General Assembly as established by the Charter of the United Nations,
Underlining the need to further enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the General
Assembly,
Reiterating that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is a critical component of the overall
reform of the United Nations,
Emphasizing the need to align the agenda of the General Assembly in full support of the implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,148
Welcoming the calls to increase the efficiency of the work of the General Assembly through streamlining its
agenda, including by elimination of duplication and overlap of agenda items,
Recognizing the role of the General Assembly in addressing issues of peace and security, in accordance with the
Charter, and acknowledging its role and authority, established in Article 10 of the Charter, to make recommendations
to the Members of the United Nations or to the Security Council or to both, on questions or matters within the scope
of the Charter, except as provided in Article 12 thereof,
Stressing the role of the General Assembly in taking forward the major reforms of the Organization, including
reforms proposed by the Secretary-General, as contained in resolutions 72/199 of 20 December 2017, 72/266 A of
24 December 2017 and 72/279 of 31 May 2018, adopted during its seventy-second session,
Reaffirming the central position of the General Assembly as the chief deliberative, policymaking and
representative organ of the United Nations, as well as the role of the Assembly in the process of standard-setting and
the codification of international law,
Reaffirming also the authority and increasing role of the General Assembly in global matters of concern to the
international community, including in global governance, as set out in the Charter,
Mindful of the need to provide all Permanent Missions, regardless of their size and capacities, with ample
opportunity to participate in the work of the General Assembly and its Main Committees,
Mindful that we have yet to achieve full gender and geographical balance within the United Nations, while
encouraging further intergovernmental efforts in this regard, and convinced of the need to guarantee equal
opportunities for women and men from all regional groups in their access to senior decision-making positions,
including to the post of Secretary-General, bearing in mind the need to secure the highest standards of efficiency,
competence and integrity,
Welcoming, in this regard, the efforts of the Secretary-General in achieving gender parity at senior management
level, in particular the initiation of the system-wide strategy on gender parity,

_______________
Resolutions 46/77, 47/233, 48/264, 51/241, 52/163, 55/14, 55/285, 56/509, 57/300, 57/301, 58/126, 58/316, 59/313, 60/286, 61/292,
62/276, 63/309, 64/301, 65/315, 66/294, 67/297, 68/307, 69/321 and 70/305.
148
Resolution 70/1.
147

95

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

Recalling the conclusion of the process of selection and appointment of the ninth Secretary-General, which was
characterized by an enhanced degree of transparency, accountability and inclusivity, in accordance with resolutions
69/321 of 11 September 2015 and 70/305 of 13 September 2016,
Recalling also the fact that women constituted more than half of all of the candidates for Secretary-General
presented by Member States in accordance with resolution 69/321, and emphasizing the need to strive for gender
balance in the selection of other executive heads,
Recalling further that the selection and appointment of the Secretary-General should be considered in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter, and taking into account all relevant General Assembly
resolutions, and recalling the exclusively international character of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and
the necessity of securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity,
Affirming that the work of the President of the General Assembly and of the Office of the President of the
General Assembly shall be guided by the rules of procedure of the General Assembly and the principles of universality,
objectivity, non-selectivity, constructive international dialogue and cooperation,
Welcoming the efforts of the President of the General Assembly to reinvigorate the revitalization of the work of
the Assembly during its seventy-second session,
1. Welcomes the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the Revitalization of the Work of the General
Assembly and the updated inventory of Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed thereto;149
2. Takes note with appreciation of the multilingual web page devoted to the revitalization of the work of the
General Assembly, accessible directly from the United Nations website, which exists in all six official languages,
including an overview of major outcomes achieved under this agenda item, and invites the Secretariat to continue
updating regularly and equally that web page and its substantive content in a cost-effective manner;
3. Decides to establish, at its seventy-third session, an ad hoc working group on the revitalization of the work
of the General Assembly, open to all Member States:
(a) To identify further ways to enhance the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, inter
alia, by building on the progress achieved in past sessions as well as on previous resolutions, including evaluating the
status of their implementation;
(b)

To submit a report thereon to the Assembly at its seventy-third session;

4. Also decides that the Ad Hoc Working Group shall continue its review of the inventory of General
Assembly resolutions on revitalization annexed to the report of the Ad Hoc Working Group submitted at the seventysecond session and, as a result, continue to update the inventory to be attached to the report to be submitted at the
seventy-third session of the Assembly, including the separate indication of relevant provisions that were not
implemented, with reasons therefor;
5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General,150 and requests the Secretary-General to submit an
update on the provisions of the General Assembly resolutions on revitalization addressed to the Secretariat for
implementation that have not been implemented, with an indication of the constraints and reasons behind any lack of
implementation, for further consideration by the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventy-third session;
Role and authority of the General Assembly
6. Reaffirms the role and authority of the General Assembly, including on questions relating to international
peace and security, in accordance with Articles 10 to 14 and 35 of the Charter of the United Nations, where
appropriate, using the procedures set forth in rules 7 to 10 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, which enable
swift and urgent action by the Assembly, bearing in mind that the Security Council has the primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, in accordance with Article 24 of the Charter;
_______________
149
150

96

A/72/896.
A/72/736.

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

7. Recognizes that implementation of General Assembly resolutions, including those related to the
revitalization of its work, enhances the role, authority, effectiveness and efficiency of the Assembly, and underlines
the important role and responsibility of Member States in their full implementation;
8. Reaffirms that the relationship between the principal organs of the United Nations is mutually reinforcing
and complementary, in accordance with and with full respect for their respective functions, authority, powers and
competencies as enshrined in the Charter, and in this regard stresses the importance of further ensuring increased
cooperation, coordination and the exchange of information among the Presidents of the principal organs and also with
the Secretariat, in particular the Secretary-General;
9. Recalls the practice of holding periodic informal briefings by the Secretary-General on his priorities,
travels and most recent activities, including his participation in international meetings and events organized outside
the United Nations, and invites the Secretary-General to continue this practice;
10. Welcomes the holding of an interactive and comprehensive dialogue between the Permanent Missions and
the Secretariat on 5 April 2018, as mandated in resolution 71/323, aimed at improving the work of the Secretariat in
its interaction with the Permanent Missions, and requests the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group to continue
to convene the interactive dialogue within the framework of the Ad Hoc Working Group, aimed at:
(a)

Identifying issues in the interaction of the Secretariat with the Permanent Missions;

(b) Identifying solutions in better meeting the needs and requirements of the Permanent Missions regarding
standard operating procedures used at United Nations Headquarters in New York;
11. Reiterates its decision to hold thematic dialogues periodically during the work of the Ad Hoc Working
Group and to review this arrangement at the seventy-third session of the General Assembly;
12. Invites Member States to submit, through the Co-Chairs of the Ad Hoc Working Group, and prior to the
holding of the interactive and comprehensive dialogue, specific issues on which action by the Secretariat might be
needed, and requests the Secretariat to provide comprehensive answers within a reasonable amount of time on the
possible actions, and impediments, if any, to solve the issues raised;
13. Welcomes, in this regard, the active participation by the Secretariat during the seventy-second session, and
in particular notes with appreciation the establishment of a “one stop shop” as a single entry point for requesting
meetings services, while encouraging the Secretariat to make similar arrangements for other services provided;
14. Recognizes the value of holding interactive inclusive thematic debates on current issues of critical
importance to the international community, and calls upon the President of the General Assembly to organize such
debates in close consultation with the General Committee and the Member States, including with regard to the
frequency and preliminary programme of such debates, in order to enable an adequate level of participation and an
appropriate allocation of time for substantive interactive discussion during the debates so as to enable all interested
delegations to state their positions and to facilitate, where appropriate, results-oriented and productive outcomes of
such debates, and in this context welcomes the initiative of the President of the Assembly at its seventy-second session
to select “Focusing on people: striving for peace and a decent life for all on a sustainable planet” as the theme of the
general debate;
15. Recommends, in this regard, unless decided otherwise, that no other agenda items should be opened during
the dates allocated for the general debate;
16. Requests the President of the General Assembly to limit high-level meetings to current issues of critical
importance to the international community, with the interest of the wider membership in mind and with a focus on
the most vulnerable, while encouraging the allocation of events of a strictly sectoral or thematic nature to the six Main
Committees;
17. Commends improvements in the quality of the annual report of the Security Council to the General
Assembly, including as presented in the note by the President of the Security Council,151 and welcomes the
willingness of the Council to continue to consider other suggestions concerning improvements to the annual report;
_______________
151

S/2017/507.

97

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

18. Requests the Secretariat, including the Department of Public Information, while carrying out its activities,
as mandated by the General Assembly, to continue its efforts to raise the visibility of the Assembly and to enhance
world public and media awareness of the contribution made by the Assembly to the fulfilment of the goals of the
Organization, as set out in the Charter;
19. Requests the Secretary-General, under relevant agenda items, to bring to the attention of the Member
States constraints that have prevented the Secretary-General from implementing those provisions of General
Assembly resolutions that are addressed to the Secretariat;
Working methods
20. Reaffirms existing relevant mandates related to the improvement of the working methods of the Main
Committees, including section C of the annex to resolution 58/316 of 1 July 2004, paragraphs 7 to 13 of resolution
59/313 of 12 September 2005, cluster III of the annex to resolution 60/286 of 8 September 2006 and resolution
69/321, in particular paragraphs 16 and 17 thereof;
21. Emphasizes that the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly is interlinked with the
strengthening of the Main Committees;
22. Requests each Main Committee to further discuss its working methods at the beginning of every session,
and in this regard invites the Chairs of the Main Committees to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group during the seventythird session on any best practices and lessons learned with a view to improving working methods, as appropriate;
23. Requests the continuation of the established practice of holding handover meetings of the outgoing and
incoming bureaux to exchange views on outcomes and the upcoming agenda, and of presenting a report by the Chairs
of the Main Committees to their successors on best practices and lessons learned;
24. Requests the President-elect of the General Assembly to continue with the practice of meeting informally
with the incoming members of the General Committee before the beginning of the regular session in order to review
the proposed programme of work of the Main Committees, with a view to increasing their efficiency, improving
complementarity and avoiding overlap of meetings of the Main Committees to the extent possible, in order to allow
for wider participation by Member States;
25. Calls for the continuation of the practice of periodical meetings between the six Chairs of the Main
Committees during the session of the General Assembly to share best practices and increase the coherence and
complementarity of the work of the Main Committees;
26. Welcomes efforts to afford elected members of the Security Council appropriate opportunities to prepare
for their tenure, and also welcomes the note by the President of the Security Council in which the elected Council
members are invited to observe some of its meetings and activities as from 1 October immediately preceding their
term of membership;151
27. Emphasizes that the General Assembly and its Main Committees, at the seventy-third session, in
consultation with Member States, should continue their consideration of and make proposals for the further
biennialization, triennialization, clustering and elimination of items on the agenda of the Assembly, including through
the introduction of a sunset clause, with the clear consent of the sponsoring State or States, taking into account the
relevant recommendations of the Ad Hoc Working Group;
28. Recalls the Guidelines on the Rationalization of the Agenda of the General Assembly, as adopted in its
resolution 48/264 of 29 July 1994;
29. Also recalls the need to enhance synergies and coherence and reduce overlap where it is found to exist in
the agendas of the General Assembly, especially of its Second and Third Committees, the Economic and Social
Council and its subsidiary bodies, and the work of the high-level political forum on sustainable development convened
under the auspices of the Council and the Assembly, as well as all other related forums, in accordance with relevant
rules of procedure and in the light of the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development,148 and calls for
the continuation of such efforts during the seventy-third session of the Assembly;
30. Requests the General Committee, while exercising its functions under rule 40 of the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly, to pay special attention to reduction of such overlap;
98

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

31. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session to identify proposals, through
consultations with all Member States and the President of the Economic and Social Council, as well as through the
convening of the General Committee, aimed at addressing gaps and duplication in the agenda of the Assembly as they
relate to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, taking into account the report on the strategic alignment of
future sessions of the Assembly and other relevant inputs, for the consideration of Member States during the seventythird session of the Assembly;
32. Encourages Member States, in proposing and voting for candidates to subsidiary organs of the General
Assembly, to seek to promote gender balance in all such bodies;
33. Recalls rules 153 and 154 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and encourages the Chairs
of the Main Committees and the Secretary-General to ensure observance of these rules, within their respective
mandates;
34. Also recalls rule 72 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, and calls for strict adherence by
each speaker to the time limits in the Assembly, where applicable, bearing in mind that all speakers shall get the same
opportunity to deliver their statements within the allocated time limit, as set out in the rules of procedure of the
Assembly;
35. Reiterates its invitation to the Chairs of meetings of the General Assembly and United Nations
conferences, especially when there is very limited time available for debate, to consider recommending the “all
protocol observed” principle, whereby participants are encouraged to refrain from listing standard protocol
expressions during their statements;
36. Requests the Secretariat to ensure the availability through the eDelegate portal of provisional lists of
speakers at United Nations meetings and conferences not later than by the end of the business day preceding the
relevant meeting or conference;
37. Recommends that speakers should be mindful of the speed of statement delivery, bearing in mind the need
for accuracy of interpretation;
38. Urges all presiding officers and Member States to strictly adhere to the scheduled starting time of meetings
of the General Assembly and its subsidiary bodies;
39. Calls upon all officers chairing or facilitating intergovernmental processes to seek to conduct informal
negotiations during regular working hours, in order to allow for the active and constructive participation of all
Permanent Missions in the work of the United Nations;
40. Decides to continue to consider ways to rationalize the number of side events held during the high-level
segment of the general debate, bearing in mind the need to enhance its decorum and significance, and encourages the
scheduling of side events at United Nations Headquarters outside of the hours when the general debate is being held;
41. Takes note of the possibility for Member States to publish their side events under a dedicated section of
the digital version of the Journal of the United Nations;
42. Decides that, in addition to the general debate and the thematic meetings, the interactive and
comprehensive dialogue between the Permanent Missions and the Secretariat held within the Ad Hoc Working
Group, as outlined in paragraph 10 of resolution 71/323, shall be webcast;
43. Recalls its resolutions 1898 (XVIII) of 11 November 1963, 2837 (XXVI) of 17 December 1971, 45/45 of
28 November 1990, 51/241 of 31 July 1997, 58/126 of 19 December 2003 and 58/316, and reiterates its call to the
President of the General Assembly to continue to make full use of the General Committee throughout the session,
with a view to reviewing the programme of work of the Assembly and its Main Committees, in line with rule 42 of
the rules of procedure of the Assembly;
44. Reiterates its invitation to the President of the General Assembly and the Chairs of the Main Committees,
in consultation with the General Committee and Member States, as well as to the Secretary-General, to enhance the
coordination of the scheduling of the meetings of the Assembly, including high-level meetings and high-level
thematic debates, with a view to optimizing their interactivity, effectiveness and distribution throughout the session,
and to consider ways to decrease the number of high-level events held during the general debate;
99

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

45. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in order to enhance transparency, to continue to attach
the list of speakers at high-level thematic debates organized by the President to the summary of those events;
46. Encourages the scheduling of future high-level meetings during the first half of the year, from within
existing resources, taking into account the calendar of conferences and without prejudice to the current practice of
convening one high-level meeting in September at the beginning of each session of the General Assembly;
47. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session a report on
the possible alternative dates for the beginning of the regular session of the Assembly152 and the financial and logistical
implications thereof, as well as on potential benefits and shortcomings of various options, based on the premise that
any such change will not have an effect on the beginning of the general debate in September;153
48. Decides to establish the pattern for the rotation of the Chairs of the Main Committees for the forthcoming
10 sessions of the General Assembly, namely from the seventy-fourth to the eighty-third session, as contained in the
annex to the present resolution;
49. Also decides to prepare arrangements concerning the rotation of the Chairs of the Main Committees for
the following sessions no later than at its eighty-second session;
50. Continues to encourage Member States to seek gender balance in the distribution of the Chairs and bureau
members of the Main Committees as well as the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly, where applicable;
51. Decides to continue to consider, within the Ad Hoc Working Group, the potential concept and scope of
guidelines on how to conduct the election campaigns by Member States, with a view to improving the standards of
transparency and equity;
52. Welcomes the efficient implementation of paragraphs 47 and 48 of resolution 71/323 relating to the
conduct of elections in the General Assembly and the Main Committees;
53. Notes the practice implemented during the secret vote-counting procedure, whereby no use of mobile
phones or other electronic communication devices is permitted in the room where counting is being conducted, thus
ensuring the confidentiality of elections and the integrity of secret ballots, and requests the continuation of this
practice;
54. Encourages Member States to make, to the extent possible, full use of e-services provided by the
Secretariat, in order to save costs and reduce the environmental impact and improve the distribution of documents,
and in this regard requests the Secretariat to further improve, harmonize and, where appropriate, unify such services,
under eDelegate, including the continuation of the practice of making available all official correspondence of the
United Nations addressed to the Member States;
55. Takes note of the introduction of real-time updates with respect to the cancellation and postponement of
meetings, and requests the continuation of this practice with further improvements, in particular with the introduction
of the possibility of subscribing to relevant agenda items with automatic notifications to subscribers on their status;
56. Emphasizes that multilingualism remains a core value of the Organization, and reaffirms the need to
achieve full parity among the six official languages in the United Nations, including on official websites;
57. Welcomes the publishing of electronic live versions of the Blue Book, the White Pages and the
Yellow Pages;
58. Takes note with appreciation of the changes to the format, production and editing of the Journal of the
United Nations, and requests the Secretariat to continue the improvement of the Journal in accordance with
requirements provided in paragraph 51 of resolution 71/323 and to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventythird session on the outcomes of that improvement;
59. Affirms the principle that the Journal shall provide an overview of all meetings taking place at the United
Nations, and requests that meetings be listed under the established categories in contiguous order and that all meetings
_______________
152

As contained in rule 1 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly.
The general debate shall begin on the Tuesday of the fourth week in September, counting from the first week that contains at least one
working day, and shall be held without interruption over a period of nine working days.
153

100

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

organized by States be included, provided that information has been submitted to the Journal unit in due time, and
clarifies that the existence of web pages for sessions of bodies should not preclude the announcement of side events;
60. Calls upon all relevant intergovernmental bodies to continue to review the need for and content of the
Journal summaries of their meetings and other announcements, and to take the steps necessary with a view to ensuring
a more streamlined format for the Journal of the United Nations;
61. Reiterates the need to produce the Journal in all six official languages in strict compliance with rule 55 of
the rules of procedure of the General Assembly;
62. Emphasizes the importance of the extension of the information in the Journal of the United Nations
published in the six official languages, reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to brief the Ad Hoc Working
Group, on a yearly basis, on the progress achieved in this regard, and requests the Secretariat to continue to explore
cost-neutral options to that effect;
63. Takes note of the concerns raised by multiple Member States regarding the prohibitive cost of the use of
the Delegates’ Dining Room and other venues at the United Nations by delegations for holding diplomatic events,
and requests the Secretary-General to provide, during the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, innovative
proposals on solutions for the existing situation, including the possibility of introducing certain elements in future
contracts with the vendor;
64. Requests the Secretariat to provide, in an electronic version only, a list containing the names of the
President and the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly and officers of the Main Committees, as well as members
of the Security Council, members of the Economic and Social Council and Member States and observers of the United
Nations;
Selection and appointment of the Secretary-General and other executive heads
65. Encourages future Presidents of the General Assembly to actively contribute to the implementation of
provisions guiding the selection and appointment of the ninth Secretary-General, as contained in all relevant
resolutions, in particular resolutions 69/321 and 70/305;
66. Reiterates that the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General differs from the process used
with regard to the executive heads of the organizations of the United Nations system, given the roles of the Security
Council and the General Assembly in accordance with Article 97 of the Charter, and emphasizes in particular that the
process of selection of the Secretary-General is guided by the principles of transparency and inclusiveness, building
on the best practices and the participation of all Member States;
67. Stresses, in particular, the need to ensure the appointment of the best possible candidate for the post of
Secretary-General, who embodies the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity and who
demonstrates a firm commitment to the purposes and principles of the United Nations, proven leadership and
managerial abilities, extensive experience in international relations and strong diplomatic, communication and
multilingual skills;
68. Also stresses that, in the course of the identification and appointment of the best candidate for the post of
Secretary-General, due regard shall continue to be given to regional rotation and to gender balance;
69. Reaffirms its commitment to continue, in the Ad Hoc Working Group, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 97 of the Charter, its thorough consideration of the issues under the third thematic cluster of the Working
Group, on the revitalization of the work of the General Assembly, including the examination of innovative ways to
improve the process of selecting and appointing the Secretary-General and other executive heads in all its aspects, and
recalls all relevant resolutions, including resolutions 11 (I) of 24 January 1946, 46/77 of 12 December 1991, 47/233 of
17 August 1993, 48/264, 51/241, 52/163 of 15 December 1997, 55/14 of 3 November 2000, 55/285 of 7 September
2001, 56/509 of 8 July 2002, 57/300 of 20 December 2002, 57/301 of 13 March 2003, 58/126, 58/316, 59/313,
60/286, 61/292 of 2 August 2007, 62/276 of 15 September 2008, 63/309 of 14 September 2009, 64/301 of
13 September 2010, 65/315 of 12 September 2011, 66/294 of 17 September 2012, 67/297 of 29 August 2013,
68/307 of 10 September 2014, 69/321, 70/305 and 71/323, reaffirming the applicable procedures set out in the rules
of procedure of the Assembly, in particular rule 141, and acknowledging existing relevant practices of the Assembly;
70. Calls upon the President of the General Assembly to monitor and review the implementation by the
Assembly of these resolutions;
101

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

71. Recalls that informal dialogues and meetings with candidates for the post of Secretary-General, as
provided for in paragraph 42 of its resolution 69/321, are an important part of the selection and appointment process,
and encourages the President of the General Assembly to further improve, in close consultation with Member States,
the modalities of these dialogues in order to increase their efficiency and interactivity with Member States;
72. Recognizes the possibility of providing the process of selection and appointment of the Secretary-General
with notional timelines based on its resolution 69/321 and other relevant resolutions;
73. Welcomes the collaboration between the General Assembly and the Security Council in launching the
process and circulating information on the nominated candidates during the most recent selection of the SecretaryGeneral, and encourages improvement in the interaction between the Council and the Assembly in all stages of the
process to further enhance transparency;
74. Decides to review the oath of office of the Secretary-General during its seventy-third session;
75. Welcomes the ongoing efforts of the Secretary-General towards achieving equal and fair distribution in
terms of the gender and geographical balance of the executive heads of the United Nations system and the Senior
Management Group of the Organization, while securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity,
in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter and its resolutions 46/232 of 2 March 1992, 51/241, and 71/263 of
23 December 2016, commends in particular the fact that gender parity was achieved in the Senior Management
Group, and requests that further effective measures be taken in this regard;
76. Takes note of the call by the Secretariat to all Member States encouraging the nomination of candidates
to supplement the Secretary-General’s search to ensure a wide pool of candidates for positions at the senior level;
77. Recalls its resolution 52/12 B of 19 December 1997, in particular paragraph 2 thereof, in which it notes
that the Secretary-General will appoint the Deputy Secretary-General following consultations with Member States,
stresses that the process of appointments to senior posts by the Secretary-General within the Organization should be
inclusive and transparent, in accordance with relevant rules of procedure and as set out in the Charter, and in this
context calls upon the Secretary-General to announce such vacancies well in advance;
78. Stresses the need to ensure equal and fair distribution based on gender balance and as wide a geographical
basis as possible, and in this regard recalls its resolutions 46/232 and 51/241, adopted without a vote, which contain
the principles that the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity are the paramount considerations in
the recruitment and performance of international civil servants and that, as a general rule, there should be no monopoly
on senior posts in the United Nations system by nationals of any State or group of States;
79. Reiterates its request that the Secretary-General continue his ongoing efforts to ensure the attainment of
equitable geographical distribution and gender balance in the Secretariat, while recalling its resolution 71/263, in
particular the paragraphs thereof related to equitable geographical distribution and gender balance;
80. Requests the Office of Human Resources Management of the Secretariat to continue with the practice of
providing a briefing to the Ad Hoc Working Group on the gender balance and regional origin of the executive heads
of the United Nations system and the Senior Management Group of the Organization, and takes note of the practice
of distributing said briefing to the Member States;
81. Invites the specialized agencies, funds and programmes to maintain updated information regarding the
past and present executive heads on their official websites in order to strengthen transparency, as well as accessibility
of the historical record;
82. Requests the Secretariat to brief the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventy-third session on the issue of
candidacies of senior United Nations officials currently holding office, in order to enhance transparency and equity
of the appointment process;
Strengthening the accountability, transparency and institutional memory of the Office of the President
of the General Assembly
83. Commends the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session for strengthening the
transparency and inclusivity of his Office, including through continuing the practices outlined in paragraph 66 of
resolution 71/323, and for voluntarily presenting the summary of his personal financial disclosure, and requests future
Presidents of the Assembly to follow these good practices;
102

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

84. Notes with appreciation the views expressed by the Office of the President of the General Assembly to
the Ad Hoc Working Group on the strengthening of the accountability, transparency and institutional memory of the
Office of the President and its relationship with the Secretariat and the measures already taken in this regard, while
continuing to explore additional measures where feasible, and notes the support provided by the General Assembly
and Economic and Social Council Affairs Division of the Department for General Assembly and Conference
Management of the Secretariat to the Office of the President;
85. Encourages the President of the General Assembly to continue the practice of periodically briefing
Member States on his or her activities, including official travel;
86. Commends the initiative of convening a retreat on the strengthening of the General Assembly, which
brings together the incoming and outgoing presidencies of each session of the Assembly;
87. Stresses the importance of continuing with the practice of providing a handover report from the President
of the General Assembly to their successors and all Member States, as well as of further efforts to improve archiving
and record-keeping by the Office of the President of the General Assembly;
88. Strongly welcomes the organization of informal dialogues with candidates for the position of President of
the General Assembly, as well as the circulation of vision statements, as outlined in paragraph 73 of resolution 71/323;
89. Requests the Ad Hoc Working Group to establish, in close consultation with the President of the General
Assembly, the guidelines for the informal interactive dialogue with candidates for the position of President of the
General Assembly, including the question of participants, duration and format;
90. Highly commends the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session for introducing the
morning dialogues, envisaged as informal discussions among Permanent Representatives on the substantive and
practical aspects of work of the Assembly, and strongly encourages the continuation of the valuable practice of regular
meetings between the President and the Permanent Representatives;
91. Invites the Presidents of the General Assembly to maintain the practice of holding monthly meetings with
the Secretary-General and the President of the Security Council in order to ensure cooperation, coordination and
exchange of information on cross-cutting issues related to the work of the Organization;
92. Expresses deep satisfaction that at the seventy-third session, and for the fourth time in its history, the
General Assembly will have a female President, in this regard invites Member States to consider presenting women
as candidates for the position of future Presidents of the General Assembly, and encourages Presidents-elect to
continue to ensure respect for balanced gender and geographical representation in the Office of the President of the
General Assembly, both in terms of numbers and level of responsibility, without prejudice to professional
qualifications of potential candidates;
93. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the Ad Hoc Working Group at the seventy-third session of the
General Assembly on the sources of funding and staffing of the Office of the President of the General Assembly,
including on any technical, logistical, protocol-related or financial questions, and for more clarification on the
budgetary basis for the provision of such support by the Secretariat;
94. Recalls its request to the Secretary-General and its invitation to the heads of specialized agencies, funds
and programmes, upon request by the President of the General Assembly, to consider seconding staff to work in the
Office of the President of the General Assembly on a more systematic basis;
95. Notes that the activities of the President of the General Assembly have increased markedly in recent years,
recalls provisions regarding support for the Office of the President of the General Assembly in previous resolutions,
and expresses continued interest in seeking ways to further support the Office, in accordance with existing procedures,
in particular rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, as well as to continue discussions within the Ad Hoc
Working Group on further steps to strengthen the Office;
96. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, in the context of the proposed programme budget for 2020,
proposals to review the budget allocation of the Office of the President of the General Assembly, in accordance with
existing procedures, including rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, and taking into account the
deliberations of the Ad Hoc Working Group on the issue, and in this connection looks forward to considering such
proposals during the main part of its seventy-fourth session;
103

I. Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

97. Takes note of the practice of making non-staff programme budget resources available to Presidents of the
General Assembly from the date of their election;
98. Stresses the importance of the contributions of Member States to the trust fund in support of the Office of
the President of the General Assembly, and in this regard notes with appreciation the contributions that have been
made to the fund, and encourages Member States to continue to contribute to the fund and to allow for unspent
contributions from previous sessions to be made available for succeeding terms;
99. Welcomes the continuation of the practice of vetting all contributions from sources other than Member
States through the Ethics Office, and urges adherence to this practice;
100. Reiterates its call for non-in-kind contributions to be channelled through the trust fund, and welcomes
steps taken in this regard by the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-second session;
101. Requests the President of the General Assembly, in cooperation with the Secretariat, to report to the Ad
Hoc Working Group at the seventy-third session of the Assembly on the implementation of all mandates accorded to
her under the present resolution and previous relevant resolutions.
Annex
Pattern for the rotation of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly
Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee)

Second Committee

Third Committee

Fifth Committee

Sixth Committee

Seventy-fourth Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Asia-Pacific States

African States

Western
European and
other States

Asia-Pacific
States

Eastern
European
States

Seventy-fifth

Western European
and other States

African States

Asia-Pacific
States

Eastern
Latin American Latin American
European States and Caribbean and Caribbean
States
States

Seventy-sixth

African States

Latin American and
Caribbean States

Western
European and
other States

African States

Seventy-seventh Asia-Pacific States

Asia-Pacific States

Eastern
European States

Latin American Western
and Caribbean European and
States
other States

African States

Seventy-eighth Eastern European
States

African States

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Western
European and
other States

African States

Asia-Pacific
States

Session

104

First Committee

Eastern
Asia-Pacific
European States States

Seventy-ninth

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Eastern European
States

Asia-Pacific
States

African States

Latin American Western
and Caribbean European and
States
other States

Eightieth

Western European
and other States

Latin American and
Caribbean States

African States

Asia-Pacific
States

Eastern
Asia-Pacific
European States States

Eighty-first

Asia-Pacific States

African States

Eastern
European States

Western
European and
other States

African States

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Eighty-second

Eastern European
States

Asia-Pacific States

Asia-Pacific
States

Latin American Western
and Caribbean European and
States
other States

African States

Eighty-third

African States

Latin American and
Caribbean States

Latin American
and Caribbean
States

Eastern
Asia-Pacific
European States States

Western
European and
other States

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political
and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)
Contents
Resolution
number

72/304.

Title

Page

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects...........................................106

105

II. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political and Decolonization Committee (Fourth Committee)

RESOLUTION 72/304
A/RES/72/304

Adopted at the 106th plenary meeting, on 13 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/449/Add.1, para. 6)1

72/304. Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2006 (XIX) of 18 February 1965 and all other relevant resolutions,
Recalling in particular its resolution 71/314 of 19 July 2017,
Affirming that the efforts of the United Nations in the peaceful settlement of disputes, including through its
peacekeeping operations, are indispensable,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations to continue to improve its capabilities in the field of peacekeeping
and to enhance the effective and efficient deployment of its peacekeeping operations,
Considering the contribution that all States Members of the United Nations make to peacekeeping,
Noting the widespread interest in contributing to the work of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping
Operations expressed by Member States, in particular troop- and police-contributing countries,
Bearing in mind the continuous necessity of preserving the efficiency and strengthening the effectiveness of the
work of the Special Committee,
1.

Welcomes the report of the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations;2

2. Endorses the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee contained in
chapter V of its report;
3. Urges Member States, the Secretariat and relevant organs of the United Nations to take all steps necessary
to implement the proposals, recommendations and conclusions of the Special Committee;
4. Reiterates that those Member States that become personnel contributors to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in years to come or that participate in the future in the Special Committee for three consecutive years as
observers shall, upon request in writing to the Chair of the Special Committee, become members at the following
session of the Special Committee;
5. Decides that the Special Committee, in accordance with its mandate, shall continue its efforts for a
comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects and shall review the
implementation of its previous proposals and consider any new proposals so as to enhance the capacity of the United
Nations to fulfil its responsibilities in this field;
6. Requests the Special Committee to submit a report on its work to the General Assembly at its seventythird session;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Comprehensive
review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects”.

_______________
1
2

106

The draft resolution recommended in the report was sponsored in the Committee by: Argentina, Canada, Egypt, Japan, Nigeria and Poland.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 19 (A/72/19).

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee*
Contents
Resolution
number

Title

Page




72/8.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors ...................................................109
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................109

72/258.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals........................................................................110
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................110

72/259.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur......................................................................112
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................112

72/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti ..................................................................................115
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................115

72/262.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019 ................................................................117
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................117
Resolution C ..............................................................................................................................................................................119

72/266.

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations.....................................................................................................123
Resolution B ..............................................................................................................................................................................123

72/269.

Joint Inspection Unit .................................................................................................................................................................125

72/270.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch...........127

72/285.

Rates of reimbursement to troop- and police-contributing countries.....................................................................................127

72/286.

Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda .............................................................................................128

72/287.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy .........................................................................................129

72/288.

Support account for peacekeeping operations .........................................................................................................................130

72/289.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei.......................................................................................138

72/290.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic ................................................................................................................................................141

72/291.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire .................................................................................................144

72/292.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus ..........................................................................................145

72/293.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .............148

72/294.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti ............................................................................................151

72/295.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo ......................................................................153

72/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia...............................................................................................................155

72/297.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali ............................................157

72/298.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force ........................................................................................160

_______________


Unless otherwise stated, the draft resolutions recommended in the reports were submitted by the Chair or another officer of the Bureau of the Committee.

107

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
Resolution
number

Title

Page

72/299.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon...................................................................................................162

72/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan .....................................................................................................166

72/301.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara ..............................................................168

72/302.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) ...............................................................171

72/303.

Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat ......................................................................173

108

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/8 B
A/RES/72/8B

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/572/Add.1, para. 6)

72/8.

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors

B1
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 71/261 B of 30 June 2017 and 72/8 A of 17 November 2017,
Having considered the financial report and audited financial statements for the 12-month period from 1 July
2016 to 30 June 2017 and the report of the Board of Auditors on United Nations peacekeeping operations,2 the report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United
Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 20173 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,4
1. Takes note of the audit opinions and findings, and endorses the recommendations, contained in the report
of the Board of Auditors;2
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;4
3. Acknowledges the usefulness of the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on
audit opinions and findings on peacekeeping operations and other related cross-cutting issues, contained in the report
of the Board of Auditors together with other relevant reports under the agenda item on financial reports and audited
financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors, and in this regard looks forward to considering the
conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee under this agenda item as well as under other relevant
agenda items, as appropriate;
4.

Commends the Board of Auditors for the quality of its report and the streamlined format thereof;

5. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of the recommendations of the
Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations for the financial period ended 30 June 2017;3
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the recommendations of the Board
of Auditors and the related recommendations of the Advisory Committee in a prompt and timely manner;
7. Also requests the Secretary-General to continue to indicate an expected time frame for the implementation
of the recommendations of the Board of Auditors and the priorities for their implementation, including the office
holders to be held accountable and measures taken in that regard;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to provide, in his next report on the implementation of the
recommendations of the Board of Auditors concerning United Nations peacekeeping operations, a full explanation
for the delays in the implementation of all outstanding recommendations of the Board, the root causes of the recurring
issues and the measures to be taken.

_______________
1

Resolution 72/8, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/8 A.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 5, vol. II (A/72/5 (Vol. II)).
3
A/72/756.
4
A/72/850.

109

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/258 B
A/RES/72/258B

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/669/Add.2, para. 6)

72/258. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
B5
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the proposed revised budget for the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2018–20196 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,7
Recalling its resolution 66/240 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which were resolutions
72/258 A of 24 December 2017 and 72/270 of 4 April 2018,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;6

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,7
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare an annual budget for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals on a trial basis, beginning with the budget for 2020, and also requests the Secretary-General to
conduct a review of this budgetary cycle for the Mechanism in 2022, following the completion of the first full
budgetary cycle;
4. Decides to review at its seventy-seventh session, with a view to taking a final decision, the implementation
of the annual budget;
5. Also decides to approve the establishment of eight new temporary posts (1 Assistant Secretary-General,
1 P-4 and 6 Security Service);
6.

Further decides to establish an additional post (D-1) in the Arusha branch, in Administration;

7. Decides to approve the proposed reclassification of one post of Associate Legal Officer (P-2) in Arusha
as a P-3 post;
8. Also decides to approve the proposed revised budget amounting to 196,024,100 United States dollars for
the Mechanism for the biennium 2018–2019;
9. Further decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals a total amount of 196,024,100 dollars gross (175,047,600 dollars net) for the biennium 2018–2019,
as detailed in the annex to the present resolution;
10. Decides that the total assessment for 2018 under the Special Account amounting to 10,215,450 dollars
shall consist of:
(a)

98,012,050 dollars, being half of the estimated appropriation approved for the biennium 2018–2019;

_______________
5

Resolution 72/258, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/258 A.
6
A/72/813 and A/72/813/Corr.1.
7
A/72/875.

110

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

(b)

Less 3,781,600 dollars, being the decrease in the final appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017;

(c) Less 84,015,000 dollars, being contributions assessed on Member States in respect of the commitment
authority approved by the General Assembly in section II of its resolution 72/258 A for the maintenance of the
Mechanism for the one-year period from 1 January to 31 December 2018;
11. Also decides to apportion the additional amount of 5,107,725 dollars gross (3,765,200 dollars net) among
Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations
for 2018;
12. Further decides to apportion the additional amount of 5,107,725 dollars gross (3,765,200 dollars net)
among Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments applicable to peacekeeping operations of the
United Nations for 2018;
13. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there shall
be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraphs 11 and 12 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of the estimated staff assessment income in the amount of 2,685,050
dollars approved for the Mechanism for 2018.
Annex
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals for the biennium 2018–2019
Net of staff
assessment

Gross
(United States dollars)

Estimated appropriation for the biennium 2018–2019

197 358 300

176 191 200

Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions

(1 608 000)

(1 380 800)

273 800

237 200

196 024 100

175 047 600

98 012 050

87 523 800

Requirements arising from the final appropriation for the biennium 2016–2017

3 781 600

4 568 800

Contributions assessed on Member States in respect of commitment authority approved
by the General Assembly in section II of its resolution 72/258 A for the maintenance of
the Mechanism for the one-year period from 1 January to 31 December 2018

84 015 000

75 424 600

Net contributions assessed on Member States for 2018

10 215 450

7 530 400

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to the regular budget of the United Nations for 2018

5 107 725

3 765 200

Contributions assessed on Member States in accordance with the scale of assessments
applicable to peacekeeping operations of the United Nations for 2018

5 107 725

3 765 200

Recommendations of the Fifth Committee
Estimated initial appropriation for the biennium 2018–2019
Total assessment for 2018
Requirements representing half of the estimated appropriation for the biennium 2018–2019
Less:

Of which:

111

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/259 B
A/RES/72/259B

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/671/Add.1, para. 6)

72/259. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
B8
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur9 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,10
Recalling Security Council resolution 1769 (2007) of 31 July 2007, by which the Council established the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur for an initial period of 12 months from 31 July 2007, and
the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2425 (2018) of 29 June 2018, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation until
13 July 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 62/232 A of 22 December 2007 on the financing of the Operation and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 72/259 A of 24 December 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Operation with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Noting the hybrid nature of the Operation, and in that regard stressing the importance of ensuring full
coordination of efforts between the African Union and the United Nations at the strategic level, unity of command at
the operational level and clear delegation of authority and accountability lines,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 247.9 million United States dollars,
representing some 2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 60 Member States have
paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Operation in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;

_______________
8

Resolution 72/259, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No.49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/259 A.
9
A/72/687 and A/72/794.
10
A/72/789/Add.7.

112

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,10 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Decides to allocate an amount of 32,666,800 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the
Operation;
10. Takes note of paragraph 24 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to abolish all posts that
have been vacant for 24 months or longer and have not been filled by June 2018;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Operation is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Operation for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;11
Estimates for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2018
14. Notes the strategic assessment undertaken by the Secretary-General, and requests the Secretary-General
to submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-third session a revised budget proposal for 2018/19
reflecting the decisions that may be taken by the Security Council;
15. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Operation in an amount not exceeding
385,678,500 dollars for the period from 1 July to 31 December 2018;
Financing of the commitment authority
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 26,956,024 dollars for the period from 1 to
13 July 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
17. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 760,046 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Operation for the period from 1 to 13 July 2018;
18. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 358,722,476 dollars for the period from
14 July to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 64,279,750 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
19. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 10,114,454 dollars, representing the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Operation for the period from 14 July to 31 December 2018;
_______________
11

A/72/687.

113

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Estimates for the support account for peacekeeping operations, the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda, for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
20. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur the amount of 26,866,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, comprising 19,906,800
dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 5,008,100 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy, and 1,952,000 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 938,897 dollars for the period from 1 to 13 July
2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for
2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 78,056 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 56,215 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 15,006 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 6,835 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
23. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 12,494,553 dollars for the period from
14 July to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 2,238,908 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
24. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,038,744 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 748,085 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 199,694 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 90,965 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
25. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 13,433,450 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 2,238,908 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,12 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Operation;
26. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 1,116,800 dollars, comprising the prorated share of 804,300 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 214,700 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 97,800 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
27. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 16 and 18 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 34,096,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
28. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 34,096,800 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 27 above;
_______________
12

114

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

29. Further decides that the decrease of 556,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 34,096,800 dollars
referred to in paragraphs 27 and 28 above;
30. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
31. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Operation under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
32. Invites voluntary contributions to the Operation in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur”.
RESOLUTION 72/260 B
A/RES/72/260B

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/670/Add.1, para. 6)

72/260. Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
B13
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice
Support in Haiti14 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15
Recalling Security Council resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April 2017, by which the Council established the
United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti, as a follow-on peacekeeping mission in Haiti, for an initial period
of six months from 16 October 2017 until 15 April 2018, and the subsequent resolution 2410 (2018) of 10 April 2018,
by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 April 2019,
Recalling also its resolution 72/260 A of 24 December 2017 on the financing of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti as at
30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 71.1 million United States dollars,
representing some 0.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only seven Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
_______________
13

Resolution 72/260, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No.49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/260 A.
14
A/72/793.
15
A/72/789/Add.12.

115

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,15 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Mission;

Decides to allocate an amount of 5,641,600 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
the amount of 129,301,900 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 121,455,900 dollars
for the maintenance of the Mission, 6,268,900 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
1,577,100 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 64,650,950 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,450,200 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 2,129,300 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 253,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 67,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 37,713,060 dollars for the period from
1 January to 15 April 2019, in accordance with the scale of assessments for 2019 and the updated levels;16
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,429,280 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,242,090 dollars
_______________
16

116

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 147,760 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 39,430 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 26,937,890 dollars for the period from
16 April to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 10,775,156 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,16 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
18. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 1,020,920 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 887,210 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 105,540 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account and the prorated share of 28,170 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
20. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
21. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
22. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti”.
RESOLUTIONS 72/262 B and C
A/RES/72/262BandC

72/262. Special subjects relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
Resolution B17
Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 April 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/681/Add.1, para. 6)

The General Assembly,
I
Standards of accommodation for air travel
Recalling its resolutions 37/240 of 21 December 1982 and 42/214 of 21 December 1987, section IV,
paragraph 14, of its resolution 53/214 of 18 December 1998, section XV of its resolution 62/238 of 22 December
2007, section II of its resolution 63/268 of 7 April 2009, section IV of its resolution 65/268 of 4 April 2011, section VI
of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013, section IV of its resolution 69/274 A of 2 April 2015 and section VI of its
resolution 71/272 B of 6 April 2017, as well as its decision 57/589 of 18 June 2003,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the standards of accommodation for air travel18 and
the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,19
_______________
17

Resolution 72/262, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/262 A.
18
A/72/716.
19
A/72/7/Add.44.

117

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having also considered the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
entitled “Review of air travel policies in the United Nations system: achieving efficiency gains and cost savings and
enhancing harmonization”20 and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United
Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon,21
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;18

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,19 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Recalls its resolution 71/272 B, regrets that the Secretary-General did not submit a comprehensive report
on standards of accommodation for air travel, and requests him to submit such a report to the General Assembly at
the first part of its resumed seventy-third session;
4. Expresses concern at the low rate of compliance with the advance purchase policy directive in all travel
categories, recalls paragraph 4 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to make
stronger efforts to further enhance the rate of compliance with the advance purchase policy directive across all travel
categories, in particular in the official travel category, taking into account the patterns and nature of official travel and
the reasons for non-compliance by each department, office and field mission;
5. Encourages the Secretary-General to include the advance purchase of tickets as a key performance
indicator in regular managerial and departmental performance evaluations, taking into account the specificity of
departments;
6. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to hold managers accountable for the judicious use of travel
resources, in particular by increasingly encouraging the use of alternative methods of communication and
representation and by giving primary consideration to authorizing official travel only where direct face-to-face contact
is necessary for mandate implementation;
7.

Takes note of paragraph 8 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to monitor industry best practices in the area of frequent flyer
miles and to report to the General Assembly on any new trends for making use of frequent flyer miles to improve the
administration of travel;
9.

Takes note of paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

10. Notes the decrease in the use of the lump-sum option;
11.

Takes note of paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

12. Decides to reinstate travel days and to maintain the 70 per cent lump-sum payment;
13. Looks forward to the results of the comprehensive analysis by the Secretary-General of the
implementation of the lump-sum payments option, including collection and analysis of Umoja travel information, as
well as the rate of acceptance of the lump-sum option by staff, to be presented to the General Assembly for
consideration during its seventy-third session;
14. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to eliminate the use of firstclass travel of United Nations staff members for their official travel;
15. Encourages non-staff members entitled to travel first class, with the exception of representatives of least
developed countries, to voluntarily downgrade to the class immediately below;
16. Requests the Secretary-General to include, in his report to the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session, an analysis and recommendations concerning a single threshold for the use of business class by staff below
the level of Assistant Secretary-General (and eligible family members) that should, in most years, be expected to
maximize the use of limited travel budgets;
_______________
20
21

118

A/72/629.
A/72/629/Add.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

17. Also requests the Secretary-General to encourage the voluntary use of economy- and premium economyclass travel instead of business class wherever possible;
18. Decides that the changes set out in the present resolution shall not affect the current standards of
accommodation for air travel and daily subsistence allowance of members of organs and/or subsidiary organs,
committees, councils and commissions of the United Nations;
19. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to limit the use of exceptions, to strengthen internal controls
in this regard and to report thereon in his next report on standards of accommodation for air travel;
20. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure that the procurement process for all air travel management
services contracts is conducted in full compliance with general procurement principles as set out in financial regulation
5.12, namely, (a) best value for money; (b) fairness, integrity and transparency; (c) effective international competition;
and (d) the interest of the United Nations,22 and to ensure that the procurement process includes the option of awarding
a contract to multiple vendors to allow for greater competition among selected vendors;
21. Encourages the International Civil Service Commission to assess system-wide standards of
accommodation for air travel and to present relevant recommendations to the General Assembly;
II
Proposed regional restructuring of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the proposed regional restructuring of the Office of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights23 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,24
Requests the Secretary-General to consider submitting a report, in line with established rules and procedures, to
the General Assembly for consideration at its seventy-fourth session, on a proposed regional restructuring of the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, if necessary.
Resolution C
Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/681/Add.2, para. 6)

The General Assembly,
I
Status of implementation of the information and communications technology strategy for the United Nations
Recalling section II of its resolution 60/283 of 7 July 2006, its resolutions 63/262 of 24 December 2008, 63/269
of 7 April 2009 and 64/243 of 24 December 2009, section XVII of its resolution 65/259 of 24 December 2010, its
resolution 66/246 of 24 December 2011, section I of its resolution 67/254 A of 12 April 2013, section XV of its
resolution 68/247 A of 27 December 2013, section II of its resolution 69/262 of 29 December 2014, paragraph 107 of
its resolution 70/247 of 23 December 2015, section V of its resolution 70/248 A of 23 December 2015, section II of
its resolution 70/238 B of 1 April 2016, section III of its resolution 71/272 B of 6 April 2017 and its resolution 71/281
of 6 April 2017,

_______________
22

See ST/SGB/2013/4.
A/71/218, A/71/218/Corr.1 and A/72/720.
24
A/71/584 and A/72/7/Add.45.
23

119

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered the report of the Secretary-General,25 the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the first
annual progress report of the Board of Auditors on the implementation of the information and communications
technology strategy26 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,27
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;25

2. Also takes note of the findings of the report of the Board of Auditors,26 and endorses the recommendations
contained therein;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;27
II
Estimates in respect of special political missions, good offices and other political initiatives authorized
by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council
Recalling section XXII of its resolution 72/262 A of 24 December 2017 and its resolution 72/263 A of
24 December 2017,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the estimates in respect of special political missions,
good offices and other political initiatives authorized by the General Assembly and/or the Security Council concerning
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan28 and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq,29 and
the related reports of the Advisory Committee,30
1.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;28,29

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee,30
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
3.

Decides to reduce resources for operational costs by 2,000,000 United States dollars;

4. Takes note of paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee,31 and decides to establish one
position of Senior Programme Officer (P-5) within the proposed Donor Coordination Section;
5. Decides not to establish one position of Assistant Human Rights Officer (National Professional Officer)
in Herat, Afghanistan, and one position of Human Rights Database Manager (United Nations Volunteer);
United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq
6.

Decides to reduce resources for operational costs by 2,000,000 dollars;

7. Recalls its stipulation that the use of external consultants should be kept to an absolute minimum and that
the Organization should use its in-house capacity to perform core activities to fulfil functions that are recurrent over
the long term;
8. Reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly entrusted
with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;

_______________
25

A/72/755/Rev.1.
A/72/151.
27
A/72/7/Add.51.
28
A/72/371/Add.9.
29
A/72/371/Add.10.
30
A/72/7/Add.47 and A/72/7/Add.48.
31
A/72/7/Add.47.
26

120

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Takes note of paragraph 12 of the report of the Advisory Committee,32 and decides to reclassify one
position of Gender Adviser (P-4) as a position of Senior Gender Adviser (P-5);
10. Decides not to establish one position of Human Rights Officer (P-4);
11. Urges the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to promote the nationalization of positions, whenever
appropriate, as well as to build local capacity within the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and to report
thereon in the context of future budget submissions;
12. Decides to approve a total amount of 255,924,400 dollars net of staff assessment for 2018 for the United
Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan (147,807,400 dollars) and for the United Nations Assistance Mission for
Iraq (108,117,000 dollars);
13. Also decides to approve a charge of 123,490,900 dollars against the provision for special political missions
appropriated under section 3, Political affairs, of the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, after taking into
account an amount of 132,433,500 dollars, approved for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and
the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq and included as a portion of the charge against the provision for special
political missions in accordance with General Assembly resolution 72/262 A;
III
Revised estimates relating to the programme budget for the biennium 2018−2019 under section 3,
Political affairs, and section 5, Peacekeeping operations, and the proposed budget for the support
account for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 related to
the peace and security reform
Recalling its resolution 72/199 of 20 December 2017,
Recalling also its resolution 70/262 of 27 April 2016 on the review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, and noting that the reform of the peace and security pillar is an opportunity to further advance and
strengthen conflict prevention,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General33 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,34
Commending the Secretary-General for his efforts to enhance the performance of the peace and security pillar
of the Secretariat,
Stressing that the actions to restructure the United Nations peace and security pillar should be implemented with
full respect for the relevant mandates, decisions and resolutions of the General Assembly and of the Security Council,
without changing established mandates, functions or funding sources of the peace and security pillar,
Stressing also that the prevention of conflicts remains a primary responsibility of States and that actions by the
United Nations undertaken within the framework of conflict prevention should support and complement, as
appropriate, the conflict prevention roles of national Governments,
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;33

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,34
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Reiterates its support for the vision of the Secretary-General for reforming the peace and security pillar,
and welcomes the whole-of-pillar approach to integrating political and operational responsibilities;
4. Endorses the establishment of the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and the Department
of Peace Operations;

_______________
32

A/72/7/Add.48.
A/72/772.
34
A/72/859.
33

121

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Recognizes the complementary roles of cultural change, leadership and accountability in the success of
structural changes;
6. Notes that dual reporting lines will exist between the Assistant Secretaries-General heading the single
political-operational structure and the Under-Secretaries-General for Peace Operations and for Political and
Peacebuilding Affairs, and requests the Secretary-General to keep the implementation of dual reporting lines
arrangements under close review and to take concrete actions to ensure that line management within the single
political-operational structure is clear, coherent and accountable;
7. Also notes the intention of the Secretary-General to establish and chair a Standing Principals’ Group to
provide unified leadership for strategic, political and operational responsibilities to facilitate coherence at
Headquarters and in the field, and requests the Secretary-General, without prejudice to the decision taken in the present
resolution, to present information on, inter alia, its functioning and composition, to the General Assembly at the main
part of its seventy-third session;
8. Recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to approve the relocation
of the D-2 post from New York to Nouakchott;
9. Decides to establish four stand-alone divisions for Africa, effective from 1 January 2019, within approved
resources, and requests the Secretary-General to present to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-third
session information on the organizational structure, taking into account views expressed by Member States;
10. Affirms, after considering the report of the Secretary-General, “Middle East Division” as the name of the
related new regional division;
11. Decides to place the current lead responsibility for the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
and the United Nations Assistance Mission for Iraq in the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs;
12. Recalls paragraph 32 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to consider the three posts in
the context of resolution 72/288 of 5 July 2018 on the support account for peacekeeping operations;
13. Takes note of paragraph 42 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
14. Recognizes the important contribution and increasing role of the police component in peacekeeping
operations, including their peacebuilding efforts, and requests the Secretary-General to conduct an assessment on the
functions, structure, capacity and level of the Police Division in the new structure and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to address the issue of equitable geographical representation of Member
States, in conformity with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations, at all levels of the two Departments and
to intensify his efforts to ensure proper representation of troop-contributing countries in the relevant new departments,
taking into account their contributions to United Nations peacekeeping, and to report thereon in the context of future
overview reports;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive review of the implementation of the
present resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fifth session;
IV
Global service delivery model for the United Nations Secretariat
Recalling section III of its resolution 67/246 of 24 December 2012, paragraph 13 of section VII of its resolution
69/262 of 29 December 2014, paragraph 19 of its resolution 69/273 of 2 April 2015, section XIX of its resolution
70/248 A of 23 December 2015 and section XVII of its resolution 71/272 A of 23 December 2016,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General35 and the related report of the Advisory Committee,36

_______________
35
36

122

A/72/801 and A/72/801/Add.1/Rev.1.
A/72/7/Add.50.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Having considered also the note by the Secretary-General transmitting the report of the Joint Inspection Unit
entitled “Administrative support services: the role of service centres in redesigning administrative service delivery”37
and the note by the Secretary-General transmitting his comments and those of the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination thereon,38
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;35

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee,36
subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3.

Takes note of paragraphs 10, 11 and 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee;

4. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, no later than at the first resumed part
of its seventy-third session, a new proposal for the global service delivery model which fully takes into account
paragraph 5 of the report of the Advisory Committee and the comments, observations and recommendations of the
Joint Inspection Unit,37 and to consult with Member States and relevant stakeholders and consider the views expressed
by them.
RESOLUTION 72/266 B
A/RES/72/266B

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/682/Add.2, para. 10)

72/266. Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations
B39
The General Assembly,
Recalling all its relevant resolutions, including resolutions 41/213 of 19 December 1986 and 72/266 A of
24 December 2017,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General entitled “Shifting the management paradigm in the
United Nations: implementing a new management architecture for improved effectiveness and strengthened
accountability”,40 as well as the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,41
1. Reaffirms the role of the General Assembly and its relevant intergovernmental and expert bodies, within
their respective mandates, in planning, programming, budgeting, monitoring and evaluation;
2. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibilities for administrative and budgetary matters, and reaffirms the role of the Committee in
carrying out a thorough analysis and in approving human and financial resources and policies, with a view to ensuring
full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and activities and the implementation of
policies in this regard;
3. Further reaffirms the role of the General Assembly with regard to the structure of the Secretariat, including
the creation, conversion, suppression and redeployment of posts;
4. Reaffirms the established budgetary procedures and methodologies, based on its resolutions 41/213, and
42/211 of 21 December 1987, and calls for strict adherence to the framework contained in its resolution 72/266 A;

_______________
37

A/72/299.
A/72/299/Add.1.
39
Resolution 72/266, in section VI of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No.49 (A/72/49),
vol. I, becomes resolution 72/266 A.
40
A/72/492/Add.2.
41
A/72/7/Add.49.
38

123

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly for its consideration and approval any
proposed amendments to the financial and staff regulations, along with the rationale for the proposed amendments;
6.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;40

7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,41 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
8. Welcomes the commitment of the Secretary-General to improving the ability of the United Nations to
deliver on its mandates through management reform;
9.

Stresses that accountability is a central principle of management reform;

10. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General towards a strong culture of accountability throughout the
Secretariat, acknowledges that a culture of accountability stems from the leadership of an organization, and stresses
that an effective accountability system is central to successful management of the Organization;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to develop a clear, simple and transparent system for
delegating authority, to ensure that responsibilities and accountability are aligned;
12. Underlines the crucial role of oversight bodies, including the Office of Internal Oversight Services, the
Board of Auditors and the Joint Inspection Unit, and calls upon the Secretary-General to make use of the expertise of
these bodies in the reform process, as appropriate, by implementing their relevant recommendations;
13. Decides to approve the reorganization of the current Department of Management and Department of Field
Support into the proposed new Department of Management Strategy, Policy and Compliance and Department of
Operational Support;
14. Takes note of paragraph 31 of the report of the Advisory Committee;
15. Requests the Secretary-General to put in place additional measures aimed at ensuring operational
effectiveness and strong internal controls for enhanced accountability;
16. Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventythird session, for its consideration and decision, a comparative assessment of placing human resources functions in a
single consolidated department or two distinct departments, with a view to ensuring a unified approach, optimizing
the distribution of functions and avoiding duplication;
17. Approves the proposed new subsections 29A to 29D of section 29, Management and support services, of
the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019;
18. Decides that the proposed Office of Finance and Budget shall be designated as the Office of Programme
Planning, Finance and Budget;
19. Approves the consolidation of the functions currently under the Office of Information and
Communications Technology of the Department of Management and the Information and Communications
Technology Division of the Department of Field Support;
20. Welcomes the proposal by the Secretary-General to create a new Uniformed Capabilities Support Division
as a single point of contact for troop- and police-contributing countries on all administrative and logistical issues
related to force generation, memorandums of understanding, contingent-owned equipment and reimbursement, and
requests the Secretary-General to further strengthen its role in order to streamline payments to troop- and policecontributing countries in a timely manner;
21. Decides to maintain the current name of the Headquarters Committee on Contracts and place its secretariat
within the Office of the Under-Secretary-General for the Department of Management Strategy, Policy and
Compliance;
22. Also decides that the proposed Enabling Section shall be established as an “Enabling and Outreach
Service”, to be headed at the D-1 level, tasked, inter alia, with outreach to Member States;
23. Requests the Secretary-General to submit proposals on strengthening the role of regional procurement
hubs, in particular the Regional Procurement Office in Entebbe, Uganda, in the context of his next report on
procurement;
124

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

24. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure compliance with the relevant resolutions, regulations and
rules governing United Nations procurement;
25. Further requests the Secretary-General to consider options for the Department of Management Strategy,
Policy and Compliance to have necessary and sufficient information to strengthen compliance and accountability in
the procurement function within the Secretariat, and to report thereon in the context of his next report on procurement;
26. Recognizes the high level of risk inherent in United Nations procurement activities, and requests the
Secretary-General to entrust the Office of Internal Oversight Services with continuing to monitor United Nations
procurement and report thereon biennially in conjunction with the related report of the Secretary-General on
procurement;
27. Decides that the proposed reorganization shall be implemented within the approved resources allocated
for the current Department of Management and Department of Field Support;
28. Requests the Secretary-General to undertake a comprehensive review of the implementation of the present
resolution and to report thereon to the General Assembly at the main part of its seventy-fifth session.
RESOLUTION 72/269
A/RES/72/269

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 April 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/810,
para. 6)

72/269. Joint Inspection Unit
The General Assembly,
Recalling its previous resolutions on the Joint Inspection Unit, in particular resolutions 31/192 of 22 December
1976, 50/233 of 7 June 1996, 54/16 of 29 October 1999, 56/245 of 24 December 2001, 57/284 A and B of
20 December 2002, 58/286 of 8 April 2004, 59/267 of 23 December 2004, 60/258 of 8 May 2006, 61/238 of
22 December 2006, 61/260 of 4 April 2007, 62/226 of 22 December 2007, 62/246 of 3 April 2008, 64/262 of
29 March 2010, 65/270 of 4 April 2011, 66/259 of 9 April 2012, 67/256 of 12 April 2013, 68/266 of 9 April 2014,
69/275 of 2 April 2015, 70/257 of 1 April 2016 and 71/281 of 6 April 2017,
Reaffirming the statute of the Unit42 and the unique role of the Unit as the only external and independent systemwide inspection, evaluation and investigation body,
I
Report of the Joint Inspection Unit
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2017 and programme of work for 201843 and the
note by the Secretary-General on the report of the Unit for 2017,44
1. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the Joint Inspection Unit for 2017 and programme of work
for 2018;43
2.

Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the report of the Unit for 2017;44

3. Reiterates its request to the executive heads of the participating organizations to comply fully with the
statutory procedures for consideration of the reports of the Unit and, in particular, to submit their comments, including
information on what they intend to do regarding the recommendations of the Unit, to distribute reports in time for
their consideration by legislative organs and to provide information on the steps to be taken to implement those
recommendations accepted by the legislative organs and the executive heads of participating organizations;
4. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General and the other executive heads of the participating
organizations to fully assist the Unit with the timely provision of all information requested by it;
_______________
42

Resolution 31/192, annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/72/34).
44
A/72/733.
43

125

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Requests the Secretary-General, and invites the executive heads of organizations participating in the Unit,
to take the necessary measures to ensure that the thematic reports of the Unit are listed under the appropriate
substantive agenda items of the work programmes of the General Assembly, other pertinent organs and bodies of the
United Nations and the appropriate legislative organs of the other participating organizations;
6. Stresses the importance of the oversight functions of the Unit in identifying concrete managerial,
administrative and programming questions within the participating organizations and providing the General Assembly
and other legislative organs of participating organizations with practical and action-oriented recommendations to
improve and strengthen the governance of the United Nations as a whole;
7. Reaffirms article 20 of the statute of the Unit,42 in which it is stipulated that the Unit shall be invited to be
represented at meetings when its budget estimates are being discussed;
8. Recognizes that the effectiveness of the Unit system-wide is a shared responsibility of the Unit, the
Member States and the secretariats of the participating organizations;
9. Also recognizes the need to continue to enhance the impact of the Unit on the management efficiency and
transparency of the participating organizations within the United Nations system;
10. Reiterates its request to the Unit to consider optimizing the number of projects in its programme of work
through prioritization;
11. Also reiterates its request to the Unit to continue to focus its reports on priority items of the participating
organizations and the States Members of the United Nations, including by taking into consideration the programme
of work of the General Assembly, with the aim of providing the Assembly and other legislative organs of participating
organizations with thematic reports of the Unit that can be used to maximum effect;
12. Welcomes the coordination of the Unit with the Board of Auditors and the Office of Internal Oversight
Services of the Secretariat, and encourages those bodies to continue to share experiences, knowledge, best practices
and lessons learned with other United Nations audit and oversight bodies, as well as with the Independent Audit
Advisory Committee, with a view to avoiding overlap or duplication and achieving further synergy, cooperation,
effectiveness and efficiency, without prejudice to the respective mandates of the audit and oversight bodies;
13. Also welcomes the completion of the migration of the web-based tracking system and the website of the
Unit to platforms hosted by the Secretariat, and requests the heads of participating organizations to make full use of
the web-based tracking system of the Unit;
II
Outcome of the review of the follow-up to the Joint Inspection Unit reports and recommendations
by the United Nations system organizations
Having considered the notes by the Secretary-General45 drawing to the attention of the General Assembly the
report of the Joint Inspection Unit entitled “Outcome of the review of the follow-up to the Joint Inspection Unit reports
and recommendations by the United Nations system organizations”46 and transmitting his comments and those of the
United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination thereon,47
1.

Takes note of the notes by the Secretary-General;45,47

2. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit to continue to provide an in-depth analysis of how the recommendations
of the Unit are being implemented;
3. Encourages the heads of participating organizations to examine possible options for improving
coordinated action, including through the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination, in
response to relevant recommendations of the Joint Inspection Unit;

_______________
45

A/72/704.
JIU/REP/2017/5.
47
A/72/704/Add.1.
46

126

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Reiterates its invitation to the legislative organs of the participating organizations to fully consider, discuss
and take concrete action in a timely manner on the relevant recommendations issued by the Unit, including follow-up,
as appropriate, taking into account the provisions of paragraph 4 of its resolution 50/233;
5. Requests the executive heads of the participating organizations who have not yet done so to establish a
direct reporting line from the Joint Inspection Unit focal points to top management.
RESOLUTION 72/270
A/RES/72/270

Adopted at the 81st plenary meeting, on 4 April 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/669/Add.1, para. 6)

72/270. Construction of a new facility for the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals,
Arusha branch
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 66/240 A of 24 December 2011, 66/240 B of 21 June 2012, 67/244 A of 24 December
2012, 67/244 B of 12 April 2013, 68/257 of 27 December 2013, 68/267 of 9 April 2014, 69/256 of 29 December
2014, 69/276 of 2 April 2015, 70/243 of 23 December 2015, 70/258 of 1 April 2016 and 71/282 of 6 April 2017,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General48 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,49
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;48

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions.49
RESOLUTION 72/285
A/RES/72/285

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/917,
para. 12)

72/285. Rates of reimbursement to troop- and police-contributing countries
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 67/261 of 10 May 2013 and 68/281 of 30 June 2014,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the results of the survey to support the review of the
standard rate of reimbursement to troop- and police-contributing countries50 and the related report of the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,51
1.

Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;50

2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,51 subject to the provisions of the present resolution;
3. Decides to establish a single rate of reimbursement to countries contributing contingent personnel to
United Nations field operations in the amount of 1,428 United States dollars per person per month as from
1 July 2018;
4.

Also decides to increase the death and disability compensation rates by 10 per cent as from 1 July 2018.

_______________
48

A/72/734.
A/72/785.
50
A/72/728.
51
A/72/771.
49

127

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/286
A/RES/72/286

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/917,
para. 12)

72/286. Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 69/307 of 25 June 2015, 70/289 of 17 June 2016 and 71/293 of 30 June 2017,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda,52 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,53
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 57/290 B of 18 June 2003, 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307, and
70/286 of 17 June 2016, and requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of their relevant
provisions;
2.

Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General;52

3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,53 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
4. Acknowledges the support of the Government of Uganda in facilitating the work of the United Nations at
the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
5. Recalls paragraph 13 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides not to abolish the post of
Service Delivery Manager (P-5);
6. Also recalls paragraph 22 of the report of the Advisory Committee, welcomes the nationalization of a
number of Field Service posts, and urges the Secretary-General to continue the implementation of the nationalization
plan and to report thereon in the context of the next budget submission;
7. Notes that the national staff of the Regional Service Centre are eligible for continuing contracts, and in
this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure that national staff of the Centre are granted continuing contracts
in line with the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions, in particular resolution 65/247 of 24 December
2010, and in compliance with the Staff Regulations and Rules of the United Nations;54
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
8. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Regional Service
Centre for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;55
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
9. Approves the amount of 31,438,900 United States dollars for the maintenance of the Regional Service
Centre for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;

_______________
52

A/72/639 and A/72/777.
A/72/789/Add.9.
54
ST/SGB/2017/1 and ST/SGB/2017/1/Corr.1.
55
A/72/639.
53

128

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the budget estimates
10. Decides that the requirements for the Regional Service Centre for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June
2019 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 2,983,200 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2017, to be applied against the resources required for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(b) The amount of 27,860,200 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(c) The amount of 595,500 dollars, to be charged against the appropriation under section 3, Political affairs,
of the programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019, as approved by the General Assembly in its resolutions
72/263 A to C of 24 December 2017;
(d) The estimated staff assessment income of 2,792,300 dollars, comprising the amount of 2,892,400 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 and the decrease of 100,100 dollars in respect of the period from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated
among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations;
11.
Centre.

Also decides to consider at its seventy-third session the question of the financing of the Regional Service

RESOLUTION 72/287
A/RES/72/287

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/917,
para. 12)

72/287. Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy
The General Assembly,
Recalling section XIV of its resolution 49/233 A of 23 December 1994 and its resolution 62/231 of
22 December 2007,
Recalling also its decision 50/500 of 17 September 1996 on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base
at Brindisi, Italy, and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/294 of 30 June 2017,
Recalling further its resolution 56/292 of 27 June 2002 concerning the establishment of the strategic deployment
stocks and its subsequent resolutions on the status of the implementation of the strategic deployment stocks, the latest
of which was resolution 71/294,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Logistics Base56
and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57
Reiterating the importance of establishing an accurate inventory of assets,
1. Notes with appreciation the facilities provided by the Government of Italy to the United Nations Logistics
Base at Brindisi, Italy, and by the Government of Spain to the secondary active telecommunications facility in
Valencia, Spain;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,57 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
_______________
56
57

A/72/648 and A/72/783.
A/72/789/Add.10.

129

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls paragraph 39 of the report of the Advisory Committee, looks forward to considering a proposal
on the revised concept of operations for strategic deployment stocks that takes into account the observations and
recommendations of the Office of Internal Oversight Services, and stresses the need for further analysis on enhanced
effectiveness, expected efficiencies and location issues;
5. Decides not to rename the Service for Geospatial, Information and Telecommunications Technologies as
the Field Technology Service;
6. Recalls paragraph 23 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and decides to approve the conversion of
six international general temporary assistance positions to posts: two positions of Information Systems Officer (P-4),
one position of Geospatial Information Systems Officer (P-3), one position of Environmental Engineer (P-3) and two
positions of Engineering Technician (Field Service);
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the United Nations
Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;58
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
8. Approves the cost estimates for the United Nations Logistics Base amounting to 82,448,900 United States
dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
Financing of the budget estimates
9. Decides that the requirements for the United Nations Logistics Base for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 1,280,600 dollars in respect of the financial
period ended 30 June 2017, to be applied against the resources required for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019;
(b) The balance of 81,168,300 dollars, to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping operations
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(c) The estimated staff assessment income of 6,959,100 dollars, comprising the amount of 6,610,400 dollars
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 and the increase of 348,700 dollars in respect of the period from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (b) above, to be prorated
among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations;
10. Also decides to consider at its seventy-third session the question of the financing of the United Nations
Logistics Base.
RESOLUTION 72/288
A/RES/72/288

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/917,
para. 12)

72/288. Support account for peacekeeping operations
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 45/258 of 3 May 1991, 47/218 A of 23 December 1992, 48/226 A of 23 December
1993, 48/226 C of 29 July 1994, 49/250 of 20 July 1995, 50/221 B of 7 June 1996, section I of its resolution 55/238
of 23 December 2000, its resolutions 55/271 of 14 June 2001, 56/241 of 24 December 2001, 56/293 of 27 June 2002,
57/318 of 18 June 2003, 58/298 of 18 June 2004, 59/301 of 22 June 2005, 60/268 of 30 June 2006, 61/279 of 29 June
2007, 62/250 of 20 June 2008, 63/287 of 30 June 2009, 64/271 of 24 June 2010, 65/290 of 30 June 2011, 66/265 of
_______________
58

130

A/72/648.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

21 June 2012, 67/287 of 28 June 2013, 68/283 of 30 June 2014, 69/308 of 25 June 2015, 70/287 of 17 June 2016 and
71/295 of 30 June 2017 and its other relevant resolutions, as well as its decisions 49/469 of 23 December 1994 and
50/473 of 23 December 1995,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017,59 on the budget for the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 201960 and on the comprehensive review of the
support account for peacekeeping operations,61 the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the
proposed budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 201962 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative
and Budgetary Questions,63
Recognizing the importance of the United Nations being able to respond and deploy rapidly to a peacekeeping
operation upon the adoption of a relevant resolution of the Security Council, within 30 days for traditional
peacekeeping operations and 90 days for complex peacekeeping operations,
Recognizing also the need for adequate support during all phases of peacekeeping operations, including the
liquidation and termination phases,
Mindful that the level of the support account should broadly correspond to the mandate, number, size and
complexity of peacekeeping missions,
1. Takes note of the reports of the Secretary-General on the budget for the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 201960 and on the comprehensive review of the support account
for peacekeeping operations,61 as well as the report of the Independent Audit Advisory Committee on the proposed
budget of the Office of Internal Oversight Services under the support account for peacekeeping operations for the
period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;62
2. Reaffirms its role in carrying out a thorough analysis and approval of human and financial resources and
policies with a view to ensuring the full, effective and efficient implementation of all mandated programmes and
activities and the implementation of policies in this regard;
3. Also reaffirms that the Fifth Committee is the appropriate Main Committee of the General Assembly
entrusted with responsibility for administrative and budgetary matters;
4.

Further reaffirms rule 153 of its rules of procedure;

5. Reaffirms that the support account funds shall be used for the sole purpose of financing human resources
and non-human resources requirements for backstopping and supporting peacekeeping operations at Headquarters,
and that any changes in this limitation require the prior approval of the General Assembly;
6. Also reaffirms the need for adequate funding for the backstopping of peacekeeping operations, as well as
the need for full justification for that funding in support account budget submissions;
7. Further reaffirms the need for effective and efficient administration and financial management of
peacekeeping operations, and urges the Secretary-General to continue to identify measures to increase the productivity
and efficiency of the support account;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016 and its other relevant
resolutions;
_______________
59

A/72/701 and A/72/701/Add.1.
A/72/790/Rev.1.
61
A/72/814.
62
A/72/766.
63
A/72/857.
60

131

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

9. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,63 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
10. Decides to maintain, for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, the funding mechanism
for the support account used in the current period, from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018, as approved in paragraph 3 of
its resolution 50/221 B;
11. Also decides to abolish two vacant posts in the Department of Safety and Security: one post of Security
Coordination Officer (P-4) and one post of Associate Training Officer (P-2);
12. Further decides not to redeploy the Associate Political Affairs Officer (P-2) post in the Asia, Middle East,
Europe and Latin America Division of the Office of Operations, the Political Affairs Officer (P-4) post in the Somalia
Coordination and Planning Team of the Office of Operations and the Political Affairs Officer (P-4) post in the
Partnership Team of the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division of the Department of Peacekeeping Operations;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
13. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the support account for
peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;59
Budget estimates for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
14. Approves the support account requirements in the amount of 324,703,500 United States dollars for the
financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of the amount of 28,859,100 dollars for the enterprise
resource planning project and 821,500 dollars for information and systems security, including 1,345 continuing posts
and 20 new temporary posts, as well as the abolishment, redeployment, reassignment and reclassification of posts, as
set out in annex I to the present resolution, and 57 continuing and 11 new general temporary assistance positions and
52 person-months, as set out in annex II, as well as related post and non-post requirements;
Financing of the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial periods from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 and from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
15. Decides that the requirements for the support account for peacekeeping operations for the financial period
from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 shall be financed as follows:
(a) The unencumbered balance in the amount of 324,400 dollars, in respect of the financial period from
1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017, to be applied to the resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019;
(b) The total amount of 813,800 dollars, comprising investment revenue of 811,000 dollars and other
miscellaneous revenue of 2,800 dollars in respect of the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017, to be applied to the
resources required for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(c) The amount of 928,800 dollars, representing the excess of the authorized level of the Peacekeeping
Reserve Fund in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, to be applied to the resources required for the
financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(d) The balance of 322,636,500 dollars to be prorated among the budgets of the active peacekeeping
operations for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019;
(e) The net estimated staff assessment income of 26,070,500 dollars, comprising the amount of 25,483,500
dollars for the financial period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019 and the increase of 587,000 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2017, to be offset against the balance referred to in subparagraph (d) above, to be
prorated among the budgets of the individual active peacekeeping operations.

132

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Annex I
A
Posts to be established under the support account for peacekeeping operations
for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
Posts
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number

Level

Function

Status

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

New

1

P-4

Investigator

3

P-3

Investigator

Conversion from general
temporary assistance

1

P-4

Forensic Investigator

1

P-3

Investigator

1

D-1

Deputy Director

1

P-5

Senior Investigator

2

P-4

Investigator

1

P-4

Forensic Investigator

5

P-3

Investigator

1

GS (PL)

Investigations Assistant

1

GS (OL)

Investigations Assistant

P-5

Senior Administrative
Officer

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Office of the Chief of Staff
Subtotal

1
1

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Investigations Division

Entebbe
Nairobi
Vienna

Subtotal

18

Secretariat of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions
1
Subtotal

1

Total

20

Conversion from general
temporary assistance

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the new posts is set out in the report of the Secretary-General (A/72/790/Rev.1) and
referenced in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions (A/72/857).

B
Redeployment, reassignment and abolishment of posts under the support account
for peacekeeping operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
Redeployment
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of the Under-Secretary-General/ Office of the Chief of Staff/Focal
Point for Security
Redeployment of 1 post (1 P-4 Occupational Safety Officer) from the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division/Policy
and Best Practices Service
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Investigations Division/Resident Investigations Office of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic
Redeployment of 1 post (1 P-4 Investigator) from the Resident Investigations Office of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti

133

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Resident Audit Office of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan
Redeployment of 1 post (1 P-4 Resident Auditor) from the Resident Audit Office of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Investigations Division/Resident Investigations Office of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Redeployment of 1 general temporary assistance position (1 P-3 Investigator) from the Resident Investigations Office
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Reassignment
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Investigations Division/New York
Reassignment of 1 post (1 P-3 Resident Auditor to be reassigned as 1 P-3 Investigator) from the Internal Audit
Division/Resident Audit Office of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Reassignment of 1 post (1 P-3 Resident Auditor to be reassigned as 1 P-3 Investigator) from the Internal Audit
Division/Resident Audit Office of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Abolishment
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Africa II Division
Abolishment of 2 posts (1 P-5 Senior Political Affairs Officer and 1 P-4 Political Affairs Officer)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Operations/Asia, Middle East, Europe and Latin America
Division
Abolishment of 2 posts (2 GS (OL) Team Assistant)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Military Affairs/Integrated Operational Team
Abolishment of 2 posts (1 P-5 Senior Military Liaison Officer and 1 P-4 Military Liaison Officer)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Military Affairs/Military Planning Section
Abolishment of 1 post (1 P-4 Planning Officer)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Military Affairs/Force Generation Service
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Team Assistant)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions/Police Division
Abolishment of 1 post (1 P-4 Police Liaison Officer)
Department of Peacekeeping Operations/Office of Rule of Law and Security Institutions/Strategic Policy and
Development Section
Abolishment of 1 post (1 GS (OL) Administrative Assistant)
Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Resident Audit Office of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia
Abolishment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Resident Auditor and 1 NGS Administrative Assistant)

134

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Office of Internal Oversight Services/Internal Audit Division/Resident Audit Office of the United Nations Mission
for Justice Support in Haiti
Abolishment of 1 post (1 P-4 Resident Auditor)
Department of Safety and Security
Abolishment of 2 posts (1 P-4 Security Coordination Officer and 1 P-2 Associate Training Officer)
Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level); GS (PL), General Service (Principal level); NGS, national
General Service.
Annex II
General temporary assistance positions to be established under the support account for peacekeeping
operations for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number Level

Function

Status

Department of Peacekeeping Operations
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Office of Rule of Law
and Security Institutions

Office of the Chief of Staff

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant
(organizational resilience)

Continuation

Executive Office

1

P-4

Human Resources Officer

Continuation

–

3 months,
1 P-4

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

2 months,
1 P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

2 months,
1 GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

Office of the Assistant
Secretary-General

1

P-4

Rule of Law and Security Institutions Continuation
Officer (United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic)

Justice and Corrections
Service

1

P-4

Judicial Affairs Officer

Continuation

Police Division

1

P-4

Police Programme Officer (United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic)

Continuation

Disarmament,
Demobilization and
Reintegration Section

1

P-4

Policy and Planning Officer
(disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration) (United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic)

Continuation

3 months,
1 P-3
3 months,
1 NGS

Leave replacement

Continuation

Leave replacement

Continuation

Subtotal

6

United Nations Office to the African Union
Administrative Support
Section

–
–
Subtotal

–

135

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number Level

Function

Status

Department of Field Support
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Conduct and Discipline Unit

1

P-3

Programme Officer

Continuation

Audit Response and Boards
of Inquiry Section

–

6 months,
1 P-3

Operational Review Officer

Continuation

Field Budget and
Finance Division

Memorandum of
Understanding and Claims
Management Section

2

P-3

Finance and Budget Officer

New

Field Personnel Division Field Personnel Specialist
Support Service

10

P-3

Human Resources Officer
(occupational groups)

Continuation

3

GS (OL)

Human Resources Assistant
(occupational groups)

Continuation

–

3 months,
1 P-4

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

3 months,
1 GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

Management Evaluation
Unit

1

P-3

Legal Officer

New

Peacekeeping Financing
Division

2

P-3

Finance and Budget Officer

Continuation

Accounts Division

1

P-4

Accountant (accounting policy)

Continuation

1

GS (OL)

Finance Assistant (insurance)

Continuation

Medical Service Division

1

P-4

Medical Officer

Continuation

Strategic Planning and
Staffing Division

1

P-4

Project Manager (data warehouse)

Continuation

1

P-4

Programme Officer

New

1

P-3

Human Resources Officer (mobility)

Continuation

Subtotal

16

Department of Management
Office of the UnderSecretary-General

Office of Programme
Planning, Budget and
Accounts

Office of Human
Resources Management

Executive Office

Office of Central
Support Services

Procurement Division

1

GS (OL)

Procurement Assistant

Continuation

Archives and Records
Management Section

–

5 months,
1 P-4

Information Management Officer

New

Office of Information
and Communications
Technology

Enterprise Applications
Centre Bangkok
(Bangkok office)

1

P-4

Project Manager (rations management Continuation
system)

1

P-3

Information Systems Officer (fuel
management system)

1

P-3

Information Systems Officer (customer Continuation
relationship management for the troop
contribution management project)

–

2 months,
2 P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

2 months,
3 GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

Enterprise Applications
Centre Bangkok
(New York office)
Subtotal

Continuation

13

Office of Internal Oversight Services
Executive Office

136

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Investigations Division

New York

Number Level

Status

1

P-4

Investigator

New

2

P-3

Investigator

New

1

GS (OL)

Administrative Assistant

New

1

P-4

Investigator

New

2

P-3

Investigator

New

Entebbe

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

United Nations Mission
in South Sudan

2

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

1

P-5

Chief Resident Investigator

Continuation

1

P-4

Investigator

Continuation

2

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

1

NGS

Administrative Assistant

Continuation

United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic
of the Congo

1

P-3

Investigator (from the United Nations Continuation
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission
in Mali)

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic

2

P-3

Investigator

Continuation

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission
in Mali

3

P-4

Resident Auditor

Continuation

2

P-3

Resident Auditor

Continuation

3

P-4

Resident Auditor

Continuation

2

P-3

Resident Auditor

Continuation

3 months,
2 GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

P-4

Conflict Resolution Officer

Continuation

Nairobi

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission
in Mali

Internal Audit Division

Function

United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the
Central African Republic

Subtotal

29

Executive Office of the Secretary-General
–
Subtotal

–

Office of the United Nations Ombudsman
and Mediation Services
Regional Ombudsman’s
Office in Entebbe

2
Subtotal

2

137

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Position
Department/office

Organizational unit

Number Level

Function

Status

3 months,
1 P-4

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

1.5 months,
1 P-3

Leave replacement

Continuation

–

1.5 months,
1 GS (OL)

Leave replacement

Continuation

1

P-3

Human Rights Officer

Continuation

1

P-4

Human Rights Officer

Continuation

Office of Legal Affairs
General Legal Division

Administration of Justice
Cluster

–

Subtotal

–

Department of Public Information

Subtotal

–

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights
Peace Mission Support
Section

Addis Ababa

Methodology, Education New York
and Training Section
Subtotal

2

Total

68

Positions
and 52 person-months (positions of
less than 12 months’ duration)a

Note: The specific assignment and location of each of the general temporary assistance positions is set out in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/72/790/Rev.1) and referenced in the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
(A/72/857).
Abbreviations: GS (OL), General Service (Other level); NGS, national General Service.
a

Person-months are indicated in the column entitled “Level”.

RESOLUTION 72/289
A/RES/72/289

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/913,
para. 6)

72/289. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim Security
Force for Abyei64 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65
Recalling Security Council resolution 1990 (2011) of 27 June 2011, by which the Council established the United
Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei for a period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2416 (2018) of 15 May 2018, by which
the Council extended until 15 November 2018 the mandate of the Force as set out in paragraph 2 of resolution
1990 (2011), and resolution 2412 (2018) of 23 April 2018, by which the Council extended until 15 October 2018 the
mandate modification set forth in resolution 2024 (2011) of 14 December 2011 and paragraph 1 of resolution
2075 (2012) of 16 November 2012,
_______________
64
65

138

A/72/644 and A/72/730.
A/72/789/Add.13.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling also its resolution 66/241 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/298 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei as at
30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 89.9 million United States dollars,
representing some 5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 83 Member States have
paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,65 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Force;

Decides to allocate an amount of 22,687,300 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;66
13. Decides to reduce the commitment authority in the amount of 11,300,000 dollars, previously approved
for the same period under the terms of its resolution 71/298, by the amount of 57,300 dollars to the amount of
_______________
66

A/72/644.

139

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

11,242,700 dollars, as a result of which the total resources approved for the maintenance of the Force for the period
will amount to 279,867,300 dollars, equal to the expenditures incurred by the Force during the same period;
14. Also decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
an additional amount of 11,242,700 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June
2017, in addition to the amount of 268,624,600 dollars previously appropriated for the maintenance of the Force for
the same period under the terms of its resolution 70/269 of 17 June 2016;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
15. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 2,737,400 dollars, representing the difference
between the amount of 268,624,600 dollars already apportioned under the terms of resolution 70/269 for the
maintenance of the Force and the actual expenditure of 279,867,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June
2017, less the amount of 8,505,300 dollars, representing other revenue in respect of the financial period ended 30 June
2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account the
scale of assessments for 2016 and 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
16. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 92,400 dollars, representing the difference between the estimated
staff assessment income of 2,295,000 dollars approved for the Force under the terms of resolution 70/269 and the
actual staff assessment income of 2,387,400 dollars for the financial period ended 30 June 2017;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
17. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account the amount of 282,238,900 dollars for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 263,858,100 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, 13,619,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations, 3,426,300 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and 1,335,500 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation
18. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 105,839,588 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 15 November 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
19. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,637,063 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,064,025 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 412,688 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account, the prorated share of 110,175 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 50,175 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
20. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 35,279,863 dollars for the period from
16 November to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 23,519,908 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated
in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
21. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 545,688 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 354,675 dollars approved
for the Force, the prorated share of 137,563 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account, the prorated share of 36,725 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base and the prorated share of 16,725 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Regional Service Centre;

140

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 141,119,450 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 23,519,908 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,67 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
23. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 22 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 2,182,750 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,418,700 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 550,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account, the prorated share of 146,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 66,900 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei”.
RESOLUTION 72/290
A/RES/72/290

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/916,
para. 6)

72/290. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in the Central African Republic
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,68 and the related report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69
Recalling Security Council resolution 2149 (2014) of 10 April 2014, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic as from 10 April
2014 for an initial period until 30 April 2015, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2387 (2017) of 15 November 2017, by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 November 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 68/299 of 30 June 2014 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/299 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S–IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,

_______________
67

To be adopted by the General Assembly.
A/72/637 and A/72/779.
69
A/72/789/Add.8.
68

141

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in the Central African Republic as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
232.1 million United States dollars, representing some 6.8 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only 82 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States,
in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,69 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Mission;

Decides to allocate an amount of 60,515,400 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Recalls paragraph 20 of the report of the Advisory Committee, decides to maintain the heads of Sectors
East and Centre at the D-1 level, and requests the Secretary-General to keep these posts under review;
11. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to develop an accountability framework for the
performance of entities that are not a part of the United Nations Secretariat when they perform activities funded by
the Mission resources, excluding the provision of goods and services through contractual arrangements;
12. Underlines the critical contribution that programmatic activities make to the implementation of the
mandates of the Mission and that all such activities must be directly linked to the mandates of the Mission;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;70

_______________
70

142

A/72/637.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic the amount of 995,011,800 dollars for the period from 1 July
2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 930,211,900 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 48,012,800 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations, 12,079,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and 4,708,100 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 373,129,425 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 15 November 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 7,542,675 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 5,522,512 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,454,850 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 388,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 176,963 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
19. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 124,376,475 dollars for the period from
16 November to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 82,917,650 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated
in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245,
subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
20. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 2,514,225 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,840,838 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 484,950 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 129,450 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 58,987 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 497,505,900 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 82,917,650 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,71 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 10,056,900 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 7,363,350 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,939,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 517,800 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 235,950 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
23. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 17, 19 and 21 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 82,788,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
24. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 82,788,300 dollars, in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 23 above;
_______________
71

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

143

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

25. Further decides that the increase of 777,100 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 82,788,300 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic”.
RESOLUTION 72/291
A/RES/72/291

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/915,
para. 6)

72/291. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte
d’Ivoire72 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73
Recalling Security Council resolution 1528 (2004) of 27 February 2004, by which the Council decided to
establish the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire for an initial period of 12 months as from 4 April 2004, and
the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation, the latest of which was
resolution 2284 (2016) of 28 April 2016, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Operation for a final
period until 30 June 2017,
Recalling also its resolution 58/310 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Operation and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/271 B of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire as at 30 April
2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 15.7 million United States dollars, representing some
0.3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 151 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Operation in full;
3. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,73 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;

_______________
72
73

144

A/72/655.
A/72/852.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. Recalls paragraph 10 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and in this regard requests the SecretaryGeneral to closely analyse the level of personnel required to successfully drawdown and liquidate a closing mission,
drawing on lessons learned during the liquidation of the Operation, and identify human resources strategies that
facilitate the retention of expertise from already onboarded staff, including national staff, until the end of the
liquidation period;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, in the context of the final performance report, to provide information on
the lessons learned from the deployment of the Operation, including the liquidation period;
6. Also requests the Secretary-General to identify and address all residual activities, and stresses the
importance of awareness-raising of contractors relating to the settlement of any residual claims;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
7. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Operation for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;72
8. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation shall be credited
with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 21,920,000 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of
23 December 2015, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245
of 23 December 2015;
9. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Operation,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 21,920,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 8 above;
10. Further decides that the increase of 1,147,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 21,920,000 dollars referred
to in paragraphs 8 and 9 above;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire”.
RESOLUTION 72/292
A/RES/72/292

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/904,
para. 6)

72/292. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus74 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75
Recalling Security Council resolution 186 (1964) of 4 March 1964 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2398 (2018) of 30 January 2018, by which the Council extended the
mandate of the Force until 31 July 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 47/236 of 14 September 1993 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent
resolutions and decisions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/300 of 30 June 2017,

_______________
74
75

A/72/628 and A/72/735.
A/72/789/Add.3.

145

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force by certain Governments,
Noting that voluntary contributions were insufficient to cover all the costs of the Force, including those incurred
by troop-contributing Governments prior to 16 June 1993, and regretting the absence of an adequate response to
appeals for voluntary contributions, including that contained in the letter dated 17 May 1994 from the SecretaryGeneral to all Member States,76
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus as at 30 April
2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 15.5 million United States dollars, representing some
2.5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 66 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,75 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.

Decides to allocate an amount of 2,565,300 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the Force;

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of resolutions
59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;77

_______________
76
77

146

S/1994/647.
A/72/628.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus the
amount of 56,358,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 52,938,900 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 2,732,400 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 687,400 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Notes with appreciation that a one-third share of the net appropriation, equivalent to 17,850,500 dollars,
will be funded through voluntary contributions from the Government of Cyprus and the amount of 6.5 million dollars
from the Government of Greece;
15. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 2,667,350 dollars for the period from 1 to
31 July 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
16. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 233,933 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 210,625 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 18,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 4,908 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 13,336,750 dollars for the period from
1 August to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 2,667,350 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
18. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,169,667 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,053,125 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 92,000 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 24,542 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
19. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 16,004,100 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 2,667,350 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,78 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
20. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 1,403,600 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,263,750 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 110,400 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 29,450 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2017, that
one third of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 550,500 dollars in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be returned to the Government of Cyprus;
22. Also decides, taking into account its voluntary contribution for the financial period ended 30 June 2017,
that the prorated share of the net unencumbered balance and other income in the amount of 194,041 dollars in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be returned to the Government of Greece;

_______________
78

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

147

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

23. Further decides to continue to maintain as separate the account established for the Force for the period
prior to 16 June 1993, invites Member States to make voluntary contributions to that account, and requests the
Secretary-General to continue his efforts in appealing for voluntary contributions to the account;
24. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
25. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
26. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
27. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus”.
RESOLUTION 72/293
A/RES/72/293

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/908,
para. 6)

72/293. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo79 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,80
Recalling Security Council resolution 1925 (2010) of 28 May 2010, by which the Council decided that, as from
1 July 2010, the United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo would bear the title
“United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, and recalling also the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
2409 (2018) of 27 March 2018, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 March 2019,
Recalling also its resolution 54/260 A of 7 April 2000 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/301 of 30 June 2017,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;

_______________
79
80

148

A/72/638, A/72/638/Corr.1, A/72/778, A/72/784 and A/72/784/Add.1.
A/72/789/Add.11, A/72/789/Add.11/Corr.1 and A/72/844.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of
377,609,316 United States dollars, representing some 2.0 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with
concern that only 27 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States,
in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the reports of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,80 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Stresses the crucial importance of providing adequate and timely support for the electoral process in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and requests the Secretary-General to include an update on the matter in the
context of the next budget submission;
10. Takes note of paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee,81 and decides:
(a) Not to redeploy one National Professional Officer post and three United Nations Volunteer positions that
were proposed for redeployment to the United Nations Joint Human Rights Office;
(b) Not to establish two posts of Human Rights Officer (National Professional Officer) and one post of
Protection Coordination Officer (United Nations Volunteer);
11. Welcomes efforts to provide United Nations standard accommodation for all military contingent and
formed police unit personnel, and requests the Secretary-General to strengthen his efforts in this regard and provide
an update in the context of the next budget submission;
12. Decides to allocate an amount of 151,722,200 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the
Mission;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to improve the security of communications in the
Mission;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
15. Further requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is
administered with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
16. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;82
_______________
81
82

A/72/789/Add.11 and A/72/789/Add.11/Corr.1.
A/72/638 and A/72/638/Corr.1.

149

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018
17. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the Mission for the
period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018;83
18. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments for the Mission in an amount not exceeding
47,922,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018, and requests the Secretary-General to report on
the use of the commitment authority in the context of the budget performance report of the Mission;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
19. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo the amount of 1,192,265,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to
30 June 2019, inclusive of 1,114,619,500 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 57,531,000 dollars for the
support account for peacekeeping operations, 14,473,500 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi,
Italy, and 5,641,400 dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
20. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in a total amount not exceeding 80,000,000
dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, in addition to the amount of 1,114,619,500 dollars
appropriated for the same period for the maintenance of the Mission;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
21. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 596,132,700 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
22. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 16,826,050 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 13,598,500 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,324,400 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 620,450 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 282,700 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
23. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 298,066,350 dollars for the period from
1 January to 31 March 2019, in accordance with the scale of assessments for 2019 and the updated levels;84
24. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 23 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 8,413,025 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,799,250 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,162,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 310,225 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 141,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
25. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 298,066,350 dollars for the period from
1 April to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 99,355,450 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for 2019
and the updated levels,84 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
26. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 25 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 8,413,025 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,799,250 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,162,200 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
_______________
83
84

150

A/72/778.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the support account, the prorated share of 310,225 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 141,350 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
27. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 15,912,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
28. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 15,912,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 27 above;
29. Further decides that the increase of 2,688,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 15,912,300 dollars referred
to in paragraphs 27 and 28 above;
30. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
31. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
32. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
33. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo”.
RESOLUTION 72/294
A/RES/72/294

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/903,
para. 6)

72/294. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Stabilization
Mission in Haiti85 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,86
Recalling Security Council resolution 1529 (2004) of 29 February 2004, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support continuation of a peaceful and constitutional
political process and the maintenance of a secure and stable environment in Haiti,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1542 (2004) of 30 April 2004, by which the Council established the
United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti for an initial period of six months, and the subsequent resolutions by
which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2350 (2017) of 13 April
2017, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 October 2017,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,

_______________
85
86

A/72/689.
A/72/853.

151

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling its resolution 58/311 of 18 June 2004 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/302 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti as at 30 April
2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 71.1 million United States dollars, representing some
0.9 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only seven Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
4. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
5. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,86 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
9. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
10. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;85
11. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission shall be credited
with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 14,382,400 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of
23 December 2015, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245
of 23 December 2015;
12. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 14,382,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 11 above;
152

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Further decides that the decrease in the estimated staff assessment income of 90,000 dollars in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 14,382,400 dollars referred
to in paragraphs 11 and 12 above;
14. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti”.
RESOLUTION 72/295
A/RES/72/295

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/909,
para. 6)

72/295. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo87 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions,88
Recalling Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) of 10 June 1999 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo,
Recalling also its resolution 53/241 of 28 July 1999 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/303 of 30 June 2017,
Acknowledging the complexity of the Mission,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
Mindful also of the need to ensure coordination and cooperation with the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 29.5 million United States dollars,
representing some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 99 Member States have
paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;

_______________
87
88

A/72/622 and A/72/718.
A/72/789/Add.4.

153

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,88 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;89
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo the amount of 39,595,400 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 37,192,700
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 1,919,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and
483,000 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
13. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 19,797,700 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
14. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 13 above,
their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 1,926,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff
assessment income of 1,827,750 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 77,550 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 20,700 dollars of
the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
15. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 19,797,700 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, in accordance with the scale of assessments for 2019 and the updated levels;90
16. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 15 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 1,926,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,827,750 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 77,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 20,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 13 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 1,883,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
_______________
89
90

154

A/72/622.
To be adopted by the General Assembly.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
18. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 1,883,300 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 17 above;
19. Decides that the decrease of 82,900 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 1,883,300 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 17 and 18 above;
20. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
21. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
22. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
23. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo”.
RESOLUTION 72/296
A/RES/72/296

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/914,
para. 6)

72/296. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in
Liberia91 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92
Recalling Security Council resolution 1497 (2003) of 1 August 2003, by which the Council declared its
readiness to establish a United Nations stabilization force to support the transitional government and to assist in the
implementation of a comprehensive peace agreement in Liberia,
Recalling also Security Council resolution 1509 (2003) of 19 September 2003, by which the Council
established the United Nations Mission in Liberia for a period of 12 months, and the subsequent resolutions by which
the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2333 (2016) of 23 December
2016, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission for a final period until 30 March 2018 and requested
the Secretary-General to complete by 30 April 2018 the withdrawal of all uniformed and civilian components, other
than those required to complete the liquidation of the Mission,
Recalling further its resolution 58/315 of 1 July 2004,
Recalling its resolution 58/261 A of 23 December 2003 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/304 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,

_______________
91
92

A/72/640 and A/72/640/Corr.1.
A/72/839.

155

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in Liberia as at 30 April 2018,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 22.7 million United States dollars, representing some
0.3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 99 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
3. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
4. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
5. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
7. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,92 and requests the Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
8. Stresses the importance of applicable payments due to a staff member at the time of separation from
service during the transitional period, taking into account the special situation of national staff, and in this regard
requests the Secretary-General to ensure a timely treatment to all staff;
9. Encourages the Secretary-General to identify potential outstanding commitments at least nine months
before the physical closure of a mission in future pre-liquidation processes;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his efforts to identify and address on time and in full all the
residual activities, including unforeseen liabilities identified after the closure of the Mission;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to rigorously pursue and complete the liquidation of assets, as
planned, in accordance with regulation 5.14 of the Financial Regulations and Rules of the United Nations,93 including
engaging with the authorities regarding potential donations and taking account of lessons learned, and to report thereon
in the context of the final performance report;
12. Notes with concern the significant amount of contaminated soil collected during the liquidation of the
Mission, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to reduce the long-term overall environmental
footprint of the Mission in full compliance with the relevant rules and regulations, including but not limited to the
United Nations environmental and waste management policy and procedures;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
14. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
_______________
93

156

ST/SGB/2013/4.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;91
16. Decides that Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission shall be credited
with their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 11,062,400 dollars in
respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of
23 December 2015, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245
of 23 December 2015;
17. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 11,062,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 16 above;
18. Further decides that the increase of 783,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 11,062,400 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 16 and 17 above;
19. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission in Liberia”.
RESOLUTION 72/297
A/RES/72/297

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/907,
para. 6)

72/297. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali94 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95
Recalling Security Council resolution 2100 (2013) of 25 April 2013, by which the Council established the
United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali as from 25 April 2013 and decided that
authority would be transferred from the African-led International Support Mission in Mali to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali on 1 July 2013 for an initial period of 12 months, and the
subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution
2364 (2017) of 29 June 2017, by which the Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 30 June 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 67/286 of 28 June 2013 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/305 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
_______________
94
95

A/72/663 and A/72/746.
A/72/789/Add.14.

157

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 102.1 million United
States dollars, representing some 2.2 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only
93 Member States have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those
in arrears, to ensure payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,95 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Mission;

Decides to allocate an amount of 165,422,100 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Acknowledges the need to improve situational awareness, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General
to further strengthen the measures to ensure the safety and security of Mission personnel, in particular uniformed
personnel, and the protection of civilians as mandated;
11. Stresses the crucial importance of providing adequate and timely support for the electoral process in Mali,
and requests the Secretary-General to include an update on the matter in the context of the next budget submission;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
14. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;96
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali the amount of 1,149,585,300 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019,
inclusive of 1,074,718,900 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 55,471,500 dollars for the support account for
peacekeeping operations, 13,955,400 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 5,439,500
dollars for the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
_______________
96

158

A/72/663.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Financing of the appropriation
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 574,792,650 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 95,798,775 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution
70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245
of 23 December 2015, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
17. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 10,459,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 7,347,000 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,241,150 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 598,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 272,600 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
18. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 574,792,650 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 95,798,775 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessment for
2019 and the updated levels,97 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 10,459,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 7,347,000 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,241,150 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 598,250 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 272,600 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
20. Also decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 19,210,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
21. Further decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 19,210,000 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
22. Decides that the increase of 762,400 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of the
financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 19,210,000 dollars referred to in
paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali”.
_______________
97

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

159

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/298
A/RES/72/298

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/906,
para. 12)

72/298. Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force98 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,99
Recalling Security Council resolution 350 (1974) of 31 May 1974 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force, the latest of which was resolution 2394 (2017) of 21 December 2017, by which the Council extended
the mandate of the Force until 30 June 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 3211 B (XXIX) of 29 November 1974 on the financing of the United Nations
Emergency Force and of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force and its subsequent resolutions thereon,
the latest of which was resolution 71/306 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force with the
financial resources necessary to enable it to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force as at
30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 20,770,702 United States dollars, representing
some 1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 70 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
_______________
98
99

160

A/72/633, A/72/633/Corr.1 and A/72/719.
A/72/789/Add.2.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,99 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
10. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
11. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;100
12. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force the
amount of 8,166,300 dollars for the maintenance of the Force, previously authorized by the Advisory Committee for
the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017 under the terms of section VI of General Assembly resolution 64/269, in
addition to the amount of 47,714,100 dollars previously approved for the same period under the terms of its resolution
70/279 of 17 June 2016;
Financing of the additional appropriation for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
13. Decides, taking into account the amount of 50,289,400 dollars previously apportioned under the terms of
its resolution 70/279 for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017, to apportion among Member States the
additional amount of 8,166,300 dollars for the maintenance of the Force for the same period, in accordance with the
levels updated in General Assembly resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2016 and 2017, as set out in Assembly resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
14. Also decides that there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for
in paragraph 13 above, the amount of 508,100 dollars, representing other revenue in respect of the financial period
ended 30 June 2017;
15. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of General Assembly resolution 973 (X) of
15 December 1955, there shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in
paragraph 14 above, their respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 57,200 dollars, representing the additional
staff assessment income for the Force in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force the
amount of 64,190,100 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 60,295,100 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 3,112,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 782,900 dollars
for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 32,095,050 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the
mandate of the Force;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against
the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 835,900 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 676,600 dollars approved
_______________
100

A/72/633 and A/72/633/Corr.1.

161

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the Force, the prorated share of 125,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 33,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
19. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 32,095,050 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 5,349,175 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,101 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
20. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 835,900 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 676,600 dollars approved
for the Force, the prorated share of 125,750 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account and the prorated share of 33,550 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United
Nations Logistics Base;
21. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
22. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and
6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
23. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
24. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force”.
RESOLUTION 72/299
A/RES/72/299

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/905, para. 11),102 by
a recorded vote of 125 to 3, with 1 abstention, as follows:
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Chile, China, Colombia, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Gambia, Germany, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Serbia, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe [125]
Against: Canada, Israel, United States of America [3]
Abstaining: Guatemala [1]

_______________
101

To be adopted by the General Assembly.
The draft resolution recommended in the report was introduced in the Committee by the representative of Egypt (on behalf of the States
Members of the United Nations that are members of the Group of 77 and China).
102

162

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

72/299. Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon103 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,104
Recalling Security Council resolution 425 (1978) of 19 March 1978 regarding the establishment of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council extended the mandate of the
Force, the latest of which was resolution 2373 (2017) of 30 August 2017, by which the Council extended the mandate
of the Force until 31 August 2018,
Recalling also its resolution S-8/2 of 21 April 1978 on the financing of the Force and its subsequent resolutions
thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/307 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming its resolutions 51/233 of 13 June 1997, 52/237 of 26 June 1998, 53/227 of 8 June 1999, 54/267 of
15 June 2000, 55/180 A of 19 December 2000, 55/180 B of 14 June 2001, 56/214 A of 21 December 2001, 56/214 B
of 27 June 2002, 57/325 of 18 June 2003, 58/307 of 18 June 2004, 59/307 of 22 June 2005, 60/278 of 30 June 2006,
61/250 A of 22 December 2006, 61/250 B of 2 April 2007, 61/250 C of 29 June 2007, 62/265 of 20 June 2008, 63/298
of 30 June 2009, 64/282 of 24 June 2010, 65/303 of 30 June 2011, 66/277 of 21 June 2012, 67/279 of 28 June 2013,
68/292 of 30 June 2014, 69/302 of 25 June 2015, 70/280 of 17 June 2016 and 71/307,
Reaffirming also the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Force,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Force with the financial resources necessary to enable it to
fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon as at 30 April
2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 57.6 million United States dollars, representing some
1 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 87 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Force in full;
4. Expresses deep concern that Israel did not comply with resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267,
55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265,
63/298, 64/282, 65/303, 66/277, 67/279, 68/292, 69/302, 70/280 and 71/307;
5. Stresses once again that Israel should strictly abide by resolutions 51/233, 52/237, 53/227, 54/267,
55/180 A, 55/180 B, 56/214 A, 56/214 B, 57/325, 58/307, 59/307, 60/278, 61/250 A, 61/250 B, 61/250 C, 62/265,
63/298, 64/282, 65/303, 66/277, 67/279, 68/292, 69/302, 70/280 and 71/307;
6. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
_______________
103
104

A/72/630 and A/72/776.
A/72/789/Add.5.

163

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

7. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
8. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
10. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,104 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
11. Decides to allocate an amount of 6,709,300 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for
the Force;
12. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
13. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Force is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
14. Reiterates its request to the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary to ensure the full
implementation of paragraph 8 of resolution 51/233, paragraph 5 of resolution 52/237, paragraph 11 of resolution
53/227, paragraph 14 of resolution 54/267, paragraph 14 of resolution 55/180 A, paragraph 15 of resolution 55/180 B,
paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 A, paragraph 13 of resolution 56/214 B, paragraph 14 of resolution 57/325,
paragraph 13 of resolution 58/307, paragraph 13 of resolution 59/307, paragraph 17 of resolution 60/278, paragraph 21
of resolution 61/250 A, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 B, paragraph 20 of resolution 61/250 C, paragraph 21 of
resolution 62/265, paragraph 19 of resolution 63/298, paragraph 18 of resolution 64/282, paragraph 15 of resolution
65/303, paragraph 13 of resolution 66/277, paragraph 13 of resolution 67/279, paragraph 13 of resolution 68/292,
paragraph 14 of resolution 69/302, paragraph 13 of resolution 70/280 and paragraph 14 of resolution 71/307, stresses
once again that Israel shall pay the amount of 1,117,005 dollars resulting from the incident at Qana on 18 April 1996,
and requests the Secretary-General to report on this matter to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
15. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Force for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;105
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
16. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon the amount
of 505,053,500 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 474,406,700 dollars for the
maintenance of the Force, 24,486,500 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations and 6,160,300
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy;
Financing of the appropriation
17. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 84,175,580 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 August 2018 in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, and taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
18. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 17 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 2,561,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 2,143,200 dollars approved for the Force, the prorated share of 329,770 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account and the prorated share of 88,030 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base;
_______________
105

164

A/72/630.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

19. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 168,351,170 dollars for the period from
1 September to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 42,087,792 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject
to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
20. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 19 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 5,122,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,286,400 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 659,530 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 176,070 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
21. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 252,526,750 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 42,087,792 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,106 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Force;
22. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 21 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 7,683,000 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,429,600 dollars
approved for the Force, the prorated share of 989,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the support account and the prorated share of 264,100 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base;
23. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there shall be
set off against the apportionment, as provided for in paragraphs 17, 19 and 21 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 12,528,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, and taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
24. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Force, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the total amount of 12,528,700 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 23 above;
25. Further decides that the increase of 287,700 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 12,528,700 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 23 and 24 above;
26. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
27. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Force under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5 and 6
of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
28. Invites voluntary contributions to the Force in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable to
the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices established
by the General Assembly;
29. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session, under the item entitled “Financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East”, the sub-item entitled “United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon”.

_______________
106

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

165

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

RESOLUTION 72/300
A/RES/72/300

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/911,
para. 6)

72/300. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan,107 the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the Mission for the period from 1 July 2017
to 30 June 2018108 and the related reports of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,109
Recalling Security Council resolution 1996 (2011) of 8 July 2011, by which the Council established, as from
9 July 2011, the United Nations Mission in South Sudan, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2406 (2018) of 15 March 2018, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 15 March 2019,
Recalling also its resolution 66/243 A of 24 December 2011 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/308 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission in South Sudan as at 30 April 2018,
including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 398,569,032 United States dollars, representing some
5.8 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 47 Member States have paid their assessed
contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of their
outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
_______________
107

A/72/624 and A/72/802.
A/72/792.
109
A/72/789/Add.15 and A/72/854.
108

166

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,110 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Mission;

Decides to allocate an amount of 129,426,300 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;111
Financing arrangements for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018
13. Takes note of the note by the Secretary-General on the financing arrangements for the Mission;108
14. Authorizes the Secretary-General to enter into commitments in an amount not to exceed 65,157,100
dollars for the maintenance of the Mission for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018, in addition to the amount
of 1,071,000,000 dollars already appropriated for the same period for the maintenance of the Mission under the terms
of its resolution 71/308;
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
15. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission in South Sudan the amount
of 1,203,326,600 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 1,124,960,400 dollars for the
maintenance of the Mission, 58,064,700 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations, 14,607,800
dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 5,693,700 dollars for the Regional Service Centre
in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
16. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 601,663,300 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 December 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking
into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
17. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 14,547,150 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 11,289,650 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 2,345,950 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 626,200 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 285,350 dollars of the
estimated staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
18. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 249,075,668 dollars for the period from
1 January to 15 March 2019, in accordance with the scale of assessments for 2019 and the updated levels;112
19. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 6,022,207 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 4,673,672 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 971,173 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
_______________
110

A/72/789/Add.15.
A/72/624.
112
To be adopted by the General Assembly.
111

167

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

for the support account, the prorated share of 259,233 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 118,129 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
20. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 352,587,632 dollars for the period from
16 March to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 100,277,217 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,112 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
21. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 20 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 8,524,943 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 6,615,978 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 1,374,777 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 366,967 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 167,221 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
22. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 20,511,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
23. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 20,511,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 22 above;
24. Further decides that the decrease of 4,544,200 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 20,511,100 dollars
referred to in paragraphs 22 and 23 above;
25. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
26. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
27. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan”.
RESOLUTION 72/301
A/RES/72/301

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/910,
para. 6)

72/301. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara113 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions,114
_______________
113
114

168

A/72/623 and A/72/731.
A/72/789/Add.1/Rev.1.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recalling Security Council resolution 690 (1991) of 29 April 1991, by which the Council established the United
Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara, and the subsequent resolutions by which the Council
extended the mandate of the Mission, the latest of which was resolution 2414 (2018) of 27 April 2018, by which the
Council extended the mandate of the Mission until 31 October 2018,
Recalling also its resolution 45/266 of 17 May 1991 on the financing of the Mission and its subsequent
resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/309 of 30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as stated
in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of 23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the Mission,
Mindful of the fact that it is essential to provide the Mission with the financial resources necessary to enable it
to fulfil its responsibilities under the relevant resolutions of the Security Council,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to entrust the Head of Mission with the task of formulating future budget
proposals in full accordance with the provisions of its resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006,
61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289 of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June
2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other relevant resolutions;
2. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western
Sahara as at 30 April 2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 40.7 million United States dollars,
representing some 3.3 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 101 Member States
have paid their assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure
payment of their outstanding assessed contributions;
3. Expresses its appreciation to those Member States that have paid their assessed contributions in full, and
urges all other Member States to make every possible effort to ensure payment of their assessed contributions to the
Mission in full;
4. Expresses concern at the financial situation with regard to peacekeeping activities, in particular as regards
the reimbursements to troop contributors that bear additional burdens owing to overdue payments by Member States
of their assessments;
5. Emphasizes that all future and existing peacekeeping missions shall be given equal and non-discriminatory
treatment in respect of financial and administrative arrangements;
6. Also emphasizes that all peacekeeping missions shall be provided with adequate resources for the effective
and efficient discharge of their respective mandates;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that proposed peacekeeping budgets are based on the relevant
legislative mandates;
8. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,114 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
9.
Mission;

Decides to allocate an amount of 11,311,600 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the

10. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296, 60/266, 61/276, 64/269, 65/289, 66/264, 69/307 and 70/286;
11. Also requests the Secretary-General to take all action necessary to ensure that the Mission is administered
with a maximum of efficiency and economy;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
12. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Mission for the period
from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;115
_______________
115

A/72/623.

169

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
13. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in
Western Sahara the amount of 55,997,700 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of
52,350,800 dollars for the maintenance of the Mission, 2,702,100 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping
operations, 679,800 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 265,000 dollars for the
Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation
14. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 18,665,900 dollars for the period from 1 July
to 31 October 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into
account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
15. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their
respective share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 846,767 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income
of 745,700 dollars approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 72,767 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 19,433 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 8,867 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
16. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 9,332,950 dollars for the period from
1 November to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 4,666,475 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in
its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject
to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
17. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 16 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 423,383 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 372,850 dollars approved
for the Mission, the prorated share of 36,383 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the support
account, the prorated share of 9,717 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the United Nations
Logistics Base and the prorated share of 4,433 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for the
Regional Service Centre;
18. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 27,998,850 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 4,666,475 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,116 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Mission;
19. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 18 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 1,270,150 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 1,118,550 dollars
approved for the Mission, the prorated share of 109,150 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved
for the support account, the prorated share of 29,150 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income approved for
the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 13,300 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the Regional Service Centre;
20. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there shall
be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 14 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 1,731,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
21. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Mission, there
shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and other
revenue in the amount of 1,731,100 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance with
the scheme set out in paragraph 20 above;
_______________
116

170

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

22. Further decides that the decrease of 141,000 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect
of the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be set off against the credits in the amount of 1,731,100 dollars
referred to in paragraphs 20 and 21 above;
23. Emphasizes that no peacekeeping mission shall be financed by borrowing funds from other active
peacekeeping missions;
24. Encourages the Secretary-General to continue to take additional measures to ensure the safety and security
of all personnel participating in the Mission under the auspices of the United Nations, bearing in mind paragraphs 5
and 6 of Security Council resolution 1502 (2003) of 26 August 2003;
25. Invites voluntary contributions to the Mission in cash and in the form of services and supplies acceptable
to the Secretary-General, to be administered, as appropriate, in accordance with the procedure and practices
established by the General Assembly;
26. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara”.
RESOLUTION 72/302
A/RES/72/302

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee (A/72/912,
para. 6)

72/302. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the financing of the United Nations Support Office
in Somalia117 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118
Recalling Security Council resolution 1863 (2009) of 16 January 2009, in which the Council expressed its intent
to establish a United Nations peacekeeping operation in Somalia as a follow-on force to the African Union Mission
in Somalia, subject to a further decision of the Council by 1 June 2009, and requested the Secretary-General, in order
for the forces of the Mission to be incorporated into a United Nations peacekeeping operation, to provide a United
Nations logistical support package to the Mission, including equipment and services,
Recalling also the subsequent resolutions of the Security Council by which the logistical support package for
the Mission was extended, the latest of which was resolution 2415 (2018) of 15 May 2018, by which the Council
extended the logistical support package until 31 July 2018,
Recalling further its resolution 63/275 A of 7 April 2009 on the financing of the activities arising from Security
Council resolution 1863 (2009) and its subsequent resolutions thereon, the latest of which was resolution 71/311 of
30 June 2017,
Reaffirming the general principles underlying the financing of United Nations peacekeeping operations, as
stated in its resolutions 1874 (S-IV) of 27 June 1963, 3101 (XXVIII) of 11 December 1973 and 55/235 of
23 December 2000,
Noting with appreciation that voluntary contributions have been made to the United Nations trust fund
established to support the African Union Mission in Somalia,
Mindful of the fact that the Support Office operates in a hostile environment and that it is essential to provide it
with the financial resources necessary to enable it to fulfil its mandate,
1. Takes note of the status of contributions to the United Nations Support Office in Somalia as at 30 April
2018, including the contributions outstanding in the amount of 178.3 million United States dollars, representing
_______________
117
118

A/72/650 and A/72/763.
A/72/789/Add.6.

171

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

some 5 per cent of the total assessed contributions, notes with concern that only 87 Member States have paid their
assessed contributions in full, and urges all other Member States, in particular those in arrears, to ensure payment of
their outstanding assessed contributions;
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions,118 subject to the provisions of the present resolution, and requests the
Secretary-General to ensure their full implementation;
3. Decides to allocate an amount of 75,565,500 dollars for air operations from the overall resources for the
Support Office;
4. Also decides not to establish the post of Programme Management Officer (human rights due diligence
policy) (P-4) in the immediate office of the Assistant Secretary-General;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure the full implementation of the relevant provisions of its
resolutions 59/296 of 22 June 2005, 60/266 of 30 June 2006, 61/276 of 29 June 2007, 64/269 of 24 June 2010, 65/289
of 30 June 2011, 66/264 of 21 June 2012, 69/307 of 25 June 2015 and 70/286 of 17 June 2016, as well as other
relevant resolutions;
Budget performance report for the period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017
6. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on the budget performance of the Support Office for the
period from 1 July 2016 to 30 June 2017;119
Budget estimates for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019
7. Decides to appropriate to the Special Account for the United Nations Support Office in Somalia the
amount of 597,034,000 dollars for the period from 1 July 2018 to 30 June 2019, inclusive of 558,152,300 dollars for
the maintenance of the Support Office, 28,809,000 dollars for the support account for peacekeeping operations,
7,247,700 dollars for the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy, and 2,825,000 dollars for the Regional
Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda;
Financing of the appropriation
8. Decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 49,752,833 dollars for the period from 1 to
31 July 2018, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246 of 23 December 2015, taking into account
the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245 of 23 December 2015;
9. Also decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X) of 15 December 1955, there
shall be set off against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 8 above, their respective
share in the Tax Equalization Fund of 811,300 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 541,933
dollars approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 193,992 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account, the prorated share of 51,783 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 23,592 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
10. Further decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 248,764,167 dollars for the period from
1 August to 31 December 2018, at a monthly rate of 49,752,833 dollars, in accordance with the levels updated in its
resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of assessments for 2018, as set out in its resolution 70/245, subject to
a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Support Office;
11. Decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off against the
apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 10 above, their respective share in the Tax
Equalization Fund of 4,056,500 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 2,709,667 dollars
approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 969,958 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
approved for the support account, the prorated share of 258,917 dollars of the estimated staff assessment income
_______________
119

172

A/72/650.

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 117,958 dollars of the estimated staff
assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
12. Also decides to apportion among Member States the amount of 298,517,000 dollars for the period from
1 January to 30 June 2019, at a monthly rate of 49,752,833 dollars, in accordance with the scale of assessments for
2019 and the updated levels,120 subject to a decision of the Security Council to extend the mandate of the Support
Office;
13. Further decides that, in accordance with the provisions of its resolution 973 (X), there shall be set off
against the apportionment among Member States, as provided for in paragraph 12 above, their respective share in the
Tax Equalization Fund of 4,867,800 dollars, comprising the estimated staff assessment income of 3,251,600 dollars
approved for the Support Office, the prorated share of 1,163,950 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the support account, the prorated share of 310,700 dollars of the estimated staff assessment
income approved for the United Nations Logistics Base and the prorated share of 141,550 dollars of the estimated
staff assessment income approved for the Regional Service Centre;
14. Decides that, for Member States that have fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support Office, there
shall be set off against their apportionment, as provided for in paragraph 8 above, their respective share of the
unencumbered balance and other revenue in the amount of 16,558,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended
30 June 2017, in accordance with the levels updated in its resolution 70/246, taking into account the scale of
assessments for 2017, as set out in its resolution 70/245;
15. Also decides that, for Member States that have not fulfilled their financial obligations to the Support Office,
there shall be set off against their outstanding obligations their respective share of the unencumbered balance and
other revenue in the amount of 16,558,400 dollars in respect of the financial period ended 30 June 2017, in accordance
with the scheme set out in paragraph 14 above;
16. Further decides that the increase of 688,600 dollars in the estimated staff assessment income in respect of
the financial period ended 30 June 2017 shall be added to the credits in the amount of 16,558,400 dollars referred to
in paragraphs 14 and 15 above;
17. Invites voluntary contributions to the United Nations trust fund established to support the African Union
Mission in Somalia;
18. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-third session the item entitled “Financing of
the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)”.
RESOLUTION 72/303
A/RES/72/303

Adopted at the 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, without a vote, on the recommendation of the Committee
(A/72/682/Add.2, para. 10)

72/303. Progress towards an accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 59/272 of 23 December 2004 and 60/254 of 8 May 2006, section I of its resolution
60/260 of 8 May 2006 and its resolutions 60/283 of 7 July 2006, 61/245 of 22 December 2006, 63/276 of 7 April
2009, 64/259 of 29 March 2010, 66/257 of 9 April 2012, 67/253 of 12 April 2013, 68/264 of 9 April 2014, 69/272 of
2 April 2015, 70/255 of 1 April 2016 and 71/283 of 6 April 2017,
Reaffirming its commitment to strengthening accountability in the United Nations Secretariat and the
accountability of the Secretary-General for the performance of the Secretariat to all Member States,
Emphasizing that accountability is a central pillar of effective and efficient management that requires attention
and strong commitment at all levels of the Secretariat, especially at the highest level,

_______________
120

To be adopted by the General Assembly.

173

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Recognizing and reaffirming the important role of the oversight bodies in the development of an accountability
system that is relevant to the United Nations,
Having considered the seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the accountability system in the
United Nations Secretariat: strengthening the accountability system of the Secretariat under the new management
paradigm121 and the related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,122
1. Takes note of the seventh progress report of the Secretary-General on the accountability system in the United
Nations Secretariat: strengthening the accountability system of the Secretariat under the new management paradigm;121
2. Endorses the conclusions and recommendations contained in the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions;122
3. Stresses the indispensable roles of external and internal oversight mechanisms, carried out through regular
audit reviews and the issuance of pertinent recommendations, and that the full and timely implementation of the
recommendations of oversight bodies, which are aimed at strengthening the performance of managers in monitoring
the activities for which they are held accountable, is an essential part of any effective system of accountability;
4. Recalls paragraph 6 of its resolution 71/283, and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to intensify
his efforts to ensure implementation of the provisions thereof, including outreach activities to staff at all levels on the
content of the Anti-Fraud and Anti-Corruption Framework of the United Nations Secretariat123 and of the policy on
protection against retaliation;124
5. Welcomes the efforts of the Secretary-General towards a strong culture of accountability throughout the
Secretariat, acknowledges that a culture of accountability stems from the leadership of an organization, and stresses
that an effective accountability system is central to successful management of the Organization;
6. Stresses, as one of the essential components of accountability, the importance of compliance with the
Charter of the United Nations, its resolutions and the regulations and rules;
7.

Recalls paragraphs 8 and 10 of its resolution 71/283;

8. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to make efforts aimed at improving the culture of
accountability in the Secretariat, including by continuing to encourage, inter alia, a conducive environment for the
reporting of fraud, waste and misconduct, and to continue to take appropriate measures for the protection of whistleblowers and the prevention of retaliation;
9. Recalls paragraph 17 of the report of the Advisory Committee, notes with regret that implementation of,
follow-up to and reporting on compliance with the resolutions of the General Assembly that pertain specifically to the
accountability system remain inconsistent, and reiterates that this information should be included in performance
reports on the programme budget;
10. Reiterates that the timely submission of documents is an important aspect of the accountability of the
Secretariat to Member States, notes the ongoing efforts to address the underlying challenges related to documentation,
and in this regard requests the Secretary-General to ensure the continued inclusion in the senior managers’ compacts
of a related managerial indicator;
11. Recalls paragraph 27 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General to
provide more details on the measures taken to combat sexual harassment in the Organization and to report thereon in
the context of his next report on human resources management;
12. Also recalls paragraph 35 of the report of the Advisory Committee, and requests the Secretary-General, in
the context of his eighth progress report on the accountability system in the United Nations Secretariat, to include
comprehensive information on the outcome of his efforts related to streamlining and simplifying the internal policy
framework on accountability;
_______________
121

A/72/773.
A/72/885.
123
ST/IC/2016/25, annex.
124
ST/SGB/2017/2/Rev.1.
122

174

III. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

13. Reaffirms that results-based management and performance reporting are essential pillars of a
comprehensive accountability framework;
14. Recognizes the importance of results-based management and the need to strengthen the capacity of the
Secretariat for programme monitoring and reporting, and requests an update on measures taken in the context of the
eighth progress report;
15. Notes the development of the action plan for the implementation of results-based management in the
United Nations Secretariat, 2018–2021125 as a critical element of the accountability system, and requests an update
on progress made towards the implementation of the action plan in the context of the eighth progress report;
16. Emphasizes that evaluation and self-evaluation are essential managerial tools and that senior managers
have the responsibility to use evaluation and self-evaluation findings to improve performance and learning, and in this
regard requests the Secretary-General to continue to take concrete measures to enhance in-house capacity for selfevaluation, including self-evaluation support within the Secretariat, taking advantage of the existing knowledge and
expertise of oversight bodies to ensure that all efforts are made to avoid the duplication and/or overlapping of efforts;
17. Stresses the need for the Secretary-General to address the deficiencies in the current system of delegation
of authority through the promulgation of well-defined roles and responsibilities of individuals at all levels to whom
authority is delegated, systemic reporting mechanisms on monitoring and exercise of delegated authority, risk
mitigation and safeguard measures, and actions to be taken in cases of mismanagement or abuse of authority;
18. Notes the measures taken to strengthen senior managers’ compacts, and requests the Secretary-General to
include information on the effectiveness of these compacts as instruments of accountability in the context of future
progress reports on accountability in the United Nations Secretariat;
19. Recalls paragraph 19 of its resolution 71/283, and requests the Secretary-General to include in future
progress reports an overview of the status of accountability in the Secretariat, including information on the impact of
specific accountability measures.

_______________
125

A/72/773, annex II.

175

IV. Decisions
Contents
Decision
number

Title

Page

A. Elections and appointments
72/403.

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council ...................................................................................................179
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................179

72/404.

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice ..............................................................................................179
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................179

72/405.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions ...............................180
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................180

72/411.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination ..............................................................180
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................180

72/412.

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences................................................................................................181
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................181

72/414.

Election of two members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission ........................................181
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................181

72/416.

Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption
and Production Patterns.............................................................................................................................................................182

72/417.

Election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session....................................................................182

72/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session.........................................................182

72/419.

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council........................................................................................182

72/420.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session ..............................183

72/421.

Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council.....................................................................................183

72/422.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights ............................................184
B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

72/504.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items ......................................................................................................................185
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................185

72/549.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal ..........................................................................186

72/550.

International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda...........................................................186

72/551.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination ...........................................................................................................................................................187

72/552.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day of Remembrance
of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade .................................................................................................187

72/553.

Organizational meeting of the United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament ...................187
177

IV. Decisions

72/554.

Theme and sub-themes of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South Cooperation ...................187

72/555.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace ........................................................187

72/556.

United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament ......................................................................188

72/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other
matters related to the Security Council ....................................................................................................................................188

72/559.

High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2019 .......................................................................................188

72/560.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage.................................189

72/561.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate and promote the International Day against
Nuclear Tests .............................................................................................................................................................................191

72/562.

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations .....................192

72/563.

Report of the Security Council .................................................................................................................................................192

72/564.

Nelson Mandela Peace Summit ...............................................................................................................................................192

72/565.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis ...........................192

72/566.

Prevention of armed conflict.....................................................................................................................................................192

72/567.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution ................192

72/568.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic .............................................................................................................192

72/569.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan ...........................................................................................................193

72/570.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte ..........................................................................................................................193

72/571.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965 ...............................................................................................................193

72/572.

Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations .......................................................................................................193

72/573.

Strengthening of the United Nations system ...........................................................................................................................193

72/574.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor ........................................................................................................193

72/575.

Agenda items for inclusion in the draft agenda of the seventy-third session ........................................................................193

72/576.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Kofi Annan, seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations...........................................195
2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

72/547.

Questions deferred for future consideration ............................................................................................................................195
Decision B..................................................................................................................................................................................195
Decision C..................................................................................................................................................................................196

72/558.

178

Effective date of resolutions relating to the peacekeeping budget and special political missions .......................................197

IV. Decisions

A. Elections and appointments
72/403. Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council
B1
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 13 July 2018, the General Assembly, pursuant to its resolutions 60/251 of
15 March 2006 and 65/281 of 17 June 2011, elected ICELAND as a member of the Human Rights Council for the
remainder of the term of office of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA beginning on 13 July 2018.2
As a result, as of 13 July 2018, the Human Rights Council is composed of the following 47 Member States:3
AFGHANISTAN,*** ANGOLA,*** AUSTRALIA,*** BELGIUM,* BRAZIL,** BURUNDI,* CHILE,*** CHINA,** CÔTE
D’IVOIRE,* CROATIA,** CUBA,** DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO,*** ECUADOR,* EGYPT,** ETHIOPIA,*
GEORGIA,* GERMANY,* HUNGARY,** ICELAND,** IRAQ,** JAPAN,** KENYA,* KYRGYZSTAN,* MEXICO,***
MONGOLIA,* NEPAL,*** NIGERIA,*** PAKISTAN,*** PANAMA,* PERU,*** PHILIPPINES,* QATAR,*** REPUBLIC OF
KOREA,* RWANDA,** SAUDI ARABIA,** SENEGAL,*** SLOVAKIA,*** SLOVENIA,* SOUTH AFRICA,** SPAIN,***
SWITZERLAND,* TOGO,* TUNISIA,** UKRAINE,*** UNITED ARAB EMIRATES,* UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN
AND NORTHERN IRELAND** and VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF).*
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2018.

**
***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

72/404. Election of five members of the International Court of Justice
B4
The General Assembly, at its 97th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2018, and the Security Council, at its
8292nd meeting, on the same date, proceeded independently of one another to elect, in accordance with Articles 2 to
4, 7 to 10 and 14 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, rules 150 and 151 of the rules of procedure of the
Assembly and rules 40 and 61 of the provisional rules of procedure of the Council, a member of the Court for the
unexpired term of office of Mr. Hisashi OWADA (Japan) whose resignation took effect on 7 June 2018.5
Having obtained the required absolute majority of votes in both the General Assembly and the Security Council,
Mr. Yuji Iwasawa (Japan) was elected as a member of the Court for a term of office beginning on 22 June 2018 and
expiring on 5 February 2021.
As a result, as of 22 June 2018, the International Court of Justice is composed as follows: Mr. Ronny ABRAHAM
(France),*** Mr. Mohamed BENNOUNA (Morocco),** Mr. Dalveer BHANDARI (India),*** Mr. Antônio Augusto
CANÇADO TRINDADE (Brazil),*** Mr. James Richard CRAWFORD (Australia),** Ms. Joan E. DONOGHUE (United
States of America),** Mr. Giorgio GAJA (Italy),* Mr. Kirill GEVORGIAN (Russian Federation),** Mr. Yuji IWASAWA
_______________
Decision 72/403, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/403 A.
2
See A/72/924.
1

China, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ethiopia, Germany, Kenya, Nigeria, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, the United Arab
Emirates, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) are serving their second
consecutive term.
3

Decision 72/404, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/404 A.
5
See A/72/872.
4

179

IV. Decisions

(Japan),* Mr. Patrick Lipton ROBINSON (Jamaica),** Mr. Nawaf SALAM (Lebanon),*** Ms. Julia SEBUTINDE
(Uganda),* Mr. Peter TOMKA (Slovakia),* Ms. XUE Hanqin (China)* and Mr. Abdulqawi Ahmed YUSUF
(Somalia).***
_________________
*
**
***

Term of office expires on 5 February 2021.
Term of office expires on 5 February 2024.
Term of office expires on 5 February 2027.

72/405. Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
B6
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2018, the General Assembly appointed Mr. Takeshi Matsunaga as a
member of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions for a term of office beginning on
15 August 2018 and ending on 31 December 2019, as a result of the resignation of Mr. Takeshi Akamatsu.7
As a result, as of 15 August 2018, the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions is
composed as follows: Mr. Bachar Bong ABDALLAH (Chad),*** Mr. Pavel CHERNIKOV (Russian Federation),***
Mr. Ihor HUMENNYI (Ukraine),* Mr. Conrod HUNTE (Antigua and Barbuda),* Mr Mutaz HYASSAT (Jordan),*
Mr. Marcel JULLIER (Switzerland),** Mr. Mahesh KUMAR (India),** Ms. Julia A. MACIEL GONZÁLEZ
(Paraguay),*** Mr. Takeshi MATSUNAGA (Japan),** Mr. Olivier MYARD (France),** Mr. Carlos RUIZ MASSIEU
(Mexico),** Mr. Babou SENE (Senegal),* Mr. Tesfa Alem SEYOUM (Eritrea),* Mr. Cihan TERZI (Turkey),***
Mr. David TRAYSTMAN (United States of America)*** and Mr. YE Xuenong (China).**
__________________
*
**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2018.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

72/411. Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination
B8
At its 87th plenary meeting, on 26 April 2018, the General Assembly, on the basis of nominations by the
Economic and Social Council9 and in accordance with the annex to Council resolution 2008 (LX) of 14 May 1976
and Assembly decision 42/450 of 17 December 1987, elected CHAD and ITALY as members of the Committee for
Programme and Coordination for a term of office beginning on 26 April 2018 and expiring on 31 December 2020.
As a result, as of 26 April 2018, the Committee for Programme and Coordination is composed of the following
32 Member States:10 ARGENTINA,* BANGLADESH,** BELARUS,*** BOTSWANA,*** BRAZIL,*** BULGARIA,***
BURKINA FASO,*** CAMEROON,*** CHAD,*** CHILE,*** CHINA,** CUBA,*** EGYPT,** ERITREA,** FRANCE,*
GERMANY,*** HAITI,** INDIA,*** IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),*** ITALY,*** JAPAN,*** PAKISTAN,*** PERU,*
_______________
Decision 72/405, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/405 A.
7
See A/72/101/Rev.1/Add.1.
6

Decision 72/411, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/411 A.
9
See A/72/612/Add.1; see also Economic and Social Council decision 2018/201 E.
8

One vacancy for a member from Western European and other States remains to be filled for a term of office beginning on the date of
election and expiring on 31 December 2018; and one vacancy for a member from Latin American and Caribbean States remains to be filled
for a term of office beginning on the date of election and expiring on 31 December 2020.
10

180

IV. Decisions

PORTUGAL,*** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA,*** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SENEGAL,** UNITED
KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND,*** UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA,* UNITED STATES
OF AMERICA*** and ZIMBABWE.*
__________________
*
**
***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2018.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

72/412. Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
B11
At its 78th plenary meeting, on 7 March 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 of its
resolution 43/222 B of 21 December 1988, took note of the appointment by its President, after consultations with the
Chair of the regional group concerned, of BRAZIL as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term of office
beginning on 7 March 2018 and ending on 31 December 2020 and of ECUADOR as a member of the Committee for a
term of office beginning on 7 March 2018 and expiring on 31 December 2018.
At its 90th plenary meeting, on 24 May 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with paragraph 2 of its
resolution 43/222 B, took note of the appointment by its President, after consultations with the Chair of the regional
group concerned, of SIERRA LEONE as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a term of office beginning on
24 May 2018 and expiring on 31 December 2020.
As a result, as of 24 May 2018, the Committee on Conferences is composed of the following 21 Member States:
AUSTRIA,** BOTSWANA,*** BRAZIL,*** CHINA,** ECUADOR,* FRANCE,*** GERMANY,* GHANA,* GUYANA,*
HUNGARY,* IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),* IRAQ,*** JAMAICA,** JAPAN,** KENYA,** LIBERIA,* MOROCCO,**
NEPAL,*** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*** SIERRA LEONE*** and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.**
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2018.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

72/414. Election of two members of the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission
B12
On 12 February 2018, the Economic and Social Council elected ITALY as a member of the Organizational
Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission pursuant to paragraphs 4 (a) to (d) of General Assembly resolution
60/180 of 20 December 2005, to complete the term of office of Sweden, whose membership in the Council ended on
31 December 2017.13
As a result, on 12 February 2018, the Organizational Committee of the Peacebuilding Commission is composed
of the following 31 Member States: BANGLADESH,** BELGIUM,** BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL STATE OF),**
BRAZIL,** CANADA,** CHINA,* CÔTE D’IVOIRE,** COLOMBIA,** CZECHIA,*** ECUADOR,** EGYPT,**
EL SALVADOR,*** ETHIOPIA,** FRANCE,* GERMANY,** INDIA,** INDONESIA,** ITALY,** JAPAN,** KENYA,**
_______________
Decision 72/412, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/412 A.
11

Decision 72/414, in section A of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/414 A.
13
See Economic and Social Council decision 2018/201 C.
12

181

IV. Decisions

MEXICO,** NIGERIA,** NORWAY,** PAKISTAN,** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,** ROMANIA,** RUSSIAN FEDERATION,*
RWANDA,** SOUTH AFRICA,** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND* and UNITED
STATES OF AMERICA.*
__________________
*
**

Permanent members of the Security Council.
Term of office expires on 31 December 2018.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.

72/416. Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable
Consumption and Production Patterns
At its 90th plenary meeting, on 24 May 2018, the General Assembly, recalling its resolution 69/214 of
19 December 2014, decided to allow the Group of African States to renominate its two existing members of the Board
of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns, namely, Kenya and
Nigeria, which had already served one term from 2015 to 2017.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, in accordance with resolutions 67/203 of 21 December 2012
and 69/214, decided to appoint ARGENTINA, AZERBAIJAN, BHUTAN, COLOMBIA, HUNGARY, ISRAEL, JAPAN,
KENYA, NIGERIA and SWITZERLAND as members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework of Programmes on
Sustainable Consumption and Production Patterns for a term beginning on 16 September 2017 and ending on
15 September 2019.14
72/417. Election of the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session15
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 5 June 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 21 of the Charter
of the United Nations, rule 30 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 1 of the annex to resolution
33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected Ms. María Fernanda ESPINOSA GARCÉS of Ecuador as President of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session.
72/418. Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session15
At its 92nd plenary meeting, on 5 June 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with rule 30 of the rules of
procedure of the Assembly and paragraphs 2 and 3 of the annex to resolution 33/138 of 19 December 1978, elected
by acclamation the following 21 Member States as Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly at its seventy-third
session: ALGERIA, BURKINA FASO, CAMBODIA, CHINA, CYPRUS, DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO, FRANCE,
GAMBIA, GUYANA, IRAQ, JAPAN, NAMIBIA, PANAMA, QATAR, RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SAN MARINO, SPAIN, SUDAN,
UKRAINE, UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
72/419. Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 8 June 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 23 of the Charter
of the United Nations, rule 142 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 17 of Assembly resolution
68/307 of 10 September 2014, elected BELGIUM, the DOMINICAN REPUBLIC, GERMANY, INDONESIA and SOUTH
AFRICA as non-permanent members of the Security Council for a two-year term of office beginning on 1 January
2019 to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms of office of BOLIVIA (PLURINATIONAL STATE OF),
ETHIOPIA, KAZAKHSTAN, the NETHERLANDS and SWEDEN.
As a result, as of 1 January 2019, the Security Council is composed of the following 15 Member States:
BELGIUM,** CHINA, CÔTE D’IVOIRE,* DOMINICAN REPUBLIC,** EQUATORIAL GUINEA,* FRANCE, GERMANY,**
_______________
14

Argentina, Kenya and Nigeria are serving their second consecutive term.

In accordance with rule 38 of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, the General Committee consists of the President of the
Assembly, the 21 Vice-Presidents and the Chairs of the six Main Committees.
15

182

IV. Decisions

INDONESIA,** KUWAIT,* PERU,* POLAND,* RUSSIAN FEDERATION, SOUTH AFRICA,** UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND and UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
__________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

72/420. Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session15
On 5 June 2018, the First, Special Political and Decolonization (Fourth), Second, Third, Fifth and Sixth
Committees of the General Assembly held meetings in accordance with rules 99 (a) and 103 of the rules of procedure
of the Assembly for the purpose of electing their Chairs.
At its 93rd plenary meeting, on 8 June 2018, the President of the General Assembly announced that the
following persons had been elected as Chairs of the First, Special Political and Decolonization (Fourth), Second,
Third, Fifth and Sixth Committees of the Assembly at its seventy-third session:
First Committee:

Mr. Ion JINGA (Romania)

Special Political and
Decolonization Committee
(Fourth Committee):

Mr. Lewis Garseedah BROWN (Liberia)16

Second Committee:

Mr. Jorge SKINNER-KLÉE ARENALES (Guatemala)

Third Committee:

Mr. Mahmoud SAIKAL (Afghanistan)

Fifth Committee:

Ms. Gillian BIRD (Australia)

Sixth Committee:

Mr. Michel Xavier BIANG (Gabon)

72/421. Election of eighteen members of the Economic and Social Council
At its 96th plenary meeting, on 13 June 2018, the General Assembly, in accordance with rule 140 of the rules
of procedure of the Assembly, elected CAMBODIA, MALTA and YEMEN as members of the Economic and Social
Council for the remainder of the terms of office of TAJIKISTAN, SPAIN and the UNITED ARAB EMIRATES,17 respectively,
beginning on 1 January 2019.
At the same meeting, the General Assembly, in accordance with Article 61 of the Charter of the United Nations
and rule 145 of the rules of procedure of the Assembly and paragraph 17 of Assembly resolution 68/307 of
10 September 2014, elected ANGOLA, ARMENIA, BRAZIL, CANADA, EGYPT, ETHIOPIA, IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),
JAMAICA, KENYA, LUXEMBOURG, MALI, the NETHERLANDS, PAKISTAN, PARAGUAY, SAUDI ARABIA,
TURKMENISTAN, UKRAINE and the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA as members of the Economic and Social Council for
a three-year term of office beginning on 1 January 2019 to fill the vacancies occurring on the expiration of the terms
of office of AFGHANISTAN, ALGERIA, BELGIUM, CANADA, CHILE, CZECHIA, GUYANA, IRAQ, ITALY, LEBANON,
NIGERIA, PERU, the REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA, RWANDA, SOMALIA, SOUTH AFRICA, the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
and VIET NAM.
As a result, as of 1 January 2019, the Economic and Social Council is composed of the following 54 Member
States: ANDORRA,* ANGOLA,*** ARMENIA,*** AZERBAIJAN,* BELARUS,** BENIN,* BRAZIL,*** CAMBODIA,*
CAMEROON,* CANADA,*** CHAD,* CHINA,* COLOMBIA,* DENMARK,* ECUADOR,** EGYPT,*** EL SALVADOR,**
ESWATINI,* ETHIOPIA,*** FRANCE,** GERMANY,** GHANA,** INDIA,** IRAN (ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF),***
IRELAND,** JAMAICA,*** JAPAN,** KENYA,*** LUXEMBOURG,*** MALAWI,** MALI,*** MALTA,** MEXICO,**
MOROCCO,** NETHERLANDS,*** NORWAY,* PAKISTAN,*** PARAGUAY,*** PHILIPPINES,** REPUBLIC OF KOREA,*
ROMANIA,* RUSSIAN FEDERATION,* SAINT VINCENT AND THE GRENADINES,* SAUDI ARABIA,*** SUDAN,**
_______________
16
17

Mr. Lewis Garseedah Brown was subsequently replaced by Mr. Dee-Maxwell Saah Kemayah, Sr. (Liberia) on 4 October 2018.
See A/72/845 and A/72/870.

183

IV. Decisions

TOGO,** TURKEY,** TURKMENISTAN,*** UKRAINE,*** UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN
IRELAND,* UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,*** URUGUAY,** VENEZUELA (BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF)* and YEMEN.*
___________________
*

Term of office expires on 31 December 2019.

**

Term of office expires on 31 December 2020.

***

Term of office expires on 31 December 2021.

72/422. Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
At its 111th plenary meeting, on 10 August 2018, the General Assembly approved the appointment by the
Secretary-General18 of Ms. Michelle BACHELET (Chile) as United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights for
a four-year term of office beginning on 1 September 2018 and expiring on 31 August 2022.

_______________
18

184

See A/72/945.

IV. Decisions

B. Other decisions
1. Decisions adopted without reference to a Main Committee
72/504. Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items
B19
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2018, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of
sub-item (cc) entitled “Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament”
of agenda item 99 entitled “General and complete disarmament”, under heading G (Disarmament), to consider it
directly in plenary meeting and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft decision.20
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of agenda
item 11 entitled “Sport for development and peace: building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to
proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution.21
At the same meeting, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary meeting agenda item 19
entitled “Sustainable development”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable
development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations
conferences), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution.22
At its 91st plenary meeting, on 31 May 2018, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary
meeting sub-item (a) entitled “Operational activities for development of the United Nations system” of agenda item 24
entitled “Operational activities for development”, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and
sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United
Nations conferences), and to proceed expeditiously with the consideration of a draft resolution.23
At its 97th plenary meeting, on 22 June 2018, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (c) entitled “Election of five members of the International Court of Justice” of agenda item 113 entitled “Elections
to fill vacancies in principal organs”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), and to
proceed expeditiously with the election to fill the vacancy resulting from the resignation of a member of the Court.24
At its 106th plenary meeting, on 13 July 2018, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (d) entitled “Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council” of agenda item 114 entitled “Elections
to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections”, under heading I (Organizational, administrative and other
matters), and to proceed expeditiously with the election to fill the vacancy resulting from the withdrawal of a member
of the Council.25
At its 107th plenary meeting, on 23 July 2018, the General Assembly decided to reopen consideration of subitem (a) entitled “Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions”
of agenda item 115 entitled “Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments”, under
_______________
Decision 72/504, in section B.1 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/504 A.
19

A/72/L.44.
A/72/L.43.
22
A/72/L.42.
20
21

23

A/72/L.52.

24

See A/72/872.
A/72/924.

25

185

IV. Decisions

heading I (Organizational, administrative and other matters), to consider it directly in plenary meeting and to proceed
expeditiously with the appointment to fill the vacancy resulting from the resignation of a member of the Advisory
Committee.26
At its 109th plenary meeting, on 27 July 2018, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in plenary
meeting sub-item (b) entitled “Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action
(SAMOA) Pathway and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States” of agenda item 19 entitled “Sustainable development”,
under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the
relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences), and to proceed expeditiously
with the consideration of a draft resolution.27
At its 112th plenary meeting, on 6 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to consider directly in
plenary meeting agenda item 99 entitled “General and complete disarmament”, under heading G (Disarmament), in
order to proceed with the high-level meeting to commemorate and promote the International Day against Nuclear
Tests.
72/549. Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the Olympic ideal
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 26 January 2018, the General Assembly took note of the solemn appeal made
by the President of the Assembly in connection with the observance of the Olympic Truce.28
72/550. International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda
At its 77th plenary meeting, on 26 January 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of Algeria, Benin,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic, Chad, the Comoros, the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Israel, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia,
Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia, the Niger, Nigeria, the Philippines,
Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa, the Sudan, Swaziland,29 Togo, Turkey, Uganda, Viet Nam and Zambia,30
recalling its resolution 58/234 of 23 December 2003 and bearing in mind that, since 2004, 7 April has been observed
in the United Nations as the International Day of Reflection on the Genocide in Rwanda, recalling also Security
Council resolution 955 (1994) of 8 November 1994 concerning the establishment of the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31 December 1994,
recalling further that the Appeals Chamber of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda issued, on 16 June 2006,
a judicial notice concluding that it was a “fact of common knowledge” that “between 6 April and 17 July 1994, there
was a genocide in Rwanda against the Tutsi ethnic group”,31 recalling that more than a million people were killed
during the genocide, including Hutu and others who opposed it, and noting with concern any form of denial of that
genocide, recalling Security Council resolution 2150 (2014) of 16 April 2014, and recognizing the importance of
combating impunity for all violations that constitute the crime of genocide, decided to designate 7 April as the
International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda, and recalled that, during the 1994
genocide against the Tutsi, Hutu and others who opposed it were also killed.

_______________
26

A/72/101/Rev.1/Add.1.

A/72/L.60/Rev.1 and A/72/L.60/Rev.1/Corr.1.
A/72/700.
29
On 30 May 2018, the Permanent Mission of Swaziland to the United Nations advised the Secretariat that “Eswatini” was to be used as
the short form of the country name.
27
28

30
31

186

A/72/L.31 and A/72/L.31/Add.1.
ICTR-98–44-AR73(C).

IV. Decisions

72/551. Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day
for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
At its 79th plenary meeting, on 20 March 2018, the General Assembly decided, without setting a precedent, to
invite Ms. Tendayi Achiume, Special Rapporteur on contemporary forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance, and Ms. Gay McDougall, member of the Committee on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination, to make statements at the commemorative meeting on the occasion of the International Day for the
Elimination of Racial Discrimination.
72/552. Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the occasion of the International Day
of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2018, the General Assembly decided, without setting a precedent, to
invite Ms. Graciela Dixon, former Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of Panama, to make a keynote statement at the
commemorative meeting on the occasion of the International Day of Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the
Transatlantic Slave Trade.
72/553. Organizational meeting of the United Nations high-level international conference
on nuclear disarmament
At its 80th plenary meeting, on 26 March 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela,32 recalling its resolution 72/251 of 24 December 2017, in which it had decided that the United
Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament should include a one-day organizational meeting,
to be held in New York on 28 March 2018, decided to postpone the one-day organizational meeting of the conference
to 10 May 2018.
72/554. Theme and sub-themes of the second High-level United Nations Conference
on South-South Cooperation
At its 82nd plenary meeting, on 12 April 2018, the General Assembly, taking note of the note by the SecretaryGeneral on the preparatory process of the second High-level United Nations Conference on South-South
Cooperation,33 and recalling its resolution 71/318 of 28 August 2017, entitled “Second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation”, decided:
(a) That the overarching theme of the Conference shall be “Role of South-South cooperation and the
implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development: challenges and opportunities”;
(b)

That the sub-themes of the Conference shall be:

(i)

Comparative advantages and opportunities of South-South cooperation;

(ii)

Challenges and the strengthening of the institutional framework of South-South cooperation and triangular
cooperation;

(iii) Sharing of experiences, best practices and success stories;
(iv) Scaling up the means of implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development in support of
South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation.
72/555. High-level meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding and sustaining peace
At its 83rd plenary meeting, on 24 April 2018, the General Assembly decided, without setting a precedent, to invite
Ms. Michelle Yeoh, actress, producer and United Nations Development Programme Goodwill Ambassador; Mr. Ishmael
Beah, United Nations Children's Fund Advocate for Children Affected by War; Ms. Joy Onyesoh, President of the
Women’s International League for Peace and Freedom in Nigeria; and Ms. Jayathma Wickramanayake, Envoy of the
Secretary-General on Youth to make statements at the high-level meeting on peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
_______________
32
33

A/72/L.44.
A/72/711.

187

IV. Decisions

72/556. United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament
At its 87th plenary meeting, on 26 April 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of Indonesia,34 recalling
its resolution 72/251 of 24 December 2017 in which it had decided to convene, from 14 to 16 May 2018, the United
Nations high-level international conference on nuclear disarmament, including a one-day organizational meeting to
be held on 28 March 2018, and its decision 72/553 of 26 March 2018, in which it had decided to postpone the
organizational meeting to 10 May 2018, decided to postpone the conference and its organizational meeting until a
date to be decided by the Assembly.
72/557. Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council
and other matters related to the Security Council
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 29 June 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President:
(a) Decided to reaffirm the central role of the General Assembly concerning the question of equitable
representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters related to the Security
Council;
(b) Also decided to immediately continue intergovernmental negotiations on Security Council reform in
informal plenary of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session, as mandated by Assembly decisions 62/557 of
15 September 2008, 63/565 B of 14 September 2009, 64/568 of 13 September 2010, 65/554 of 12 September 2011,
66/566 of 13 September 2012, 67/561 of 29 August 2013, 68/557 of 8 September 2014, 69/560 of 14 September
2015, 70/559 of 27 July 2016 and 71/553 of 19 July 2017, building on the informal meetings held during its seventysecond session and on the revised elements of commonality and issues for further consideration, circulated on 14 June
2018, as well as the positions of and proposals made by Member States, reflected in the text and its annex circulated
on 31 July 2015, and using the elements of convergence circulated on 12 July 2016 and the elements of commonality
and issues for further consideration circulated on 27 June 2017 to help to inform its future work, while welcoming the
active engagement, initiatives and intensive efforts of the President of the General Assembly, and noting with
appreciation the active role and concrete efforts of the Co-Chairs undertaken in a consultative manner with a view to
an early comprehensive reform of the Security Council;
(c) Further decided to convene the Open-ended Working Group on the Question of Equitable Representation
on and Increase in the Membership of the Security Council and Other Matters related to the Security Council during
the seventy-third session of the General Assembly, if Member States so decide;
(d) Decided to include in the agenda of the seventy-third session of the General Assembly the item entitled
“Question of equitable representation on and increase in the membership of the Security Council and other matters
related to the Security Council”.
72/559. High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2019
At its 110th plenary meeting, on 6 August 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,35
decided to transmit the following draft decision to the General Assembly at its seventy-third session for action:
High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2019
The General Assembly, recalling its resolutions 67/290 of 9 July 2013, 69/313 of 27 July 2015, 70/1 of
25 September 2015, 70/299 of 29 July 2016, 71/225 of 21 December 2016, 72/139 of 12 December 2017 and 72/251
of 24 December 2017, and recalling also its resolutions 57/301 of 13 March 2003, in particular paragraph 2 thereof,
and 71/323 of 8 September 2017, decides:
(a) That the general debate of the seventy-fourth session of the General Assembly will be held from Tuesday,
24 September, to Saturday, 28 September, and on Monday, 30 September 2019;

_______________
34
35

188

A/72/L.50.
A/72/L.66.

IV. Decisions

(b) To hold the High-level Dialogue on Financing for Development of the General Assembly on Monday,
23 September 2019, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., and to hold the high-level political forum on
sustainable development under the auspices of the Assembly on Tuesday, 24 September, from 3 to 6 p.m., and on
Wednesday, 25 September, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;
(c) To hold the high-level meeting on universal health coverage on Thursday, 26 September 2019, from
10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., in accordance with resolution 72/139, and to hold on the same day the highlevel meeting to commemorate and promote the International Day for the Total Elimination of Nuclear Weapons,
from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., in accordance with resolution 72/251;
(d) To hold the high-level meeting to review progress made in addressing the priorities of small island
developing States through the implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway on
Friday, 27 September 2019, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., in accordance with resolution 71/225;
(e)

That each high-level meeting will not have any parallel meetings.

72/560. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage
At its 110th plenary meeting, on 6 August 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,36
decided to transmit the following draft resolution to the Assembly for action at its seventy-third session:
Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on universal health coverage
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that, through the adoption of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development37 and its Sustainable
Development Goals in September 2015, Heads of State and Government made a bold commitment to achieve
universal health coverage by 2030, including financial risk protection, access to quality essential health-care services
and access to safe, effective, quality and affordable essential medicines and vaccines for all,
Recalling its resolution 71/159 of 15 December 2016, entitled “Global health and foreign policy: health
employment and economic growth”, which underlined the primary responsibility of Member States to accelerate the
transition towards universal health coverage,
Recalling also its resolution 72/139 of 12 December 2017, entitled “Global health and foreign policy: addressing
the health of the most vulnerable for an inclusive society”, in which it decided to hold a high-level meeting in 2019
on universal health coverage,
Recalling further its resolution 67/81 of 12 December 2012, entitled “Global health and foreign policy”, in
which it recognized the responsibility of Governments to urgently and significantly scale up efforts to accelerate the
transition towards universal access to affordable and quality health-care services, and that effective and financially
sustainable implementation of universal health coverage is based on a resilient and responsive health system, and
reaffirming the primary responsibility of Member States to determine and promote their own paths towards achieving
universal health coverage,
Recalling its resolution 72/138 of 12 December 2017, entitled “International Universal Health Coverage Day”,
in which it decided to proclaim 12 December as International Universal Health Coverage Day,
Recognizing that health is a precondition for and an outcome and indicator of all three dimensions – economic,
social and environmental – of sustainable development and that, despite progress made, challenges in global health,
including major inequities and vulnerabilities within and among countries, regions and populations, still remain and
demand persistent attention,
Emphasizing the need for the high-level meeting to complement and build on preceding and ongoing health
processes and initiatives, including the high-level meeting on HIV/AIDS held in New York from 8 to 10 June 2016
and the high-level meeting on antimicrobial resistance held in New York on 21 September 2016, as well as the high_______________
36
37

A/72/L.65.
Resolution 70/1.

189

IV. Decisions

level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis and the third high-level meeting of the General Assembly on the
prevention and control of non-communicable diseases, to be convened in New York on 26 and 27 September 2018,
respectively,
Welcoming the convening of the global conference on primary health care, on achieving universal health
coverage and the Sustainable Development Goals, in Astana on 25 and 26 October 2018, in celebration of the fortieth
anniversary of the Declaration of Alma-Ata, which may contribute to the debates of the high-level meeting of the
General Assembly on universal health coverage,
1. Decides that the one-day high-level meeting on universal health coverage to be convened by the President
of the General Assembly shall be held in New York on the third day of the general debate of the Assembly at its
seventy-fourth session, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m., and consist of an opening segment, a plenary
segment for general discussion, two multi-stakeholder panels and a brief closing segment;
2. Also decides that the overall theme of the high-level meeting will be “Universal health coverage: moving
together to build a healthier world”;
3.

Further decides that:

(a) The opening segment, to be held from 10 to 10.30 a.m., will feature statements by the President of the
General Assembly at its seventy-fourth session, the Secretary-General, the Director General of the World Health
Organization, the President of the World Bank Group, as well as an eminent high-level champion of universal health
coverage, selected, in consultation with Member States, by the President of the Assembly, giving due consideration
to gender equity;
(b) The plenary segment, to be held from 10.30 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 5.30 p.m., will comprise
statements by Member States and observers of the General Assembly; a list of speakers will be established in
accordance with established practices of the Assembly, and the time limits for these statements will be three minutes
for individual delegations and five minutes for statements made on behalf of a group of States;
(c) The closing segment, to be held from 5.30 to 6 p.m., will comprise summaries of the multi-stakeholder
panels and concluding remarks by the President of the General Assembly;
4.

Decides that the organizational arrangements for the two multi- stakeholder panels will be as follows:

(a) Two multi-stakeholder panels will be held in parallel to the plenary segment, one from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m.
and the other from 3 to 5 p.m.;
(b) Each of the two multi-stakeholder panels will be co-chaired by two representatives, one from a developed
country and one from a developing country, to be appointed by the President of the General Assembly from among
the Heads of State or Government attending the high-level meeting, in consultation with Member States, taking into
account gender equity, level of development and geographical representation;
(c) The themes of the multi-stakeholder panels will take into consideration the direction and outcomes of
other preceding health processes and initiatives, as well as the interactive multi-stakeholder hearing, with a view to
ensuring the most effective and efficient outcomes and potential deliverables and to sharing experiences and lessons
learned to address remaining implementation gaps;
(d) The President of the General Assembly may invite parliamentarians, local governments, the heads or
senior representatives of relevant United Nations entities, including the World Bank, development partners, civil
society, the private sector, academia, medical associations, indigenous leadership and community organizations to
serve as speakers on the panels, taking into account gender equity, level of development and geographical
representation;
5. Also decides that the high-level meeting shall approve a concise and action-oriented political declaration,
agreed in advance by consensus through intergovernmental negotiations, to be submitted by the President of the
General Assembly for adoption by the Assembly;
6. Requests the President of the General Assembly, with the support of the World Health Organization and
other relevant partners, to organize and preside over an interactive multi-stakeholder hearing, before the end of July
2019, with the active participation of appropriate senior-level representatives of Member States, observers of the
General Assembly, parliamentarians, representatives of local government, relevant United Nations entities, non190

IV. Decisions

governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and Social Council, invited civil society
organizations, philanthropic foundations, academia, medical associations, the private sector and broader communities,
ensuring the participation and voices of women, children, youth and indigenous leadership, as part of the preparatory
process for the high-level meeting, and also requests the President to prepare a summary of the hearing prior to the
high-level meeting;
7. Encourages all Member States to participate in the high-level meeting, including the multi-stakeholder
panels, at the highest possible level, preferably at the level of Heads of State and Government, and invites all observers
of the General Assembly to be represented at the highest possible level;
8. Invites the United Nations system, including funds, programmes and specialized agencies, including the
World Health Organization, regional commissions and relevant envoys of the Secretary-General, to participate in the
high-level meeting, as appropriate, and urges them to consider relevant initiatives, such as the International Health
Partnership for UHC2030, in support of the preparatory process and the meeting, particularly with regard to sharing
evidence and good practices, challenges and lessons learned;
9.

Invites the Inter-Parliamentary Union to contribute to the high-level meeting;

10. Invites non-governmental organizations with relevant expertise that are in consultative status with the
Economic and Social Council to register with the Secretariat to attend the meeting and the interactive multistakeholder hearing;
11. Requests the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of other relevant representatives of
relevant non-governmental organizations, civil society organizations, academic institutions and the private sector who
may attend the high-level meeting and participate in the interactive multi-stakeholder hearing and the multistakeholder panels, taking into account the principles of transparency and equitable geographical representation, with
due regard to the meaningful participation of women, and to submit the list to Member States for their consideration
on a non-objection basis;38
12. Invites members of civil society, non-governmental organizations, the private sector, academia,
development partners and other relevant initiatives to make a fundamental contribution to the process in terms of
raising awareness of the importance of universal health coverage and its contribution towards the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals;37
13. Encourages Member States to consider including in their national delegations ministers from all relevant
ministries, as appropriate, as well as representatives such as parliamentarians, mayors and governors, representatives
of civil society, including non-governmental organizations, indigenous leadership, community organizations and
faith-based organizations, academia, philanthropic foundations, the private sector and universal health coverage
networks, with due regard to gender equity;
14. Requests the President of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session to finalize the organizational
arrangements for the high-level meeting, in close consultation with Member States, including the themes of the multistakeholder panels in line with paragraph 4 (c) of the present resolution.
72/561. High-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate and promote the International Day
against Nuclear Tests
At its 112th plenary meeting, on 6 September 2018, the General Assembly decided, without setting a precedent,
to invite Mr. Lassina Zerbo, Executive Secretary of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization, and
Mr. Karipbek Kuyukov, Honorary Ambassador of the ATOM Project, to make statements at the high-level meeting
to commemorate and promote the International Day against Nuclear Tests.

_______________
The list of proposed as well as final names will be brought to the attention of the General Assembly. Where a name is objected to, the
objecting Member State will, on a voluntary basis, make known to the Office of the President of the General Assembly the general basis of
its objections and the Office will share any information received with any Member State upon its request.
38

191

IV. Decisions

72/562. Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12, paragraph 2, of the Charter
of the United Nations
At its 114th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2018, the General Assembly took note of the note by the
Secretary-General.39
72/563. Report of the Security Council
At its 114th plenary meeting, on 12 September 2018, the General Assembly took note of the report of the
Security Council.40
72/564. Nelson Mandela Peace Summit
At its 115th plenary meeting, on 13 September 2018, the General Assembly:
(a) Decided, under rule 81 of its rules of procedure, to reconsider the provision contained in paragraph 3 of
its resolution 72/243 of 22 December 2017;
(b) Also decided, on the proposal of its President, that the opening plenary meeting of the high-level plenary
meeting of the General Assembly, to be known as the Nelson Mandela Peace Summit, would also feature statements
by the President of South Africa and the Prime Minister of Ireland.
72/565. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level meeting on the fight
against tuberculosis
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly:
(a) Decided, under rule 81 of its rules of procedure, to reconsider the provisions contained in paragraphs 1 and 3
of resolution 72/268 of 4 April 2018;
(b)

Also decided, on the proposal of its President, that:

(i) The high-level meeting on the fight against tuberculosis would be held on the second day of the general
debate of the General Assembly at its seventy-third session, from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 6 p.m.;
(ii)

The opening segment of the meeting would be held from 10 to 11 a.m.; and

(iii) The plenary segment of the meeting would be held from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 to 5.30 p.m.
72/566. Prevention of armed conflict
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Prevention of armed conflict” in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session.
72/567. Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the sub-item entitled “Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement of disputes, conflict prevention
and resolution” of the agenda item entitled “Prevention of armed conflict” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-third session.
72/568. Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-third session.
_______________
39
40

192

A/72/300.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 2 (A/72/2).

IV. Decisions

72/569. The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-third session.
72/570. Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte” in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session.
72/571. Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences
of the separation of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation of
the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965” in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session.
72/572. Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations” in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session.
72/573. Strengthening of the United Nations system
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the item entitled
“Strengthening of the United Nations system” in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session.
72/574. Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to defer consideration of
the item entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor” and to include it in the draft agenda of its
seventy-third session.
72/575. Agenda items for inclusion in the draft agenda of the seventy-third session
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly decided to include the following
items in the draft agenda of its seventy-third session:
Item 9.

Report of the Economic and Social Council

Item 14.

Integrated and coordinated implementation of and follow-up to the outcomes of the major United
Nations conferences and summits in the economic, social and related fields

Item 15.

Culture of peace

Item 19.

Sustainable development

Item 22.

Groups of countries in special situations
(b)

Item 24.

Follow-up to the second United Nations Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries

Operational activities for development
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system

(b)

South-South cooperation for development

Item 29.

Report of the Security Council

Item 35.

Protracted conflicts in the GUAM area and their implications for international peace, security and
development

Item 37.

The situation in the Middle East
193

IV. Decisions

Item 38.

Question of Palestine

Item 55.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping operations in all their aspects

Item 65.

Peacebuilding and sustaining peace

Item 72.

Promotion and protection of human rights
(c)

Item 73.

Item 99.

Human rights situations and reports of special rapporteurs and representatives

Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and disaster relief assistance of the United
Nations, including special economic assistance
(a)

Strengthening of the coordination of emergency humanitarian assistance of the United Nations

(b)

Assistance to the Palestinian people

(c)

Special economic assistance to individual countries or regions

General and complete disarmament
(cc) Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament

Item 107. Crime prevention and criminal justice
Item 113. Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
Item 114. Elections to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other elections
(a)

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme and Coordination

Item 117. Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Item 127. Global health and foreign policy
Item 130. Investigation into the conditions and circumstances resulting in the tragic death of Dag
Hammarskjöld and of the members of the party accompanying him
Item 133. Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the Board of Auditors
Item 134. Review of the efficiency of the administrative and financial functioning of the United Nations
Item 136. Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
Item 137. Programme planning
Item 139. Pattern of conferences
Item 140. Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of the United Nations
Item 141. Human resources management
Item 142. Joint Inspection Unit
Item 143. United Nations common system
Item 145. Report on the activities of the Office of Internal Oversight Services
Item 146. Administration of justice at the United Nations
Item 148. Financing of the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals
Item 149. Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping
operations
Item 150. Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei
Item 151. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central
African Republic
Item 152. Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire
194

IV. Decisions

Item 153. Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
Item 154. Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Item 156. Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti
Item 157. Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
Item 158. Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia
Item 159. Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
Item 160. Financing of the United Nations peacekeeping forces in the Middle East
Item 161. Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan
Item 162. Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara
Item 163. Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
Item 164. Financing of the activities arising from Security Council resolution 1863 (2009)
Item 165. Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support in Haiti
72/576. Tribute to the memory of Mr. Kofi Annan, seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations
At its 116th plenary meeting, on 17 September 2018, the General Assembly, on the proposal of its President,
decided, without setting a precedent, to invite the following speakers to make statements during the commemorative
plenary meeting on 21 September 2018 to pay tribute to the late seventh Secretary-General of the United Nations,
Mr. Kofi Annan: Mr. Ban Ki-moon, eighth Secretary-General of the United Nations; Ms. Mary Robinson,
representative of the Elders; Mrs. Nane Annan, spouse; Mr. Iqbal Riza, former Under-Secretary-General and Chef de
Cabinet; Ms. Anastasiya Delenda, former staff member of the Executive Office of the Secretary-General; and a family
member of the late former Secretary-General, Mr. Kofi Annan, to speak on behalf of his children.

2. Decisions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
72/547. Questions deferred for future consideration
B41
At its 81st plenary meeting, on 4 April 2018, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,42 decided to defer until the main part of its seventy-third session consideration of the following
documents:
Item 136
Programme budget for the biennium 2018–2019
Review of the experience of the utilization of the contingency fund
Report of the Secretary-General on the review of the experience of the utilization of the contingency fund43
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions44
_______________
Decision 72/547, in section B.6 of the Official Records of the General Assembly, Seventy-second Session, Supplement No. 49 (A/72/49),
vol. II, becomes decision 72/547 A.
41

42

A/72/682/Add.1, para. 5.

43

A/70/395.
A/70/7/Add.7.

44

195

IV. Decisions

C
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,45 decided to defer until the second part of its resumed seventy-third session consideration of the following
documents:
Item 149
Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Closed peacekeeping missions
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201746
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions47
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201648
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions49
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201550
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions51
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201452
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions53
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201354
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions55
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201256
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions57
Report of the Secretary-General on the updated financial position of closed peacekeeping missions as at
30 June 201158
Related report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions59
_______________
45
46

A/72/682/Add.2, para. 11.
A/72/649.

A/72/838.
A/71/652.
49
A/71/856.
50
A/70/552.
51
A/70/829.
52
A/69/659.
53
A/69/827.
47
48

A/68/666.
A/68/837.
56
A/67/739.
54
55

57

A/67/837.

58

A/66/665.
A/66/713 and A/66/713/Corr.1.

59

196

IV. Decisions

72/558. Effective date of resolutions relating to the peacekeeping budget and special political missions
At its 104th plenary meeting, on 5 July 2018, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Fifth
Committee,60 decided that all resolutions relating to the peacekeeping budget and special political missions adopted
at its 104th meeting, on 5 July 2018, under agenda items 136, 149 to 154 and 156 to 165, would be effective as from
1 July 2018.

_______________
60

A/72/917, para. 13.

197

Annex I
Allocation of agenda itemsa
a

1. The following item and the following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee,
were also considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed seventy-second session of the General
Assembly, under heading A (Promotion of sustained economic growth and sustainable development in
accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):b
19. Sustainable development:
(b) Follow-up to and implementation of the SIDS Accelerated Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway
and the Mauritius Strategy for the Further Implementation of the Programme of Action for the
Sustainable Development of Small Island Developing States.
2. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Second Committee, was also considered
directly in plenary meeting during the resumed seventy-second session, under heading A (Promotion of
sustained economic growth and sustainable development in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the
General Assembly and recent United Nations conferences):b
24. Operational activities for development:
(a)

Operational activities for development of the United Nations system;

3. The following item and the following sub-item, which had been allocated to the First Committee, were
also considered directly in plenary meeting during the resumed seventy-second session, under heading G
(Disarmament):b
99. General and complete disarmament:
(cc) Follow-up to the 2013 high-level meeting of the General Assembly on nuclear disarmament.
4. The following sub-item, which had been allocated to the Fifth Committee, was also considered directly
in plenary meeting during the resumed seventy-second session, under heading I (Organizational,
administrative and other matters):b
115. Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs and other appointments:
(a)

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions.

b

_______________
a
b

Organized under headings corresponding to the priorities of the Organization.
See decision 72/504 B in section IV.B of the present volume.

199

Annex II
Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Resolutions
Resolution
number

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

133

104th

5 July 2018

109

148

104th

5 July 2018

110

163

104th

5 July 2018

112

165

104th

5 July 2018

115

Resolution B

136

81st

4 April 2018

117

Resolution C

136

104th

5 July 2018

119

Resolution B

134

104th

5 July 2018

123

72/267.

The role of diamonds in fuelling conflict: breaking the link
between the illicit transaction of rough diamonds and
armed conflict as a contribution to prevention
and settlement of conflicts

33

78th

7 March 2018

2

72/268.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on the fight against tuberculosis

127

81st

4 April 2018

4

72/269.

Joint Inspection Unit

142

81st

4 April 2018

125

72/270.

Construction of a new facility for the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch

148

81st

4 April 2018

127

72/271.

Improving global road safety

12

82nd

12 April 2018

7

72/272.

World Bicycle Day

11

82nd

12 April 2018

13

72/273.

Cooperation between the United Nations and the International
Fund for Saving the Aral Sea

19

82nd

12 April 2018

15

72/274.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the third high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on the prevention and control
of non-communicable diseases

117

82nd

12 April 2018

16

72/8.

Title

Financial reports and audited financial statements, and reports
of the Board of Auditors
Resolution B

72/258.

Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Resolution B

72/259.

Financing of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur
Resolution B

72/260.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for Justice Support
in Haiti
Resolution B

72/262.

72/266.

Special subjects relating to the programme budget
for the biennium 2018–2019

Shifting the management paradigm in the United Nations

201

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

72/275.

International Association of Permanent Representatives
to the United Nations

123

82nd

12 April 2018

18

72/276.

Follow-up to the report of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace

65

87th

26 April 2018

19

72/277.

Towards a Global Pact for the Environment

14

88th

10 May 2018

20

72/278.

Interaction between the United Nations, national parliaments
and the Inter-Parliamentary Union

126

89th

22 May 2018

22

72/279.

Repositioning of the United Nations development system
in the context of the quadrennial comprehensive policy
review of operational activities for development
of the United Nations system

24 (a)

91st

31 May 2018

25

72/280.

Status of internally displaced persons and refugees from Abkhazia,
Georgia, and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia, Georgia

35

95th

12 June 2018

30

72/281.

International Day of Family Remittances

14

95th

12 June 2018

31

72/282.

Complete and unconditional withdrawal of foreign military forces
from the territory of the Republic of Moldova

35

98th

22 June 2018

32

72/283.

Strengthening regional and international cooperation
to ensure peace, stability and sustainable development
in the Central Asian region

65

98th

22 June 2018

34

72/284.

The United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review

118

101st

26 June 2018

37

72/285.

Rates of reimbursement to troop- and police-contributing
countries

149

104th

5 July 2018

127

72/286.

Financing of the Regional Service Centre in Entebbe, Uganda

149

104th

5 July 2018

128

72/287.

Financing of the United Nations Logistics Base at Brindisi, Italy

149

104th

5 July 2018

129

72/288.

Support account for peacekeeping operations

149

104th

5 July 2018

130

72/289.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Security Force for Abyei

150

104th

5 July 2018

138

72/290.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic

151

104th

5 July 2018

141

72/291.

Financing of the United Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire

152

104th

5 July 2018

144

72/292.

Financing of the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus

153

104th

5 July 2018

145

72/293.

Financing of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

154

104th

5 July 2018

148

72/294.

Financing of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti

156

104th

5 July 2018

151

72/295.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo

157

104th

5 July 2018

153

72/296.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in Liberia

158

104th

5 July 2018

155

72/297.

Financing of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali

159

104th

5 July 2018

157

72/298.

Financing of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force

160 (a)

104th

5 July 2018

160

72/299.

Financing of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon

160 (b)

104th

5 July 2018

162

202

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions
Resolution
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

72/300.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in South Sudan

161

104th

5 July 2018

166

72/301.

Financing of the United Nations Mission for the Referendum
in Western Sahara

162

104th

5 July 2018

168

72/302.

Financing of the activities arising from Security Council
resolution 1863 (2009)

164

104th

5 July 2018

171

72/303.

Progress towards an accountability system
in the United Nations Secretariat

134

104th

5 July 2018

173

72/304.

Comprehensive review of the whole question of peacekeeping
operations in all their aspects

55

106th

13 July 2018

106

72/305.

Review of the implementation of General Assembly resolution
68/1 on the strengthening of the Economic and Social Council

14 and 117

107th

23 July 2018

49

72/306.

Implementation of the United Nations Decade of Action
on Nutrition (2016–2025)

14

108th

24 July 2018

54

72/307.

Modalities for the high-level review of the SIDS Accelerated
Modalities of Action (SAMOA) Pathway

19 (b)

109th

27 July 2018

55

72/308.

Modalities for the Intergovernmental Conference to Adopt the
Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration

14 and 117

110th

6 August 2018

57

72/309.

Consolidating gains and accelerating efforts to control and
eliminate malaria in developing countries, particularly
in Africa, by 2030

13

113th

10 September 2018

68

72/310.

New Partnership for Africa's Development: progress in
implementation and international support

66 (a)

113th

10 September 2018

77

72/311.

Implementation of the recommendations contained in the report
of the Secretary-General on the causes of conflict and the promotion
of durable peace and sustainable development in Africa

66 (b)

113th

10 September 2018

85

72/312.

United Nations action on sexual exploitation and abuse

131

115th

13 September 2018

94

72/313.

Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly

121

116th

17 September 2018

95

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

114 (d)

106th

13 July 2018

179

113 (c)

97th

22 June 2018

179

115 (a)

107th

23 July 2018

180

114 (a)

87th

26 April 2018

180

Decisions
Decision
number

72/403.

Title

Election of fifteen members of the Human Rights Council
Decision B

72/404.

Election of five members of the International Court of Justice
Decision B

72/405.

Appointment of members of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions
Decision B

72/411.

Election of twenty members of the Committee for Programme
and Coordination
Decision B

203

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decision
number

72/412.

Title

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

78th
90th

7 March 2018
24 May 2018

181

12 February 2018

181

Appointment of members of the Committee on Conferences
Decision B

72/414.

Item

115 (f)

Election of two members of the Organizational Committee
of the Peacebuilding Commission
Decision B

114 (c)

72/416.

Appointment of members of the Board of the 10-Year Framework
of Programmes on Sustainable Consumption and Production
Patterns

115 (g)

90th

24 May 2018

182

72/417.

Election of the President of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session

4

92nd

5 June 2018

182

72/418.

Election of the Vice-Presidents of the General Assembly
at its seventy-third session

6

92nd

5 June 2018

182

72/419.

Election of five non-permanent members of the Security Council

113 (a)

93rd

8 June 2018

182

72/420.

Election of the Chairs of the Main Committees of the General
Assembly at its seventy-third session

5

93rd

8 June 2018

183

72/421.

Election of eighteen members of the Economic
and Social Council

113 (b)

96th

13 June 2018

183

72/422.

Approval of the appointment of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights

115 (h)

111th

10 August 2018

184

72/504.

Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items
7

80th
82nd
91st
97th
106th
107th
109th
112th

26 March 2018
12 April 2018
31 May 2018
22 June 2018
13 July 2018
23 July 2018
27 July 2018
6 September 2018

185

Decision B

134

81st

4 April 2018

195

Decision C

134

104th

5 July 2018

196

72/549.

Building a peaceful and better world through sport and the
Olympic ideal

11

77th

26 January 2018

186

72/550.

International Day of Reflection on the 1994 Genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda

66 (b)

77th

26 January 2018

186

72/551.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the
occasion of the International Day for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination

70

79th

20 March 2018

187

72/552.

Commemorative meeting of the General Assembly on the
occasion of the International Day of Remembrance of the
Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade

119

80th

26 March 2018

187

Decision B

72/547.

204

Questions deferred for future consideration

Annex II – Checklist of resolutions and decisions

Decision
number

Title

Item

Plenary
meeting

Date of adoption

Page

99 (cc)

80th

26 March 2018

187

72/553.

Organizational meeting of the United Nations high-level
international conference on nuclear disarmament

72/554.

Theme and sub-themes of the second High-level United Nations
Conference on South-South Cooperation

14

82nd

12 April 2018

187

72/555.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace

65

83rd

24 April 2018

187

72/556.

United Nations high-level international conference on nuclear
disarmament

99 (cc)

87th

26 April 2018

188

72/557.

Question of equitable representation on and increase in the
membership of the Security Council and other matters related
to the Security Council

122

104th

29 June 2018

188

72/558.

Effective date of resolutions relating to the peacekeeping budget
and special political missions

136, 149 to
154 and 156
to 165

104th

5 July 2018

197

72/559.

High-level meetings of the General Assembly in September 2019

7

110th

6 August 2018

188

72/560.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on universal health coverage

127

110th

6 August 2018

189

72/561.

High-level meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
and promote the International Day against Nuclear Tests

99

112th

6 September 2018

191

72/562.

Notification by the Secretary-General under Article 12,
paragraph 2, of the Charter of the United Nations

112

114th

12 September 2018

192

72/563.

Report of the Security Council

29

114th

12 September 2018

192

72/564.

Nelson Mandela Peace Summit

65

115th

13 September 2018

192

72/565.

Scope, modalities, format and organization of the high-level
meeting on the fight against tuberculosis

127

116th

17 September 2018

192

72/566.

Prevention of armed conflict

34 (a)

116th

17 September 2018

192

72/567.

Strengthening the role of mediation in the peaceful settlement
of disputes, conflict prevention and resolution

34 (b)

116th

17 September 2018

192

72/568.

Zone of peace and cooperation of the South Atlantic

36

116th

17 September 2018

192

72/569.

The situation in the occupied territories of Azerbaijan

40

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/570.

Question of the Comorian island of Mayotte

41

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/571.

Request for an advisory opinion of the International Court
of Justice on the legal consequences of the separation
of the Chagos Archipelago from Mauritius in 1965

88

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/572.

Implementation of the resolutions of the United Nations

120

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/573.

Strengthening of the United Nations system

123

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/574.

Financing of the United Nations Mission in East Timor

155

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/575.

Agenda items for inclusion in the draft agenda
of the seventy-third session

7

116th

17 September 2018

193

72/576.

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Kofi Annan, seventh SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations

7

116th

17 September 2018

195

205
