Also noting that the implementation of the United Nations
peace-keeping plan contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral of 11 Decem ber 1991 cw will facilita te the task of the
Confcrence on Yugoslavia in reaching a political settlement,

9. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter until
a peaceful solution is achieved.

Recalling its primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security.

Decision

Adopted m1a11imously al the 3049th
meeli,rg.

At its 3055th meeting, on 21 February 1992, the Council
invited the representative of Yugoslavia to participa te, without
vote, in the discussion of the item entitled "Further report of
the Secretary-General pursuant to Security Council resolution
721 (1991) (S/23592 and Add.l)". 3

Recalling also the provisions of Chapter VIH of the
Charter,
Expressing concem at the indications that the arms embargo
,stablisheù by the Council in resolution 713 (1991) is not being
fi.Jlly observed, as noted in paragraph 21 of the report of the
Secret ary-C'-.ene ral, 32

Resolution 743 (1992)
of 21 February 1992

The Security Council,

Reaffirms its approval set out in resolution 724 (1991)
of the United Nations peace-keeping plan contained in the
report of the Secretary-Gcneral of 11 December 1991;34
1.

Reaffirming its resolutions 713 ( 1991) of 25 September
1991, 721 (1991) of 27 November 1991, 724 (1991) of 15
December 1991, 727 ( 1992) of 8 J anuary 1992 and 740 (1992)
of 7 February 1992,

2. Welcomes the continuing efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his Persona! Envoy for Yugoslavia to remove the
remaining obstacle in the way of the deployment of a peacekceping operation;

Taking note of the fürther report of the Secretary-General
of 15 and 19 February 199235 submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolution 721 (1991) and the request of the Govemment ofYugoslavia of26 November 1991 36 for a peace-keeping
operation in Yugoslavia referred to in that resolution,

3. Approves the proposa] by the Secretary-General to
increase the authorized strength of the military liaison mission
lo a total of seventy--fivc officers;

Noting in particular that the Secretary-General considers
that the conditions permitting the early dcployment of a United
Nations Protection Force arc met and welcoming bis recommendation that this Force should be established with immediate
effect,

4. Requests the Secretary-General to expedite bis
preparations for a United Nations peace-keeping operation so
as to be prepared to deploy immcdiately after the Council
decides to do so:

:5. Expresses its concem that the United Nations peacekeeping plan has not yet been fully and unconditionally
accepted by ail in Yugoslavia on whose cooperation its success
depends;

Expressing its gratitude to the Secretary-General and his
Persona! Envoy for Yugoslavia for their contribution to the
achievement of conditions facilitating the deployment of a
United Nations Protection Force and their continuing commitment to this effort,

6. Calfs upon ail States to continue to take ail appropriate steps to ensure that the Yugoslav parties implement their
unqualified acceptance of the United Nations peace-keeping
plan. fulfil their commitments in good faith and cooperate fully
with the Secretary-General:

Concemed that the situation in Yugoslavia continues to
constitute a threat to international peacc and security as
determined in resolution 713 (1991).
Recalling its primary responsibility under the Charter of the
United Nations for the maintenance of international peace and
security,

7. Calls upon the Yugoslav parties to cooperate fullywith
the Conference on Yugoslavia in its aim of reaching a political
settlement consistent with the principles of the Conference on
Security and Cooperation in Europe, and reaffirms that the
United Nations peace-keeping plan and its implementation is
in no way intended to prejudge the terms of a political settlement;

Recalling also the provisions of Article 25 and Chapter VIII
of the Charter,
Commending again the efforts undertaken by the European
Community and its member States, with the support of the
St~tes _participating in the Conference on Security and CooperatJon m Europe, through the convening of a Conference on
Yugoslavia, including the mechanisms set forth within it, to
ensure a peaceful political settlement,

8. Also calls upon ail States to cooperate fully with the
Security Council Committee established by resolution 724
(1991) conceming Yugoslavia, including reporting any information brought to their attention conceming violations of the
embargo:

8

Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, and
reaffirms that the United Nations peace-keeping plan and its
implementation is in no way intended to prejudge the terms of
a political settlement;

Convinced that the implementation of the United Nations
peace-keeping plan 34 will assist the Conference on Yugoslavia
in reaching a peaceful political seulement,
1. Approves the further report of the Secretary-General
of 15 and 19 February 199235 submitted pursuant to Security
Council resolut ion 721 ( 1991 ),

11. Decides within the same framework that the embargo
imposed byparagraph 6 ofresolution 713 (1991) shall not apply
to weapons and military equipment destined for the sole use of
the Force;

2. Decides to establish, under its authority, a United
Nations Protection Force in accordance with the above-mentioned report and the United Nations peace-keeping plan,34 and
requests the Secretary-General to take the measures necessary
to ensurc its earliest possible deployment;

12. Requests ail States to provide appropriate support to
the Force, in particular to permit and facilitate the transit of its
personnel and equipment;

3. Decides that, in order to implement the recommendations in paragraph 30 of the report, the Force is established in
accordance with paragraph 4 below, for an initial period of
twelve months unless the Council subsequently decides otherwise;

13. Decides to remain actively seized of the matter until
a peaceful solution is achieved.
Adopted unanimcmsly al the 3055th
meeting.

4. Requests the Secretary-C',eneral immediately to deploy
those elements of the Force which can assist in developing an
implementation plan for the earliest possible full deployment of
the Force for approval by the Council and a budget, which
together will maximize the contribution of the Yugoslav parties
to offsetting its costs and in ail other ways secure the most
etlïcient and cost-effective operation possible;

Decisions

In a letter dated 25 February 1992,37 addressed to the
President of the Security Council for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General referred to
resolution 743 (1992) of21 February 1992 by which the Council
had decided to establish a United Nations Protection Force.
Having completed his consultations with the parties, he
proposed, with the consent of the Council, to appoint Lleutenant-General Satish Nambiar, of India, as Force Commander.

5. Recal/s that, in accordance with paragraph 1 of the
United Nations peace-kecping plan, the Force should be an
intcrim arrangement to create the conditions of peace and
security required for the negotiation of an overall settlement of
the Yugoslav crisis;

By a letter dated 26 February 1992,38 the President of the
Security Council informed the Secretary-General as follows.

6. Invites accordingly the Secretary-General to report to
the Security Council as appropriate and not Jess than every six
months on progress towards a peaceful political settlement and
the situation on the ground, and to submit a first report on the
establishment of the Force within two months of the adoption
of the present resolution;

"I have the honour to inform you that your letter
dated 25 February 1992 conceming the appointment of the
Force Commander of the United Nations Protection
Force 37 has been brought to the attention of the members
of the Council. They agree with the proposai contained in
your letter."

7. Undertakes, in this connection, to examine without
delay any recommendations that the Secretary-General may
make in his reports conceming the Force, including the
duration of its mission, and to adopt appropriate decisions;

In a letter dated 25 February 1992, 39 addressed to the
President of the Security Council for the attention of the
members of the Council, the Secretary-General, having
completed the necessary consultations, proposed that the
military elements of the United Nations Protection Force be
composed of contingents from the following States, ail ofwhom
had expressed their readiness in principle to make the necessary
personnel available: Argentina, Bangladesh, Belgium, Canada,
Colombia, Czechoslovakia, Denmark, Egypt, Finland, France,
Ghana, Ireland, Kenya, Luxembourg, Nepal, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Russian Federation, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northem Ireland. He stated that he was awaiting
a reply from certain other States which had been informally
approached and that be would revert to the Security Council
when he had an indication of whether they were also ready in
principle to contribute military personnel to this mission.

8. Urges all parties and others concemed to comply
strictly with the cease-fire agreements signed at Geneva on 23
November 1991 31 and at Sarajevo on 2 January 1992,30 and to
cooperate fully and unconditionally in the implementation of
the United Nations peace-keeping plan;
9. Demands that ail parties and others concemed take ail
the necessary measures to ensure the safety of the personnel
sent by the United Nations and of the members of the European Community Monitoring Mission;
10. Catis again upon the Yugoslav parties to cooperate
fully with the Conference on Yugoslavia in its aim of reaching
a political scttlemcnt consistent with the principles of the
9
