United Nations

A/RES/67/154

General Assembly

Distr.: General
13 March 2013

Sixty-seventh session
Agenda item 67 (a)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 20 December 2012
[on the report of the Third Committee (A/67/455)]

67/154. Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain
practices that contribute to fuelling contemporary
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance
The General Assembly,
Guided by the Charter of the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, 1 the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 2 the
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination 3
and other relevant human rights instruments,
Recalling the provisions of Commission on Human Rights resolutions
2004/16 of 16 April 2004 4 and 2005/5 of 14 April 2005 5 and relevant Human
Rights Council resolutions, in particular resolutions 7/34 of 28 March 2008, 6 18/15
of 29 September 2011 7 and 21/33 of 28 September 2012, 8 as well as General
Assembly resolutions 60/143 of 16 December 2005, 61/147 of 19 December 2006,
62/142 of 18 December 2007, 63/162 of 18 December 2008, 64/147 of
18 December 2009, 65/199 of 21 December 2010 and 66/143 of 19 December 2011
on this issue and resolutions 61/149 of 19 December 2006, 62/220 of 22 December
2007, 63/242 of 24 December 2008, 64/148 of 18 December 2009, 65/240 of
24 December 2010 and 66/144 of 19 December 2011, entitled “Global efforts for
the total elimination of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance and the comprehensive implementation of and follow-up to the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action”,
_______________
1

Resolution 217 A (III).
See resolution 2200 A (XXI), annex.
3
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 660, No. 9464.
4
See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council, 2004, Supplement No. 3 (E/2004/23), chap. II,
sect. A.
5
Ibid., 2005, Supplement No. 3 and corrigenda (E/2005/23 and Corr.1 and 2), chap. II, sect. A.
6
See Official Records of the General Assembly, Sixty-third Session, Supplement No. 53 (A/63/53), chap. II.
7
Ibid., Sixty-sixth Session, Supplement No. 53A and corrigendum (A/66/53/Add.1 and Corr.1), chap. II.
8
Ibid., Sixty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 53A (A/67/53/Add.1), chap. II.
2

12-48784

*1248784*

Please recycle

Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/67/154

Recalling also the Charter of the Nuremberg Tribunal and the Judgement of
the Tribunal, which recognized as criminal, inter alia, the SS organization and all its
integral parts, including the Waffen SS, through its officially accepted members
implicated in or with knowledge of the commission of war crimes and crimes
against humanity connected with the Second World War, as well as other relevant
provisions of the Charter and the Judgement,
Recalling further the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance on 8 September 2001, 9 in
particular paragraph 2 of the Declaration and paragraph 86 of the Programme of
Action, as well as the relevant provisions of the outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference, of 24 April 2009, 10 in particular paragraphs 11 and 54,
Alarmed, in this regard, at the spread in many parts of the world of various
extremist political parties, movements and groups, including neo-Nazis and
skinhead groups, as well as similar extremist ideological movements,
Deeply concerned by all recent manifestations of violence and terrorism
incited by violent nationalism, racism, xenophobia and related intolerance,
Reaffirms the relevant provisions of the Durban Declaration9 and of the
1.
outcome document of the Durban Review Conference,10 in which States condemned
the persistence and resurgence of neo-Nazism, neo-Fascism and violent nationalist
ideologies based on racial and national prejudice and stated that those phenomena
could never be justified in any instance or in any circumstances;
Takes note of the report of the Special Rapporteur on contemporary
2.
forms of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, prepared
in accordance with the request contained in General Assembly resolution 66/143; 11
3.
Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights for her commitment to maintaining the fight against racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance as one of the priority activities of
her Office;
Expresses deep concern about the glorification of the Nazi movement
4.
and former members of the Waffen SS organization, including by erecting
monuments and memorials and holding public demonstrations in the name of the
glorification of the Nazi past, the Nazi movement and neo-Nazism, as well as by
declaring or attempting to declare such members and those who fought against the
anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement participants in
national liberation movements;
Expresses concern at recurring attempts to desecrate or demolish
5.
monuments erected in remembrance of those who fought against Nazism during the
Second World War, as well as to unlawfully exhume or remove the remains of such
persons, and in this regard urges States to fully comply with their relevant
obligations, inter alia, under article 34 of Additional Protocol I to the Geneva
Conventions of 1949; 12
_______________
9

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.
See A/CONF.211/8, chap. I.
11
A/67/328.
12
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 1125, No. 17512.
10

2/6

Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/67/154

6.
Notes with concern the increase in the number of racist incidents
worldwide, including the rise of skinhead groups, which have been responsible for
many of these incidents, as well as the resurgence of racist and xenophobic violence
targeting members of national, ethnic, religious or linguistic minorities;
Reaffirms that such acts may be qualified to fall within the scope of the
7.
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,3
that they may not be justified as exercises of the rights to freedom of peaceful
assembly and of association as well as the rights to freedom of opinion and
expression, and that they may fall within the scope of article 20 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights2 and may legitimately be restricted as set out
in articles 19, 21 and 22 of the Covenant;
8.
Expresses deep concern at attempts at commercial advertising aimed at
exploiting the sufferings of the victims of war crimes and crimes against humanity
committed during the Second World War by the Nazi regime;
Stresses that the practices described above do injustice to the memory of
9.
the countless victims of crimes against humanity committed in the Second World
War, in particular those committed by the SS organization and by those who fought
against the anti-Hitler coalition and collaborated with the Nazi movement, and
negatively influence children and young people, and that failure by States to
effectively address such practices is incompatible with the obligations of States
Members of the United Nations under its Charter and is incompatible with the
purposes and principles of the Organization;
10. Also stresses that such practices fuel contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance and contribute to the
spread and multiplication of various extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and in this regard calls for
increased vigilance;
11. Emphasizes the need to take the measures necessary to put an end to the
practices described above, and calls upon States to take more effective measures in
accordance with international human rights law to combat those phenomena and the
extremist movements, which pose a real threat to democratic values;
12. Encourages States to adopt further measures to provide training to the
police and other law enforcement bodies on the ideologies of extremist political
parties, movements and groups whose advocacy constitutes incitement to racist and
xenophobic violence and to strengthen their capacity to address racist and
xenophobic crimes and to bring to justice those responsible for such crimes;
13. Notes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur regarding the
responsibility of political leaders and parties in relation to messages that incite
racial discrimination or xenophobia;
14. Recalls the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur to introduce into
national criminal law a provision according to which committing an offence with
racist or xenophobic motivations or aims constitutes an aggravating circumstance
allowing for enhanced penalties, and encourages those States whose legislation does
not contain such provisions to consider that recommendation;
15. Reaffirms, in this regard, the particular importance of all forms of
education, including human rights education, as a complement to legislative
measures, as outlined by the Special Rapporteur;

3/6

A/RES/67/154

Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

16. Emphasizes the recommendation of the Special Rapporteur presented at
the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly, in which he emphasized the
importance of history classes in teaching the dramatic events and human suffering
which arose out of the adoption of ideologies such as Nazism and Fascism;
17. Stresses the importance of other positive measures and initiatives aimed
at bringing communities together and providing them with space for genuine
dialogue, such as round tables, working groups and seminars, including training
seminars for State agents and media professionals, as well as awareness-raising
activities, especially those initiated by civil society representatives which require
continued State support;
18. Calls upon States to continue to invest in education, inter alia, in order
to transform attitudes and correct ideas of racial hierarchies and superiority
promoted by extremist political parties, movements and groups and counter their
negative influence;
19. Underlines the potentially positive role that relevant United Nations
entities and programmes, in particular the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, can play in the aforementioned areas;
20. Reaffirms article 4 of the Convention, according to which States parties
to that instrument condemn all propaganda and all organizations that are based on
ideas or theories of superiority of one race or group of persons of one colour or
ethnic origin, or that attempt to justify or promote racial hatred and discrimination
in any form, and undertake to adopt immediate and positive measures designed to
eradicate all incitement to, or acts of, such discrimination and, to that end, with due
regard to the principles embodied in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights1
and the rights expressly set forth in article 5 of the Convention, inter alia:
(a) Shall declare an offence punishable by law all dissemination of ideas
based on racial superiority or hatred, and incitement to racial discrimination, as well
as all acts of violence or incitement to such acts against any race or group of persons
of another colour or ethnic origin, and also the provision of any assistance to racist
activities, including the financing thereof;
(b) Shall declare illegal and prohibit organizations, and organized and all
other propaganda activities, that promote and incite racial discrimination, and shall
recognize participation in such organizations or activities as an offence punishable
by law;
(c) Shall not permit public authorities or public institutions, national or
local, to promote or incite racial discrimination;
21. Also reaffirms that, as underlined in paragraph 13 of the outcome
document of the Durban Review Conference, any advocacy of national, racial or
religious hatred that constitutes incitement to discrimination, hostility or violence
should be prohibited by law, that all dissemination of ideas based on racial
superiority or hatred, or incitement to racial discrimination, as well as all acts of
violence or incitement to such acts, shall be declared offences punishable by law, in
accordance with the international obligations of States, and that these prohibitions
are consistent with freedom of opinion and expression;
22. Recognizes the positive role that the exercise of the right to freedom of
opinion and expression, as well as full respect for the freedom to seek, receive and
impart information, including through the Internet, can play in combating racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
4/6

Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/67/154

23. Expresses concern about the use of the Internet to propagate racism,
racial hatred, xenophobia, racial discrimination and related intolerance, and in this
regard calls upon States parties to the Covenant to implement fully articles 19 and
20 thereof, which guarantee the right to freedom of expression and outline grounds
on which the exercise of this right can be legitimately restricted;
24. Recognizes the need to promote the use of new information and
communications technologies, including the Internet, to contribute to the fight
against racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
25. Encourages those States that have made reservations to article 4 of the
Convention to give serious consideration to withdrawing such reservations as a
matter of priority, as stressed by the Special Rapporteur;
26. Notes the importance of strengthening cooperation at the regional and
international levels with the aim of countering all manifestations of racism, racial
discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance, in particular regarding issues
raised in the present resolution;
27. Stresses the importance of cooperating closely with civil society and
international and regional human rights mechanisms in order to counter effectively
all manifestations of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance, as well as extremist political parties, movements and groups, including
neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other similar extremist ideological movements
that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
28. Encourages States parties to the Convention to ensure that their
legislation incorporates the provisions of the Convention, including those of
article 4;
29. Encourages States to adopt the legislation necessary to combat racism
while ensuring that the definition of racial discrimination set out therein complies
with article 1 of the Convention;
30. Recalls that any legislative or constitutional measures adopted with a
view to countering extremist political parties, movements and groups, including
neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and similar extremist ideological movements should
be in conformity with the relevant international human rights norms;
31. Also recalls the request of the Commission on Human Rights, in its
resolution 2005/5,5 that the Special Rapporteur continue to reflect on this issue,
make relevant recommendations in his future reports and seek and take into account
in this regard the views of Governments and non-governmental organizations;
32. Requests the Special Rapporteur to prepare, for submission to the General
Assembly at its sixty-eighth session and to the Human Rights Council at its
twenty-third session, reports on the implementation of the present resolution, in
particular regarding paragraphs 4, 5, 7 to 9, 16 and 17 above, based on the views
collected in accordance with the request of the Commission, as recalled in
paragraph 31 above;
33. Expresses its appreciation to those Governments that have provided
information to the Special Rapporteur in the course of the preparation of his report
to the General Assembly, and notes the increase in such contributions received
from States;

5/6

Glorification of Nazism: inadmissibility of certain practices
that contribute to fuelling contemporary forms of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance

A/RES/67/154

34. Stresses that such information is important for the sharing of experiences
and best practices in the fight against extremist political parties, movements and
groups, including neo-Nazis and skinhead groups, and other extremist ideological
movements that incite racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;
35. Encourages Governments and non-governmental organizations to cooperate
fully with the Special Rapporteur in the exercise of the tasks outlined in paragraph 31
above;
36. Encourages Governments, non-governmental organizations and relevant
actors to disseminate, as widely as possible, information regarding the contents of
and the principles outlined in the present resolution, including through the media,
but not limited to it;
37.

Decides to remain seized of the issue.
60th plenary meeting
20 December 2012

6/6
