S/2017/680

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 August 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 4 August 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
Further to my most recent report to the Security Council on the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) (S/2017/591), dated 11 July 2017,
I hereby request the Council to consider the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which is due to expire on 31 August
2017. In a letter dated 25 July 2017 addressed to me, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Emigrants of Lebanon requested the Council to extend the mandate for a
further year, without amendment.
Further to Security Council resolution 2305 (2016), a strategic review of
UNIFIL was conducted earlier in 2017. I communicated its conclusions and
recommendations in a letter dated 8 March 2017 to the President of the Security
Council (S/2017/202). The review took into account the evolving regional dynamics
and internal context in Lebanon. The strategic priorities identified reflect a
heightened emphasis on prevention, while ensuring that the necessary operational
preparedness is in place for the worst-case scenario, in particular as it pertains to the
mandate of UNIFIL regarding the protection of civilians. The review also identified
efficiency gains that could be made without compromising the operational
effectiveness of UNIFIL on land, in the air and at sea. The Force is implementing
the recommendations and has adopted a proactive approach to achieving the
efficiencies as a matter of priority.
The continued long period of relative calm and stability in southern Lebanon
and along the Blue Line, as well as in northern Israel, is significant, especially in
the light of the destabilizing developments in the region. I commend both the
Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces for their continued
commitment in maintaining the cessation of hostilities and their close cooperation
and coordination with UNIFIL.
The prevailing calm notwithstanding, there has been no tangible progress
towards a permanent ceasefire and a long-term solution to the conflict, as called for
in resolution 1701 (2006). Both parties have yet to fulfil their respective obligations
under the resolution. Israel must withdraw its forces from Lebanese territory and
stop violations of Lebanese airspace. The Government of Lebanon must exercise
effective authority over all Lebanese territory, prevent hostile actio n from its
territory, ensure the safety and security of the civilian population, in addition to
United Nations personnel, and ensure the disarmament of all armed groups so that
there will be no weapons or authority in Lebanon other than that of the Lebanes e
State.

17-13448 (E)

080817

*1713448*

S/2017/680

The Lebanese authorities should take all action to ensure that there are no
unauthorized armed personnel, assets or weapons in the area between the Blue Line
and the Litani River, bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the Lebanese
Armed Forces in this regard. For its part, UNIFIL, in coordination with the
Lebanese Armed Forces, remains determined to act with all means available within
its mandate and capabilities on specific information provided regarding the illegal
presence of armed personnel, weapons or infrastructure inside its area of operations.
It is my intention to look at ways in which UNIFIL could enhance its efforts in this
regard.
The cooperation between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces through
strategic dialogue remains essential to assisting the Government of Lebanon to
increase the capacity, capabilities and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in
southern Lebanon and the territorial waters of Lebanon at an accelerated pace to
fully implement the provisions of resolution 1701 (2006).
Mindful of the current regional context and the multiple security challenges
confronting the Lebanese Armed Forces, I repeat my call for increased and targeted
international support in this regard. The Lebanese Armed Forces have identified
prioritized land and maritime capabilities, which were reflected in the strategic
review, specifically: a “model brigade” in southern Lebanon; the acquisition of an
offshore patrol vessel; and the establishment of a civil-military cooperation centre in
the south. I strongly encourage the international community to support the identified
needs of the Lebanese Armed Forces for the implementation of resolution 1701
(2006) and to coordinate with UNIFIL and the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, within the framework of the International Support Group
for Lebanon, on how best to mobilize such support. Having a strong and sustainable
presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Lebanon is a vital element in
enhancing the overall State presence in southern Lebanon and in moving from the
fragile cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire.
The liaison and coordination arrangements that UNIFIL has established with
the Lebanese Armed Forces and the Israel Defense Forces, bilaterally and through
the tripartite forum, remain a cornerstone for assisting the parties in finding
mutually agreeable security arrangements and confidence-building measures to
mitigate the scope for tension or incidents in sensitive areas along the Blue Line.
I urge both parties to continue to actively engage with UNIFIL to maintain calm and
prevent violations. I encourage the parties to continue to work with UNIFIL in the
process to mark the Blue Line visibly on the ground in its entirety as a confidence building measure, as well as to assist with the monitoring of violations and prevent
inadvertent crossings and to find solutions for areas where agreement by the parties
has not been reached to date.
The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force continues to provide training to the naval
branch of the Lebanese Armed Forces and to conduct maritime interdiction
operations to prevent the unauthorized entry by sea of arms or r elated materiel into
Lebanon. By enabling a safe and stable maritime environment, it contributes to
maintaining the calm in Lebanon by deterring the use of Lebanese territorial waters
for illicit purposes and mitigating the spillover effects of regional cr ises, as well as
enhancing maritime trade in that part of the Mediterranean.
UNIFIL conducts, on average, 13,500 operational activities per month.
Incidents of unfriendly or aggressive behaviour towards peacekeepers by the local
population or obstruction of the freedom of movement of UNIFIL occasionally
occur, but the number of such instances remains small. UNIFIL outreach activities
and engagement with representatives of local-level and central-level government
institutions support the extension of State authority and service provision to
2/3

17-13448

S/2017/680

communities in the south. In addition, the engagement of UNIFIL troops and
international and national staff with the local population through civil -military
cooperation activities and quick-impact projects continues to foster support among
the local population and ensure that the mandate and activities of the Force are well
understood.
The total number of military personnel, as at 24 July 2017, stood at 10,466.
The UNIFIL civilian component numbered 235 international and 580 national staff.
I am grateful to the 41 troop-contributing countries that make up UNIFIL for their
ongoing commitment. The Force, through a wide range of operational and
non-operational activities, continues to play a crucial role in maintaining stabi lity in
southern Lebanon and along the Blue Line and in creating an environment for a
political process to take place with regard to a permanent ceasefire.
As the UNIFIL mandate approaches its expiration date, it is clear that more
work remains to be done. In the absence of progress towards a permanent ceasefire,
the ability of the Force to deter, prevent and deconflict will be increasingly put to
the test. All efforts must therefore be expended to take advantage of the relative
calm as a window of opportunity to make progress on outstanding elements of
resolution 1701 (2006). In this regard, I call upon the parties to take the necessary
positive steps towards a permanent ceasefire and long -term solution to the conflict
as called for in resolution 1701 (2006). UNIFIL, in close coordination with the
Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator, is ready to lend its full support to
the parties in this process.
I should like to express my appreciation to the Head of Mission and Force
Commander of UNIFIL, Major General Michael Beary, and to all the military and
civilian personnel of UNIFIL for the work that they are carrying out in southern
Lebanon and for their commitment to the service of peace.
Regarding the financial aspects of UNIFIL, by its resolution 71/307 the
General Assembly appropriated the amount of $483 million for the maintenance of
the Force for the period from 1 July 2017 to 30 June 2018. Should the Security
Council decide to extend the mandate of the Force beyond 31 August 2017, the cost
of maintaining UNIFIL would be limited to the amount approved by the Assembly.
As at 25 July 2017, unpaid assessed contributions to the Special Account for
UNIFIL amounted to $83.8 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations as at that date amounted to $4,867.9 million.
Reimbursement of troop costs has been made for the period up to 30 April 2017,
while reimbursement of the costs of contingent -owned equipment has been made for
the period up to 31 March 2017, in accordance with the quarterly schedule.
I should also like to express my appreciation for the unified and stea dfast
support of the Security Council to UNIFIL and its mandated activities. With the
above information in mind, I recommend that the Council extend the mandate of
UNIFIL for a further period of 12 months, until 31 August 2018.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

17-13448

3/3
