United Nations

A/RES/57/273

General Assembly

Distr.: General
5 March 2003

Fifty-seventh session
Agenda item 93

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/57/538)]

57/273. Ensuring effective secretariat support for sustained
follow-up to the outcome of the International Conference
on Financing for Development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 56/210 B of 9 July 2002, by which it endorsed the
Monterrey Consensus of the International Conference on Financing for
Development 1 and requested the Secretary-General to include in his report on the
outcome of the Conference, to be submitted to it at its fifty-seventh session,
measures taken as well as his proposals for ensuring effective secretariat support to
the follow-up efforts to the Conference,
Stressing the importance of providing sustained follow-up within the United
Nations system to the agreements and commitments reached at the Conference and
ensuring effective secretariat support, with collaboration from the secretariats of the
major stakeholders concerned, fully utilizing the United Nations System Chief
Executives Board for Coordination mechanism, pursuant to paragraph 72 of the
Monterrey Consensus, and building on the innovative and participatory modalities
and related coordination arrangements utilized in the preparations for the
Conference,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 2002/34 of 26 July 2002,
in which the Council, inter alia, decided to promote a coherent and integrated response
within the United Nations on the part of the different departments, units, funds,
programmes and specialized agencies, each in its specific area of competence,
Recalling the report of the Committee for Programme and Coordination on the
work of its forty-second session, in which the Committee recommended that,
following the endorsement of the Monterrey Consensus by the General Assembly,
the Secretary-General should prepare a proposal for a new subprogramme on
financing for development under programme 7, Economic and social affairs, of the
medium-term plan for the period 2002–2005, for consideration by the General
Assembly at its fifty-seventh session, 2
_______________
1
Report of the International Conference on Financing for Development, Monterrey, Mexico,
18–22 March 2002 (United Nations publication, Sales No. E.02.II.A.7), chap. I, resolution 1, annex.
2
Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/57/16), para. 107.

02 55741

A/RES/57/273

1.
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the Secretary-General on
the outcome of the International Conference on Financing for Development 3 and on
follow-up efforts to the Conference; 4
2.
Reaffirms that the Conference constituted a new approach by the
international community and that its implementation and follow-up should be given
a very high priority in the economic and social work of the United Nations;
3.
Requests the Secretary-General to establish, as soon as possible, from
within the existing resources of the United Nations Secretariat, appropriate
secretariat support arrangements along the lines envisioned in paragraph 48 of the
report of the Secretary-General on the outcome of the Conference,3 with
collaboration from other agencies and institutional stakeholders and with a
distinctive function to provide effective substantive secretariat support for sustained
follow-up within the United Nations to the agreements and commitments reached at
the Conference;
4.
Decides that the functions of the new secretariat support structure should
be of an integrating, cross-cutting and holistic nature and that it should, inter alia,
serve as a focal point in the United Nations Secretariat for overall follow-up to the
implementation of the outcome of the Conference, provide secretariat support to the
intergovernmental process entrusted with the follow-up to the Conference, support
and facilitate the participation of all stakeholders, follow closely the issues and
policies related to international economic, financial and development cooperation,
and keep under review actions taken at all levels in the follow-up to the Conference,
as well as within the framework of international economic, financial and
development cooperation, in general;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to accord priority to the following main
tasks related to follow-up activities: (a) promoting coherence and an integrated
approach within the United Nations to issues related to financing for development,
fully utilizing the United Nations System Chief Executives Board for Coordination
mechanism; (b) intensifying interactions with the secretariats of the World Bank, the
International Monetary Fund and the World Trade Organization, as well as other
institutional stakeholders; (c) continuing the involvement of other relevant stakeholders,
including civil society organizations and the private sector; and (d) preparing inputs for
consideration by the intergovernmental bodies concerned;
6.
Invites Member States and all institutional and non-institutional
stakeholders in the financing for development process to extend their full support to
and cooperate fully with the new secretariat support structure in fulfilling its tasks;
7.
Decides that the provisions of the present resolution should be
implemented, utilizing existing resources, starting at the beginning of 2003;
8.
Requests the Secretary-General to seek voluntary contributions to support
the follow-up to the Conference;
9.
Also requests the Secretary-General, as a part of his consolidated report
on financing for development, to report to the General Assembly at its fifty-eighth
session on the implementation of the present resolution.
78th plenary meeting
20 December 2002
_______________
3
4

2

A/57/344.
A/57/319–E/2002/85.
