65

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
solutions to refugee problems;
(c) Providing the necessary means to attain the
financial targets established with the approval of the
Executive Committee.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

B
The General Assembly,
Taking note of the recommendation of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, as mentioned in paragraph 169 of the report
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,13
1. Decides that the Emergency Fund established
under General Assembly resolution 1166 (XII) of 26
November 1957 shall henceforth be maintained at its
ceiling of $500,000 by replenishments from the Working Capital and Guarantee Fund and by voluntary
contributions made for that purpose;
2. Authorizes the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to allocate from the Emergency
Fund, under the general directives of the Executive
Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme, up
to $1 million annually for emergency situations, it
being understood that the amount made available for
one single emergency shall not exceed $500,000 in any
one year.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

2957 (XJ(VII). Continuation of the Office of
the lJnitPtl Nation., Hiµ;h (~ommissioner
for Refugt•ef!

The General Assembly,
Noting the report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. 14
Recalling its resolution 2294 (XXII) of 11 December 1967, in which it decided to review, not later
than at its twenty-seventh session, the arrangements
for the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees with a view to determining whether
the Ofllce should he continued beyond 31 December

1973,
Recogni:ing the continuin~ need for international
action on behalf of refugees,
Considering the valuable work which has been performed hy the Ofliee of the High Commissioner in
providing international protection to refugees and in
promoting permanent solutions to their problems,
Noting ll'ith appr~ciation the effective manner in
which the Office of the High Commissioner has been
dealing with special emergencies.
1. Decides to continue the Oflice of the United Nations High Commi~sioner for Refugees for a further
period of five vcaP- from 1 January 1974;
2. Decides to review, not bter than at its thirtysecond session. the :irrnnJ1crnrnts for the Office of the
u Official Records of the General Assembly. Twenty-seventh
Session, s,,p,-,lement No. /2 ( A/8712).
14 lbid .. Suppleml'!1t Nn 1;, ( A/8712) and Supplement No.
12A (A.'?'l',,1\,kU)

High Commissioner with a view to determining whether
the omce should be continued beyond 31 December
1978.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972
2958 (XXVII). As,,istance to Sudmwi.c refugees
returning fron1 abroad

The General Assembly,
Having heard the statement of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 1 "
Recalling Economic and Social Council resolutions
1655 (LII) of l June 1972 and 1705 (LIII) of 27
July 1972,
I. Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan in
the peaceful settlement of the southern Sudan question;
2. Commends the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees for his efficient role in the coordination of relief and resettlement operations of
refugees and other displaced persons;
3. Reaf(zrms Economic and Social Council resolutions 1655 (LII) and 1705 (LIii) in which the Council, inter alia, urged the organizations associated with
the United Nations and all Governments to render the
maximum possible assistance to the Government of
the Sudan in the relief, rehabilitation and resettlement
of Sudanese refugees coming from abroad and other
displaced persons.
2107th plenary meeting
J:; December 197:!
2959 (XXVII). Assistan('C in cases of natural
disaster and other disaslt•r situations

The General Assembly,
Recalling previous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Economic and Social Council relating to
disaster relief, in particular Assembly resolution 2816
(XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Taking note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on assistance in cases of natural
disaster and other disaster situations, 16 and having heard
the introductory statement made by the Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator before the Third Committec, 17
Noting with appreciation the action already taken
by the Disaster Relief Co-ordinator since the establishment of his Otfice,
Rca[firming the vital importance, in order to lessen
the impact of disasters, of assistance to disaster-prone
countries in preventive measures, disaster contingency
planning and preparedness,
Considering that the Disaster Relief Co-ordinator
should continue to explore ways of strengthening and
developing national contingency plans and machinery
for disaster relief co-ordination at the national level
and that, therefore, he should be provided with the
means and resources necc,sary for him tn carry out hi,
acti1111 in this area nf di,:1<;1rr preparedness,
l:'"i/hid.,

T11·01/Y·•111i:1I:

,\'f,,q·, 1 11.

Third

('1 1nt1niltl'l',

195...fth

meeting.
16 A/8854.
17 O(Jicia! Record_. nf

._\."rs,·i1,n, Third r·on1n1ir

tl1e G('11!'l'a/ As1en,!,/,. T11·nm·--scve11tl,
(',

1Ll59th mc1:tin1!.

66

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

l. Decides, as an interim measure, to authorize the
Secretary-General to draw on the Working Capital Fund
in the amount of $25,000 in 1973 for assistance to Governments, at their request, in co-operation with the organizations of the United Nations system and the League
of Red Cross Societies, where appropriate, in the
elaboration of national preparations to meet natural
disasters;
2. Calls upon the Secretary-General to explore
various means, including support through the United
Nations Development Programme, of making adequate
provision subsequently for this purpose and to report
on this matter to the General Assembly at its twentyeighth session.
2107th plenary meeting
12 December 1972

3009 (XXVII), Employment of women in senior
and other professional positions by the
secretariats of organizations in the United
Nations system

The General Assembly,
Recalling the declarations and instruments adopted
by the United Nations acknowledging the equality of
status of men and women-inter alia, the Charter of
the United Nations, the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 18 the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights18 and the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women 19-and also relevant instruments of the International Labour Organisation and the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization,
Recalling its resolution 2715 (XXV) of 15 December 1970, in which it requested the Secretary-General
to include in his report to the General Assembly on
the composition of the Secretariat data on the employment of women at senior and other professional levels,
including their numbers and the positions they occupy,
Noting with appreciation that the report of the Secretary-General on the composition of the Secretariat
submitted to the General Assembly at its twenty-sixth
session20 included for the first time some information
on the employment of women, showing the number
of women and the level at which they were employed
in senior and professional positions within the secretariats of organizations in the United Nations system,
and that a further report has been submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session21 which
likewise includes data on the employment of women,
Noting that, as at 30 June 1972, no women were
employed within the United Nations Secretariat at the
Under-Secretary-General or Assistant-Secretary-General level, that only three of the total of 59 employed
at the D-2 level were women, and that only four of
the total of 181 employed at the D-1 level were
women,
Further noting that in the less senior and professional ranks of the Secretariat the percentage of women
is in inverse proportion to the level of the position,
18 See resolution 2200 A

(XXI), annex.

19 Resolution 2263 (XXII).
20 A/8483.
2 1 A/8831 and Corr. I and Add.1.

ranging from 6.2 per cent of the staff at the P-5
level to 40.4 per cent at the P-1 level in posts subject
to geographical distribution, and from 7.3 per cent
at the P-5 level to 39.8 per cent at the P-1 level for
the Secretariat as a whole,
Noting as well that in all the other organizations
in the United Nations common system there are no
women at the highest levels, only one woman employed
at the D-2 level and only 10 women at the D-1 level,
l. Notes with satisfaction the recent appointment
by the Secretary-General of a woman to the rank of
Assistant Secretary-General and hopes that more women
will be appointed to positions at high levels of the
United Nations Secretariat;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to include in his
annual report to the General Assembly on the composition of the Secretariat more comprehensive data
on the employment of women in the secretariats of
the organizations in the United Nations system, so as
to show the nature of posts and types of duties performed by women at the professional and policy-making
levels;
3. Urges once again the organizations in the United
Nations system to take or continue to take appropriate
measures, including more extensive publk:izing of the
right of individuals personally to apply for vacant
positions, in order to ensure equal opportunities for
the employment of qualified women at the senior and
professional levels and in policy-making positions;
. 4. Calls upof! Member States, when proposing naho~a.ls for_ appomtment to the senior and profession.ii
pos1t1oi:is m t~e secretariats of the organizations in
the Umted Nations system, to give full consideration to
submitting the candidatures of qualified women for all
positions, particularly at the policy-making level.
2113th plenary meeting
18 Deccmher 1972
3010 (XXVII).

International Womrn's Yt•ar

The General Assembly,
Considering that twenty-five years have elapsed since
the first session of the Commission on the Status of
Women was held at Lake Success, New York, from
10 to 24 February 1947, and that this is a period
which makes it possible to take stock of the positive
results obtained,
Bearing in mind the aims and principles of the Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against
Women, adopted by the General Assembly in rernlution 2263 (XXII) of 7 November 1967,
Recognizing the effectiveness of the work done by
the Commission on the Status of Women in the twentyfive ~ear~ since. its establishment, an<l the important
contnbut1on which women have made to the social
political, economic and cultural life of their countries'
Considering that it is necessary to strengthen uni~
versa! recognition of the principle of the equality of
men and women, de jure and de facto, and that both
legal and ~ocial measures have to be taken by Member
States which have not yet done so to ensure the implementation of women's rights,
Recalling that its resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24
October 1970, containing the Intcrnationa 1 Development Strategy for the Second United Nations Develop-
