S/2012/71

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 January 2012
Original: English

Letter dated 24 January 2012 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith a letter dated 22 January 2012,
addressed to me from the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, His
Excellency Nabil al-Arabi, and the Prime Minister of Qatar, His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al Thani, regarding the situation in the Syrian Arab
Republic (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

12-21903 (E) 310112 310112

*1221903*

S/2012/71

Annex
League of Arab States
The Secretary-General
22 January 2012
Sir,
In the context of the League of Arab States' response to the Syrian crisis, the
Council held an extraordinary session on 22 January 2012 at the headquarters of the
General Secretariat in Cairo. The Council heard the technical field report of the
Head of the League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria concerning the period
from 24 December 2011 to 18 January 2012. The report set out the findings of the
observers, who had been deployed to 20 locations across Syria.
At that meeting, the Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs discussed the evolving
situation in Syria in the light of the report. After examining the latest political and
security developments in Syria, they adopted a resolution stating, inter alia, that the
Observer Mission would be extended and that coordination should take place with
the Secretary-General of the United Nations in order to support the Mission. The
resolution requested the Chair of the Arab Ministerial Committee on the Situation in
Syria and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States to brief the United
Nations Security Council in support of the Arab plan of action, in accordance with
the resolutions of the Council of the League of Arab States.
We therefore transmit herewith the text of the resolution adopted at that
session; the report prepared by the Head of the Observer Mission, General Mustafa
Al-Dabi; and the report of the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
concerning the mandate of the Mission, which was also presented to the Arab
Ministers for Foreign Affairs. We should be grateful if you would examine them and
take the necessary action to determine a time when the Security Council could meet
at the ministerial level with the Chair of the Committee and the Secretary-General
of the League of Arab States. You may also wish to take the necessary action in
order to circulate the annexes to this letter to the Member States of the United
Nations.
Accept, Sir, the assurances of our highest consideration.
(Signed) Nabil al-Arabi
Secretary-General
(Signed) Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar
Chair of the current session of the League of Arab States
at the ministerial level
Ban Ki-moon
Secretary-General of the United Nations

2

12-21903

S/2012/71

Enclosure 1
Monitoring of developments in the situation in Syria
Elements of the Arab plan to resolve the Syrian crisis
The Council of the League of Arab States, meeting at the ministerial level at its
resumed extraordinary session of 22 January 2012 in Cairo,
Having considered the report submitted by the Head of the League of Arab
States Observer Mission to Syria concerning the period from 24 December 2011 to
18 January 2012 in accordance with the mandate conferred on the Mission by the
protocol concluded between the Syrian Arab Republic and the General Secretariat of
the League of Arab States in Cairo on 19 December 2011,
Having heard the report of the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
concerning the political and technical context of the mandate and new developments
in Syria since the League of Arab States began its response to the crisis,
Reaffirming the following statements and resolutions of the Council of the
League of Arab States at the ministerial level: statement 148 issued at an
extraordinary session on 27 August 2011; statement 152 issued at the 136th ordinary
session on 13 September 2011; resolution 7435 adopted at an extraordinary session
on 16 October 2011; resolutions 7436 and 7437 adopted at a resumed extraordinary
session on 2 November 2011; resolution 7438 adopted at a resumed extraordinary
session on 12 November 2011; resolutions 7439 and 7440 adopted at a resumed
extraordinary session in Rabat on 16 November 2011; resolution 7441 concerning
developments in the situation in Syria, adopted at a resumed extraordinary session
on 24 November 2011; resolution 1900 adopted by the Economic and Social
Council of the League of Arab States at the ministerial level at an extraordinary
session on 26 November 2011; statement 161 issued at an extraordinary session on
20 December 2011; resolution 7442 concerning monitoring of developments in the
situation in Syria, adopted at a resumed extraordinary session on 27 November
2011; the statements issued in Doha on 3 and 17 December 2011; and the statement
issued in Cairo on 8 January 2012,
Supporting efforts to end the Syrian crisis without foreign intervention,
preventing a descent into civil war and preserving the unity and territorial
sovereignty of Syria,
Having examined the report of the Head of the Observer Mission to Syria and
developments in the situation in Syria,
Welcoming the commendable efforts of the Head and members of the Observer
Mission, who have fulfilled their functions courageously under difficult and highly
dangerous circumstances,
Recognizing the partial progress made by the Syrian Government in
implementing some of its commitments, but considering such progress insufficient,
1.
Affirms that in order to protect Syrian civilians, all violence and killing
from all quarters must cease;
2.

12-21903

Stresses that the Syrian Government must

3

S/2012/71

– Free the detainees, withdraw all armed presence from cities and residential
areas, and grant access to the relevant League agencies and Arab and
international media, in order to ensure a free transition throughout Syria and
allow examination of the facts and monitoring of events as they unfold;
– Recall the Syrian Army and any armed forces of whatever formation to their
barracks or original locations;
– Facilitate the work of the Observer Mission, allowing it to import any
equipment, in particular communications devices;
Decides to continue supporting and increasing the numbers of the
3.
Observer Mission; to provide them with the necessary technical, financial and
administrative support; and to cooperate with the Secretary-General of the United
Nations in support of the Mission;
Calls on the Syrian Government and all strands of the Syrian opposition
4.
to enter into genuine political dialogue under the auspices of the League of Arab
States within two weeks of this resolution with a view to implementing the
following initiative:
(a) A government of national unity should be formed within two months of
the dialogue, with the participation of the current Government and opposition under
an agreed leader. Its task should be to implement the provisions of the Arab plan of
action and prepare for free, multi-party parliamentary and presidential elections, in
accordance with a law specifying the procedure and under Arab and international
supervision;
(b) The President of the Republic should grant his Vice-President full powers
for complete cooperation with the government of national unity in order to enable it
to fulfil its functions in the transitional phase;
(c) Once formed, the government of national unity should declare that its
aim is to establish a democratic and multi-party system in which all citizens are
equal irrespective of their affiliation or sectarian or religious identity, and in which
power changes hands peacefully;
(d) The government of national unity should restore security and stability to
the country, and reorganize the police service in order to preserve and strengthen
public order by performing security functions of a civilian nature, the Arab States
undertaking to fund such efforts in coordination with the League of Arab States;
(e) An independent commission should be established with the task of
investigating the violations to which citizens have been subjected and establishing
the facts in order to ensure justice for the victims;
(f) Within three months of its formation, the government of national unity
should hold free and fair elections with Arab and international monitoring to
establish a constituent assembly, which should prepare a new draft national
constitution for approval by popular referendum and an electoral law based on that
draft constitution;
Invites the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States to appoint a
5.
special envoy to monitor the political process;

4

12-21903

S/2012/71

6.
Calls on the international community to support the government of
national unity in order to enable it to fulfil its functions;
7.
Requests the Chair of the Committee and the Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States to brief the United Nations Security Council in support of this
plan, in accordance with the resolutions of the Council of the League of Arab States.
Resolution 7444, adopted at a resumed extraordinary session on 22 January 2012.
The People's Democratic Republic of Algeria expresses its reservation with regard
to paragraph 7 of the resolution.

12-21903

5

S/2012/71

Enclosure 2
Increased funding for activities in implementation of the Arab plan
of action to resolve the Syrian crisis
The Council of the League of Arab States, meeting at the ministerial level at its
resumed extraordinary session of 22 January 2012 in Cairo,
Having considered the report submitted by the Head of the League of Arab
States Observer Mission to Syria concerning the period from 24 December 2011 to
18 January 2012 in accordance with the mandate conferred on the Mission by the
protocol concluded between the Syrian Arab Republic and the General Secretariat of
the League of Arab States in Cairo on 19 December 2011,
Recalling resolution 7437 concerning the funding of activities in
implementation of the Arab plan of action to resolve the Syrian crisis, adopted by
the Council of the League of Arab States at a resumed extraordinary session on
2 November 2012;
Having heard the report of the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
concerning the political and technical context of the mandate and new developments
in Syria since the League of Arab States began its response to the crisis,
Having examined the report of the Head of the Observer Mission to Syria and
developments in the situation in Syria, and affirming that it is important for the
Mission to continue to fulfilling its mandate and receiving the necessary technical
and financial support,
Pursuant to the recommendation formulated by the Arab Ministerial
Committee on the situation in Syria at its meeting of 8 January 2012,
Decides to increase the amount allocated to funding for activities in
implementation of the Arab plan of action to resolve the Syrian crisis from 1 million
United States dollars to 5 million United States dollars, subject to further increase in
accordance with the conditions and requirements of the work of the Observer
Mission.
Resolution 7445, adopted at a resumed extraordinary session on 22 January 2012.

6

12-21903

S/2012/71

Enclosure 3
jim01/sin(12/01)/07-dal(0031)

League of Arab States - General Secretariat
Division for the Council of the League
Department of Council Affairs
Meeting of the Council of the League of Arab States at the
ministerial level at a resumed extraordinary session in Cairo
on 22 January 2012
Report of the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States
concerning the mandate of the League of Arab States Observer
Mission to Syria
I wish to thank and commend General Muhammad Mustafa Al-Dabi and all of
the members of the Observer Mission for their efforts and sacrifices in fulfilling
their difficult task, which we hope will achieve its objective of achieving progress
towards the Arab solution to the Syrian crisis.
The findings of the field report show that while progress has been made, the
Syrian Government has yet to pledge immediate and full implementation of its
commitments under the Arab plan of action and the protocol of the Legal Centre
regarding the mandate of the Observer Mission, which was concluded between the
Syrian Arab Republic and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab States.
I should also like to stress several important points regarding the political and
technical context of the Mission's mandate — the difficult circumstances of which
present formidable and complex challenges — and developments that have unfolded
in Syria since the League of Arab States began to address the crisis. My purpose is
to situate the report in its proper political context.
First and foremost, as regards the nature of the Mission:
– As you will be aware, the Mission is unprecedented in the history of the
political and field action of the League of Arab States, and perhaps also at the
international level, in view of the particularities of the Syrian crisis and the
international community's response.
– This is the first time that a team of civilian observers has been sent to a State
experiencing an escalation in civilian protests calling for change and the fall of
the regime with the mandate of verifying the Government's implementation of
its commitment to end the killings and violence, remove armed presence from
cities and residential areas and free detainees. It comes at a time when the
Syrian Government retains control of the country.
– The Syrian Government is responsible for the safety and security of observers
and for escorting their movements and communications on the ground.
Paragraph 57 of the report states that the Government side has adopted a

12-21903

7

S/2012/71

deliberate strategy of seeking to prevent the Mission from accessing the
heartlands and keeping it busy with issues that are the concern of the
Government side". The Mission was aware of this strategy and resisted such
methods, acting in such a manner as to fulfil its mandate as required. It
overcame numerous obstacles to its work.
– A further complication in the nature of the mandate is that owing to the turn of
events, certain streets and residential areas are now outside the control of the
Syrian Government. They are controlled by elements loyal to the opposition,
including armed irregulars.
– The realities on the ground also show that the Syrian security services have
continued to treat the situation first and foremost as a security crisis. This
explains why the Syrian Government has yet to fully and immediately
implement its commitments under the protocol and the Arab plan of action.
– Those realities added significant burdens to the work of the observers in the
field. In particular, the humanitarian dimensions cannot be ignored. The
mandate of the Mission is no longer confined to verifying that the Syrian
Government implements its commitments. Instead, it has expanded to include
field and humanitarian issues involving the protection of civilians and the
recording of witness accounts regarding the situation of human rights in Syria.
The observers were encouraged to take on those tasks because the residents of
conflict areas, as well as opposition members, called for their protection,
presence and assistance in order to confront daily challenges. The presence of
observers helped to reassure opposition members. As a result, the numbers of
peaceful demonstrators increased in the most recent phase in areas where the
observers were present.
– The stalemate faced by the Arab solution, the mandate of the Mission and the
international community requires the Council of the League of Arab States to
reflect on recent developments in the Syrian crisis and on the Arab and
international approach. The Mission cannot continue indefinitely or in the
absence of a genuine political process.
– A decision to extend the mandate must therefore be accompanied by a review
of its nature and tasks, not to mention the equipment and staff numbers at its
disposal. A decision to extend the mandate without an agreement on a
concomitant political process to address the crisis would impact the credibility
of the Arab mobilization and the efforts of the observers.
I should now like to make a number of comments regarding the time frame and
purpose of the report of the Head of Mission which is before you.
I.
The report covers the limited and brief time frame of 29 December 2011 to 18
January 2012, and does not address the previous nine months of the Syrian crisis.
The Mission has not been able to go into detail regarding the events and violations
that took place during that time, which is outside its remit. This fact must be firmly
borne in mind when evaluating the work of the observers. The Mission monitored
events in the relatively short period of its presence, as opposed to the crisis as a
whole, which began on 15 March 2011.

8

12-21903

S/2012/71

II. The task of the Mission as stated in the protocol is to verify the Syrian
Government's implementation of its commitments under the protocol and Arab plan
of action, namely:
1.
The cessation of all violence from whatever quarter in order to protect
Syrian civilians.
2.

The release of those detained as a result of the current events.

3.

The removal of all armed presence from cities and residential areas.

4.
The granting of access to the relevant League agencies and Arab and
international media, allowing them to move freely throughout Syria, examine the
facts and monitor events as they unfold.
Those commitments are clear, and the Syrian Government is required to
implement them fully and immediately. As the report shows, Syria has yet to fully
and immediately implement its commitments since the entry into force of the
protocol.
III. It is, however, also clear from the report that during the time of the Observer
Mission's work, there was some improvement in the implementation of the
commitments made by the Syrian Government. Nevertheless, the Syrian
Government has yet to pledge that it will fully and immediately implement those
commitments.
IV. Perhaps the most worrying fact mentioned in the report is the excessive use of
force by the Syrian security services. Since March 2011, such violence has sparked
a reaction from protesters, the opposition and the so-called Free Syrian Army,
creating a risk of civil war. Paragraphs 71 and 74 of the report refer to the state of
severe tension, injustice and repression to which Syrian citizens are subjected. The
opposition has taken to bearing arms as a result of the excessive force deployed by
Government forces in response to protests, in addition to the repression,
imprisonment, torture and human rights violations perpetrated by the security
services.
V. A number of detainees have indeed been released. However, the total number
of detainees, and the number of those who remain behind bars, are not precisely
known. That situation requires further follow-up on the part of the Mission.
VI. There remain numerous obstacles to media access, even though the presence of
Arab and foreign media has been comparatively greater in the most recent phase.
VII. Although the presence of the Mission has not induced the Syrian Government
to fully and immediately implement its commitments, it has nevertheless had some
positive effects, including the following:
– The Syrian people has been given greater freedom to express its position. In
many towns, numbers of protesters increased after the observers' arrival.
– Numerous individuals have found a means to express their experience and
positions through the witness accounts which they provided directly to many
members of the Mission.
– The Mission was able to monitor and record substantial information regarding
the situation of human rights in Syria.

12-21903

9

S/2012/71

– The Mission was able to obtain lists of detainees and missing persons through
extensive contact with the people in direct meetings and on the websites
created by the League of Arab States for that purpose. The Mission is working
to secure their release and to establish the fate of the missing.
In view of the foregoing, I should like to propose the following
recommendations:
(a) The mandate of the Observer Mission should be extended, political and
media support should be provided, its numbers should be increased, and its technical
and other needs should be met, all within the framework of the decisions adopted by
the Arab Ministerial Committee on the Situation in Syria on 18 January 2012.
(b) The Secretary-General of the League of Arab States should be requested
to contact the Secretary-General of the United Nations in order to secure the
mobilization of the necessary Arab support.
(c) The Secretary-General should be requested to contact the concerned
international and regional parties, including the members of the Security Council, in
order to ensure international consensus and support for Arab mobilization and the
swift establishment of mechanisms that would develop a political solution to the
Syrian crisis, a solution that includes all relevant parties in Syria.

10

12-21903

S/2012/71

Enclosure 4
League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria
Report of the Head of the League of Arab States Observer Mission
to Syria for the period from 24 December 2011 to 18 January 2012
In the name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate
“We offered the trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains, but they
refused to carry it, and were afraid of it; and man carried it. Surely he is sinful, very
foolish” [Qur’an 33:72]
I.

Legal bases
1.
By resolution 7436 of 2 November 2011, the Council of the League of Arab
States adopted the Arab plan of action annexed thereto, welcomed the Syrian
Government’s agreement to the plan, and emphasized the need for the Syrian
Government to commit to the full and immediate implementation of its provisions.
2.
On 16 November 2011, the Council of the League of Arab States adopted
resolution 7439 approving the draft protocol of the Legal Centre and the mandate of
the League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria, namely to verify
implementation of the provisions of the Arab plan of action to resolve the Syrian
crisis and protect Syrian civilians. The resolution requested the Secretary-General of
the League of Arab States to take such steps as he deemed appropriate to appoint the
Head of the League of Arab States Observer Mission and to make contact with the
Syrian Government with a view to signing the protocol.
3.
By resolution 7441 of 24 November 2011, the Council of the League of Arab
States requested the Secretary-General of the League to deploy the Observer
Mission to the Syrian Arab Republic in order to fulfil its mandate under the protocol
immediately on its signature.
4.
The Syrian Arab Republic and the General Secretariat of the League of Arab
States signed the protocol on 19 December 2011. The protocol provided for the
establishment and deployment to the Syrian Arab Republic of a Mission comprising
civilian and military experts from Arab countries and Arab non-governmental
human rights organizations. Paragraph 5 stated that the Mission should transmit
regular reports on the results of its work to the Secretary-General of the League of
Arab State and the Syrian Government for submission — via the Arab Ministerial
Committee on the Situation in Syria — to the Council of the League at the
ministerial level for its consideration and appropriate action.
5.
On 20 December 2011, the Council of the League approved the appointment of
General Muhammad Ahmad Mustafa Al-Dabi from the Republic of the Sudan as
Head of the Observer Mission.

II.

Formation of the Mission
6.
The General Secretariat requested Member States and relevant Arab
organizations to transmit the names of its candidates for the Mission. On that basis,
166 monitors from 13 Arab countries and six relevant Arab organizations have thus
far been appointed.

12-21903

11

S/2012/71

III.

Visit of the advance delegation of the General Secretariat to Syria
7.
In preparation for the Mission, an advance delegation of the General
Secretariat visited the Syrian Arab Republic on 22 December 2011 to discuss the
logistical preparations for the Mission.
8.
In accordance with the protocol, the Syrian Government confirmed its
readiness to facilitate the Mission in every way by allowing the free and safe
movement of all of the observers throughout Syria, and by refraining from hindering
the work of the Mission on security or administrative grounds. The Syrian
Government side also affirmed its commitment to ensuring that the Mission could
freely conduct the necessary meetings; to provide full protection for the observers,
taking into consideration the responsibility of the Mission if it were to insist on
visiting areas despite the warning of the security services; and to allow the entry to
Syria of journalists and Arab and international media in accordance with the rules
and regulations in force in the country.

IV.

Arrival and preliminary visits of the Head of Mission
9.
The Head of the Mission, General Muhammad Ahmad Mustafa Al-Dabi,
arrived in the Syrian Arab Republic on the evening of Saturday 24 December 2011.
He held a series of meetings with the Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Walid
Al-Moualem, and with Syrian Government officials, who stated that they stood
prepared to cooperate fully with the Mission and to endeavour to ensure its success,
overcoming any obstacles that may arise. The necessary logistical and security
arrangements were agreed.
10. The Syrian side stated that there were certain areas that the security protection
detail would not be able to enter with the observers for fear of the citizens’ reaction.
The Head of the Mission replied that that situation would enable the Mission to
engage with citizens and opposition parties without government monitoring, thereby
removing the citizens’ fear of repercussions as a result of communicating with the
Mission.
11. The Head of the Mission completed the technical field preparations and
secured the necessary transportation and communication devices in order to start
work. He met with the observers who arrived successively in Syria and briefed them
on their duties and the bases of their work under the protocol. The observers took a
special oath for the Mission which had been drafted by the Head.
12. On 27 December 2011, the Head of the Mission and ten observers conducted a
preliminary visit to the city of Homs, one of the epicentres of tension, which has
seen acts of violence and armed confrontation between the Army and the Syrian
opposition. Some security barriers separating districts remain in place.
13. Immediately on arriving in Homs, the Head of the Mission met with the
Governor of the city, who explained that there had been an escalation in violence
perpetrated by armed groups in the city. There had been instances of kidnapping and
sabotage of Government and civilian facilities. Food was in short supply owing to
the blockade imposed by armed groups, which were believed to include some 3000
individuals. The Governor further stated that all attempts by religious figures and
city notables to calm the situation had failed. He made enquiries regarding the
possibility of addressing the issue of soldiers and vehicles blocked inside Baba Amr.

12

12-21903

S/2012/71

14. The Mission visited the residential districts of Baba Amr, Karam Al-Zaytun,
Al-Khalidiyya and Al-Ghuta without guards. It met with a number of opposition
citizens who described the state of fear, blockade and acts of violence to which they
had been subjected by Government forces. At a time of intense exchanges of gunfire
among the sides, the Mission witnessed the effects of the destruction wrought on
outlying districts. The Mission witnessed an intense exchange of gunfire between
the Army and opposition in Baba Amr. It saw four military vehicles in surrounding
areas, and therefore had to return to the Governorate headquarters. It was agreed
with the Governor that five members of the Mission would remain in Homs until the
following day to conduct field work and meet with the greatest possible number of
citizens.
15. Immediately on returning from Homs, the Head of the Mission met with the
Government and insisted that it withdraw military vehicles from the city, put an end
to acts of violence, protect civilians, lift the blockade and provide food. He further
called for the two sides to exchange the bodies of those killed.
16. At that meeting, the Syrian side agreed to withdraw all military presence from
the city and residential areas except for three army vehicles that were not working
and had been surrounded, and one that had been taken from the Army by armed
groups. The Syrian side requested the Mission’s assistance to recover and remove
those vehicles in exchange for the release of four individuals, the exchange of five
bodies from each side, the entry of basic foods for families in the city, and the entry
of sanitation vehicles to remove garbage. It was agreed at the end of the meeting
that the Mission would conduct another visit to Homs on the following day in the
company of General Hassan Sharif, the security coordinator for the Government
side.
17. During that visit, the Mission was introduced to one of the leading figures in
the opposition, who acted as media representative of the National Council. An
extensive discussion took place regarding the offer of the Syrian Government and
the best way to implement the agreement. As a result, the military vehicles were
returned and removed; the bodies of those killed were exchanged; trucks entered the
city with food; and three detainees and two women were released and returned to
their families in the presence of the Mission, thereby calming the situation inside the
city.
18. Five days after the monitors were deployed to five zones, the Ministerial
Committee requested that the Head of the Mission report on the Mission’s work. He
travelled to Cairo and gave an oral presentation to the members of the Committee at
their meeting of 8 January 2012. It was decided that the work of the Mission should
continue and that the Head of the Mission should submit a report at the end of the
period determined in the protocol, on 19 January 2012. After the Head's return to
Damascus to resume his duties, the Mission faced difficulties from Government
loyalists and opposition alike, particularly as a result of statements and media
coverage in the wake of the Committee meeting. That did not, however, affect the
work of the Mission or its full and smooth deployment across the country.
19. Following its arrival, and to this date, the Mission has received numerous
letters from the Syrian committee responsible for coordination with the Mission.
The letters refer to the material and human losses sustained by Government
institutions and offices as a result of what is described as sabotage. They assert that
all of the States’ vital services have been affected.

12-21903

13

S/2012/71

V.

Deployment of the Observer Mission to Syria
20. The observers were divided into 15 zones covering 20 cities and districts
across Syria according to the time frame set out below. The variation in dates was a
result of shortcomings in administrative and technical preparations, such as the
arrival of cars and personnel. Care was taken to ensure even distribution of
observers. Each unit comprised some ten observers of different Arab nationalities.
The groups were deployed to Syrian governorates and towns as follows:
• On 29 December 2011, six groups travelled to Damascus, Homs, Rif Homs,
Idlib, Deraa and Hama.
• On 4 January 2012, a group travelled to Aleppo.
• On 9 January 2012, two groups went to Deir Al-Zor and Latakia. However,
both returned to Damascus on 10 January 2012 owing to attacks that led to the
injury of two of the monitors in Latakia and material damage to the cars.
• On 10 January 2012, a group travelled to Qamishli and Hasaka.
• On 12 January 2012, a group travelled to Outer Damascus.
• On 13 January 2012, four groups travelled to Suwaida, Bu Kamal, Deir Al-Zor,
Palmyra (Tadmur), Sukhna, Banyas and Tartous.
• On 15 January 2012, two groups travelled to Latakia, Raqqa and Madinat
Al-Thawra.
Annex 1. List of observers, their nationalities and their distribution.
21.

The observers were provided with the following:
• A map of the region;
• A code of conduct for observers;
• The duties of the group leaders;
• The duties of the observers;
• Necessary equipment such as computers, cameras and communication devices.

22. An operations room was established at the offices of the League of Arab States
in Damascus. The office is open 24 hours a day and is directly linked to the League
of Arab States operations room in Cairo and to the groups deployed across Syria.
The room receives daily reports from the field teams and conveys special
instructions for monitoring. Owing to the volume of work, an additional operations
room was opened at the Mission headquarters in Damascus with the task of
allocating individuals and assigning committees on follow-up, detainees, the media
and financial affairs. It coordinates with the main operations room at the offices of
the League of Arab States.
23. In Latakia and Deir Al-Zor, the Mission faced difficulties from Government
loyalists. In Latakia, thousands surrounded the Mission’s cars, chanting slogans in
favour of the President and against the Mission. The situation became out of control
and monitors were attacked. Two sustained light injuries and an armoured car was
completely crushed. In order to address the matter, the Head of Mission contacted
the Syrian committee responsible for coordination with the Mission. Nevertheless,
the Head of the Mission ordered the immediate return of the two groups to

14

12-21903

S/2012/71

Damascus. He met the Minister for Foreign Affairs and made a strongly-worded
formal protest. The Syrian side strongly condemned the incident and extended a
formal apology, explaining that the events were not in any sense deliberate. In order
to emphasize the point, the Syrian Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs met with the
members of the Latakia team and stated that the Syrian Government would address
the shortcoming immediately and guarantee the safety and security of observers
everywhere. He apologized to them for the unfortunate and unintentional incidents.
The members were then assigned to new zones after four days’ rest.
VI.

Implementation of the Mission’s mandate under the protocol
24. The Head of the Mission stresses that this assessment in terms of the
provisions of the protocol summarizes the findings of the groups as relayed by
group leaders at their meeting with the Head of the Mission on 17 January 2012.

A.

Monitoring and observation of the cessation of all violence by all sides in cities
and residential areas
25. On being assigned to their zones and starting work, the observers witnessed
acts of violence perpetrated by Government forces and an exchange of gunfire with
armed elements in Homs and Hama. As a result of the Mission’s insistence on a
complete end to violence and the withdrawal of Army vehicles and equipment, this
problem has receded. The most recent reports of the Mission point to a considerable
calming of the situation and restraint on the part of those forces.
26. In Homs and Dera‘a, the Mission observed armed groups committing acts of
violence against Government forces, resulting in death and injury among their
ranks. In certain situations, Government forces responded to attacks against their
personnel with force. The observers noted that some of the armed groups were using
flares and armour-piercing projectiles.
27. In Homs, Idlib and Hama, the Observer Mission witnessed acts of violence
being committed against Government forces and civilians that resulted in several
deaths and injuries. Examples of those acts include the bombing of a civilian bus,
killing eight persons and injuring others, including women and children, and the
bombing of a train carrying diesel oil. In another incident in Homs, a police bus was
blown up, killing two police officers. A fuel pipeline and some small bridges were
also bombed.
28. The Mission noted that many parties falsely reported that explosions or
violence had occurred in several locations. When the observers went to those
locations, they found that those reports were unfounded.
29. The Mission also noted that, according to its teams in the field, the media
exaggerated the nature of the incidents and the number of persons killed in incidents
and protests in certain towns.

B.

Verifying that Syrian security services and so-called shabiha gangs do not
obstruct peaceful demonstrations
30. According to their latest reports and their briefings to the Head of the Mission
on 17 January 2012 in preparation for this report, group team leaders witnessed
peaceful demonstrations by both Government supporters and the opposition in
several places. None of those demonstrations were disrupted, except for some minor

12-21903

15

S/2012/71

clashes with the Mission and between loyalists and opposition. These have not
resulted in fatalities since the last presentation before the Arab Ministerial
Committee on the Situation in Syria at its meeting of 8 January 2012.
31. The reports and briefings of groups leaders state that citizens belonging to the
opposition surround the Mission on its arrival and use the gathering as a barrier
from the security services. However, such incidents have gradually decreased.
32. The Mission has received requests from opposition supporters in Homs and
Deraa that it should stay on-site and not leave, something that may be attributable to
fear of attack after the Mission’s departure.
C.

Verifying the release of those detained in the current incidents
33. The Mission received reports from parties outside Syria indicating that the
number of detainees was 16,237. It also received information from the opposition
inside the country that the number of detainees was 12,005. In validating those
figures, the teams in the field discovered that there were discrepancies between the
lists, that information was missing and inaccurate, and that names were repeated.
The Mission is communicating with the concerned Government agencies to confirm
those numbers.
34. The Mission has delivered to the Syrian Government all of the lists received
from the Syrian opposition inside and outside Syria. In accordance with the
protocol, it has demanded the release of the detainees.
35. On 15 January 2012, President Bashar Al-Assad issued a legislative decree
granting a general amnesty for crimes perpetrated in the context of the events from
15 March 2011 through to the issuance of the decree. In implementation of the
amnesty, the relevant Government authorities have been periodically releasing
detainees in the various regions so long as they are not wanted in connection with
other crimes. The Mission has been supervising the releases and is monitoring the
process with the Government’s full and active coordination.
36. On 19 January 2012, the Syrian government stated that 3569 detainees had
been released from military and civil prosecution services. The Mission verified that
1669 of those detained had thus far been released. It continues to follow up the issue
with the Government and the opposition, emphasizing to the Government side that
the detainees should be released in the presence of observers so that the event can be
documented.
37. The Mission has validated the following figures for the total number of
detainees that the Syrian government thus far claims to have released:
• Before the amnesty: 4,035
• After the amnesty: 3,569.
The Government has therefore claimed that a total of 7,604 detainees have
been released.
38. The Mission has verified the correct number of detainees released and arrived
at the following figures:
• Before the amnesty: 3,483
• After the amnesty: 1,669.

16

12-21903

S/2012/71

The total number of confirmed releases is therefore 5152. The Mission is
continuing to monitor the process and communicate with the Syrian Government for
the release of the remaining detainees.
D.

Confirming the withdrawal of the military presence from residential
neighbourhoods in which demonstrations and protests occurred or are occurring
39. Based on the reports of the field-team leaders and the meeting held on
17 January 2012 with all team leaders, the Mission confirmed that all military
vehicles, tanks and heavy weapons had been withdrawn from cities and residential
neighbourhoods. Although there are still some security measures in place in the
form of earthen berms and barriers in front of important buildings and in squares,
they do not affect citizens. It should be noted that the Syrian Minister of Defence, in
a meeting with the Head of the Mission that took place on 5 January 2012, affirmed
his readiness to accompany the Head of the Mission to all sites and cities designated
by the latter and from which the Mission suspects that the military presence had not
yet been withdrawn, with a view to issuing field orders and rectifying any violation
immediately.
40. Armoured vehicles (personnel carriers) are present at some barriers. One of
those barriers is located in Homs and some others in Madaya, Zabadani and Rif
Damascus. The presence of those vehicles was reported and they were subsequently
withdrawn from Homs. It has been confirmed that the residents of Zabadani and
Madaya reached a bilateral agreement with the Government that led to the removal
of those barriers and vehicles.

E.

Confirming the accreditation by the Syrian Government of Arab and
international media organizations and that those organizations are allowed to
move freely in all parts of Syria
41. Speaking on behalf of his Government, the Syrian Minister of Information
confirmed that, from the beginning of December 2011 to 15 January 2012, the
Government had accredited 147 Arab and foreign media organizations. Some 112 of
those organizations entered Syrian territory, joining the 90 other accredited
organizations operating in Syria through their full-time correspondents.
42. The Mission followed up on this issue. It identified 36 Arab and foreign media
organizations and several journalists located in a number of Syrian cities. It also
received complaints that the Syrian Government had granted some media
organizations authorization to operate for four days only, which was insufficient
time, according to those organizations. In addition to preventing them from entering
the country until they had specified their destinations, journalists were required
obtain further authorization once they had entered the country and were prevented
from going to certain areas. The Syrian Government confirmed that it grants media
organizations operating permits that are valid for 10 days, with the possibility of
renewal.
43. Reports and information from some sectors [teams] indicate that the
Government places restrictions on the movement of media organizations in
opposition areas. In many cases, those restrictions caused journalists to trail the
Mission in order to do their work.

12-21903

17

S/2012/71

44. In Homs, a French journalist who worked for the France 2 channel was killed
and a Belgian journalist was injured. The Government and opposition accused each
other of being responsible for the incident, and both sides issued statements of
condemnation. The Government formed an investigative committee in order to
determine the cause of the incident. It should be noted that Mission reports from
Homs indicate that the French journalist was killed by opposition mortar shells.
Annex 2. A list of media organizations identified and a list of media organizations
that entered Syria, according to the official information.
VII.
A.

Obstacles encountered by the Mission
Monitors
45. Some of the experts nominated were not capable of taking on such a
responsibility and did not have prior experience in this field.
46. Some of the observers did not grasp the amount of responsibility that was
being placed on them and the importance of giving priority to Arab interests over
personal interests.
47. In the course of field work, some observers were unable to deal with difficult
circumstances, which are at the core of their duties. Monitors must have certain
traits and the specializations required for such work.
48. A number of the observers are elderly, and some of them suffer from health
conditions that prevent them from performing their duties.
49. Twenty-two observers declined to complete the mission for personal reasons.
Some observers offered unfounded reasons, which were not accepted by the Head of
the Mission, while others had a personal agenda.
Annex 3. List of the names of observers who declined to complete the Mission.
50. Some observers reneged on their duties and broke the oath they had taken.
They made contact with officials from their countries and gave them exaggerated
accounts of events. Those officials consequently developed a bleak and unfounded
picture of the situation.
51. Some of the observers in the various zones are demanding housing similar to
their counterparts in Damascus or financial reimbursement equivalent to the
difference in accommodation rates resulting from the difference in hotel standards
or accommodation in Damascus. These issues do not warrant comment.
52. Some observers are afraid to perform their duties owing to the violent
incidents that have occurred in certain locations. The unavailability of armoured
cars at all the sites and the lack of bulletproof vests have negatively affected some
observers’ ability to carry out their duties.
Comments of the Head of the Mission concerning the observers
53. Some of the observers, unfortunately, believed that their journey to Syria was
for amusement, and were therefore surprised by the reality of the situation. They did
not expect to be assigned to teams or to have to remain at stations outside the capital
or to face the difficulties that they encountered.

18

12-21903

S/2012/71

54. Some of the observers were not familiar with the region and its geography. The
unavailability of armoured vehicles and protective vests had a negative effect on the
spirits of some observers.
55. Some of the observers experienced hostility both from the Syrian opposition
and loyalists. This hostility also had a negative effect on their spirits.
56. Despite the foregoing comments, the performance of many of the observers
was outstanding and praiseworthy. Those who underperformed will improve with
experience and guidance.
B.

Security restrictions
57. Although it welcomed the Mission and its Head and repeatedly emphasized
that it would not impose any security restrictions that could obstruct the movement
of the Mission, the Government deliberately attempted to limit the observers’ ability
to travel extensively in various regions. The Government also attempted to focus the
attention of the Mission on issues in which it is interested. The Mission resisted
those attempts and responded to them in a manner that allowed it to fulfil its
mandate and overcome the obstacles that stood in the way of its work.

C.

Communication equipment
58. The Mission communicates with the various groups by mobile phones and
facsimile machines connected to the local Syrian telephone network. Occasional
cuts in service prevent the Mission from communicating with the groups.
59. The Mission was equipped with 10 Thuraya satellite phones. Such devices are
hard to use inside buildings owing of the difficulty in obtain a satellite signal. As a
result, ordinary phones and fax machines, which are not considered secure
communications equipment, were used to send daily reports, instead.
60. The communication equipment the Qatari observers brought with them was
held at the Jordanian border, despite demands made by the Head of the Mission to
the Syrian authorities to permit entry of that equipment. That notwithstanding, the
amount of equipment would not have been enough to meet the needs of all sites and
station.
61. The Mission does not have portable two-way radios for communication
between team members. The Chinese Embassy provided 10 such radios as a gift to
the Mission. They were used in three sectors only.
62. Internet service is unavailable in some regions, and in other areas it is
intermittent, including in the capital.
63. There are no cameras attached to the vehicles used by the Mission, which
would facilitate observers’ work in dangerous areas.

D.

Transportation
64. The Mission has 38 cars at its disposal (23 armoured and 15 non-armoured),
including 28 four-wheel drive vehicles and 10 sedans. It should be noted that the
Mission’s mandate requires the used of armoured four-wheel drive vehicles, given
the nature of the Mission. The number of such vehicles currently available does not
satisfy the needs of the Mission, particularly for transportation into trouble spots.

12-21903

19

S/2012/71

65. When it was first deployed, the Mission rented several cars from local sources
for use in monitoring operations. However, owing to some acts of violence directed
against the field teams, the rental companies recalled those vehicles and their
drivers out of fear for their safety.
66. The Mission encountered difficulties in hiring drivers because the opposition
groups refused to allow local drivers to enter their areas because they believed the
drivers were members of the security services, which forces the observers to drive
the vehicles themselves.
67. Some of the observers demanded to use vehicles sent by their countries, a
demand that was denied by the Head of the Mission, who allocated the vehicles
according to the needs of each zone.
Annex 4. List showing the number, types and distribution of vehicles and the
countries that provided them.
E.

The media
68. Since it began its work, the Mission has been the target of a vicious media
campaign. Some media outlets have published unfounded statements, which they
attributed to the Head of the Mission. They have also grossly exaggerated events,
thereby distorting the truth.
69. Such contrived reports have helped to increase tensions among the Syrian
people and undermined the observers’ work. Some media organizations were
exploited in order to defame the Mission and its Head and cause the Mission to fail.

VIII.

Basic needs of the Mission, should its mandate be renewed
• 100 additional young observers, preferably military personnel
• 30 armoured vehicles
• Light protective vests
• Vehicle-mounted photographic equipment
• Modern communications equipment
• Binoculars, ordinary and night-vision

IX.

Evaluation:
70. The purpose of the protocol is to protect Syrian citizens through the
commitment of the Syrian Government to stop acts of violence, release detainees
and withdraw all military presence from cities and residential neighbourhoods. This
phase must lead to dialogue among the Syrian sides and the launching of a parallel
political process. Otherwise, the duration of this Mission will be extended without
achieving the desired results on the ground.
71. The Mission determined that there is an armed entity that is not mentioned in
the protocol. This development on the ground can undoubtedly be attributed to the
excessive use of force by Syrian Government forces in response to protests that
occurred before the deployment of the Mission demanding the fall of the regime. In
some zones, this armed entity reacted by attacking Syrian security forces and

20

12-21903

S/2012/71

citizens, causing the Government to respond with further violence. In the end,
innocent citizens pay the price for those actions with life and limb.
72. The Mission noted that the opposition had welcomed it and its members since
their deployment to Syria. The citizens were reassured by the Mission’s presence
and came forward to present their demands, although the opposition had previously
been afraid to do so publicly owing to their fear of being arrested once again, as
they had been prior to the Mission’s arrival in Syria. However, this was not case in
the period that followed the last Ministerial Committee statement, although the
situation is gradually improving.
73. The Mission noted that the Government strived to help it succeed in its task
and remove any barriers that might stand in its way. The Government also facilitated
meetings with all parties. No restrictions were placed on the movement of the
Mission and its ability to interview Syrian citizens, both those who opposed the
Government and those loyal to it.
74. In some cities, the Mission sensed the extreme tension, oppression and
injustice from which the Syrian people are suffering. However, the citizens believe
the crisis should be resolved peacefully through Arab mediation alone, without
international intervention. Doing so would allow them to live in peace and complete
the reform process and bring about the change they desire. The Mission was
informed by the opposition, particularly in Dar‘a, Homs, Hama and Idlib, that some
of its members had taken up arms in response to the suffering of the Syrian people
as a result of the regime’s oppression and tyranny; corruption, which affects all
sectors of society; the use of torture by the security agencies; and human rights
violations.
75. Recently, there have been incidents that could widen the gap and increase
bitterness between the parties. These incidents can have grave consequences and
lead to the loss of life and property. Such incidents include the bombing of
buildings, trains carrying fuel, vehicles carrying diesel oil and explosions targeting
the police, members of the media and fuel pipelines. Some of those attacks have
been carried out by the Free Syrian Army and some by other armed opposition
groups.
76. The Mission has adhered scrupulously to its mandate, as set out in the
protocol. It has observed daily realities on the ground with complete neutrality and
independence, thereby ensuring transparency and integrity in its monitoring of the
situation, despite the difficulties the Mission encountered and the inappropriate
actions of some individuals.
77. Under the protocol, the Mission’s mandate is one month. This does not allow
adequate time for administrative preparations, let alone for the Mission to carry out
its task. To date, the Mission has actually operated for 23 days. This amount of time
is definitely not sufficient, particularly in view of the number of items the Mission
must investigate. The Mission needs to remain on the ground for a longer period of
time, which would allow it to experience citizens’ daily living conditions and
monitor all events. It should be noted that similar previous operations lasted for
several months or, in some cases, several years.
78. Arab and foreign audiences of certain media organizations have questioned the
Mission’s credibility because those organizations use the media to distort the facts.
It will be difficult to overcome this problem unless there is political and media

12-21903

21

S/2012/71

support for the Mission and its mandate. It is only natural that some negative
incidents should occur as it conducts its activities because such incidents occur as a
matter of course in similar missions.
79. The Mission arrived in Syria after the imposition of sanctions aimed at
compelling to implement what was agreed to in the protocol. Despite that, the
Mission was welcomed by the opposition, loyalists and the Government.
Nonetheless, questions remains as to how the Mission should fulfil its mandate. It
should be noted that the mandate established for the Mission in the protocol was
changed in response to developments on the ground and the reactions thereto. Some
of those were violent reactions by entities that were not mentioned in the protocol.
All of these developments necessitated an expansion of and a change in the
Mission’s mandate. The most important point in this regard is the commitment of all
sides to cease all acts of violence, thereby allowing the Mission to complete its tasks
and, ultimately, lay the groundwork for the political process.
80. Should there be agreement to extend its mandate, then the Mission must be
provided with communications equipment, means of transportation and all the
equipment it requires to carry out its mandate on the ground.
81. On the other hand, ending the Mission’s work after such a short period will
reverse any progress, even if partial, that has thus far been made. This could perhaps
lead to chaos on the ground because all the parties involved in the crisis thus remain
unprepared for the political process required to resolve the Syrian crisis.
82. Since its establishment, attitudes towards the Mission have been characterized
by insincerity or, more broadly speaking, a lack of seriousness. Before it began
carrying out its mandate and even before its members had arrived, the Mission was
the target of a vicious campaign directed against the League of Arab States and the
Head of the Mission, a campaign that increased in intensity after the observers’
deployment. The Mission still lack the political and media support it needs in order
to fulfil its mandate. Should its mandate be extended, the goals set out in the
protocol will not be achieved unless such support is provided and the Mission
receives the backing it needs to ensure the success of the Arab solution.
X.

Recommendations:
83. In view of the above and of the success achieved in executing the provision of
the protocol, which the Syrian Government pledged to implement, I recommend the
following:
• The Mission must be provided with administrative and logistic support in
order allow it to carry out its tasks. The Mission must also be give the media
and political support required to create an appropriate environment that will
enable it to fulfil its mandate in the required manner.
• The political process must be accelerated and a national dialogue must be
launched. That dialogue should run in parallel with the Mission’s work in
order to create an environment of confidence that would contributes to the
Mission’s success and prevent a needless extension of its presence in Syria.
(Signed) Muhammad Ahmad Mustafa Al-Dabi
Head of the Mission

22

12-21903

S/2012/71

Annexes

12-21903

I.

List of observers, their nationalities and their distribution.

II.

List of media organizations identified and a list of media organizations that
entered Syria, according to the official information.

III.

List of the names of observers who declined to complete the Mission.

IV.

List showing the number, types and distribution of vehicles and the countries
that provided them.

23

S/2012/71

Annex I
League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria
Annex I
Names of the observers of the League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria

24

No.

Name

Nationality

Field team

Remarks

1

Mr. Abdulaziz Saya‘a

Algeria

Tartous and
Banyas (leader)

2

Mr. Zerdani Meziane

Algeria

Tartous and
Banyas

3

Col. Jawad Kazem Ja‘afar Jassem

Iraq

Tartous and
Banyas

4

Col. Ismail Husayn ‘Uwaysh Muhsin
Al-Zaidi

Iraq

Tartous and
Banyas

5

Mr. Said Belabad

Algeria

Tartous and
Banyas

6

Mr. Said Sultan Muhammad Ben
Sulayman

United
Arab
Emirates

Qamishli and
Hasaka (leader)

7

Mr. Fethi Belhaj

Tunisia

Qamishli and
Hasaka (deputy)

Permanent Arab
Committee for
Human Rights,
Paris

8

Mr. Ahmed Mana‘a

Tunisia

Qamishli and
Hasaka

Permanent Arab
Committee for
Human Rights,
Paris

9

Mr. Khalid Nasir Muhammad AlSuwaidi

United
Arab
Emirates

Qamishli and
Hasaka

10

Mr. Ali Raja‘a Ali Al-Saheli

Saudi
Arabia

Qamishli and
Hasaka

11

Mr. Muhammad Ahmed Ali Al-Ma‘ashi

Saudi
Arabia

Qamishli and
Hasaka

12

Mr. Abulrahman Hamud Al-Qadib

Saudi
Arabia

Qamishli and
Hasaka

13

Brig. Abbas Wannas ‘Abbud

Iraq

Qamishli and
Hasaka

14

Col. Abdulrahman Jassem Hilal Jassem
Al-Ameri

Iraq

Qamishli and
Hasaka

12-21903

S/2012/71

15

Brig. Sabah Kazem Ghanem Amer AlSaidi

Iraq

Qamishli and
Hasaka

16

Brig. Adwar Al-Fur‘an

Jordan

Suwaida (leader)

17

Brig. Khadr Qalih Hattab Muhammad
Al-Sudani

Iraq

Suwaida

18

Col. Maj. Mahmud Al-Muwali

Jordan

Suwaida

19

Maj. Fawzi Al-Sahmiyet

Jordan

Suwaida

20

Mr. Adel Ibrahim Hassan

Sudan

Suwaida

21

Brig. Abbas Hassan ‘Aydan Abdul
Khaqalji

Iraq

Suwaida

22

Mr. Khalid Ali Al-Bawsit

Bahrain

Tadmur and
Sukhna (leader)

23

Mr. Abdulaziz Al-Bu Rashid

Bahrain

Tadmur and
Sukhna

24

Ambassador Rashid Lounas

Algeria

Tadmur and
Sukhna

25

Mr. Ashika Bashir

Algeria

Tadmur and
Sukhna

26

Mr. Said Saif Al-Shamsi

United
Arab
Emirates

Tadmur and
Sukhna

27

Mr. Ali Rashid Ali Al-Husni

United
Arab
Emirates

Tadmur and
Sukhna

28

Mr. Ahmed Farhan Thabit

Iraq

Aleppo

29

Mr. Mazen Fakhir ‘Aliwi

Iraq

Aleppo

30

Mr. Mustafa Al-Mawhad Mustafa

Morocco

Aleppo

31

Col. Sadiq Al-‘Awran

Jordan

Aleppo

32

Mr. Al-Arbi Mkharek

Morocco

Aleppo

33

Mr. El Hassan Zahid

Moroco

Aleppo

34

Mr. Abullatif Al-Jabali

Tunisia

Idlib (leader)

35

Mr. Mustafa Al-Hasan Taha

Egypt

Idlib

36

Mr. Al-Bukhari Walid Ahmadi

Mauritania

Idlib

37

Ms. Nun Ja‘afar Yunus

Sudan

Idlib

38

Mr. Abulqasim ‘Uthman Said

Sudan

Idlib

12-21903

Permanent Arab
Committee for
Human Rights,
Paris

25

S/2012/71

26

39

Mr. ‘Umar Ahmad Abbas

Sudan

Idlib

40

Mr. Mohammed Yarqi

Algeria

Deraa (leader)

41

Mr. Muhammad Mahmud Walid Bubakr

Mauritania

Deraa

42

Mr. Beltut ‘Ashur

Algeria

Deraa

43

Mr. Rafa‘at Merghani Abbas

Sudan

Deraa

44

Mr. Hashim Hasan Ali

Iraq

Deraa

45

Mr. Al-Sharif ‘Awwad Rahmat

Sudan

Deraa

46

Mr. Muhammad Nafi’ullah Walid AlNi‘ma

Mauritania

Deraa

47

Col. Maj. Ahmad Salim Al-Kharafi

Kuwait

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal
(leader)

48

Mr. Issa Sultan Al-Sulayti

Bahrain

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

49

Mr. Husayn Salman Mattar

Bahrain

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

50

Col. Khader Jabbar Kayan Khalifa AlKa’abi

Iraq

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

51

Mr. Munib Ja’afar Salih Kasid AlMaliki

Iraq

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

52

Brig. Nidal Muzhir Muhammad
Abdullah Al-Rukabi

Iraq

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

53

Lt. Col. Salim Muhammad Al-Hajiri

Kuwait

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

54

Lt. Col. Khalid Nasir Al-Radhan

Kuwait

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

55

Brig. Kazem Jawad Yasir Abdulrida AlAdili

Iraq

Deir Al-Zor and
Bu Kamal

56

Mr. Ja’afar Kubayda

Sudan

Damascus
(leader)

57

Mr. Juraybi Mihraz

Algeria

Damascus

58

Mr. Mikati Ali

Algeria

Damascus

59

Mr Ibrahim Fadl Al-Mawna

Sudan

Damascus

60

Mr. Muhammad Khalil

Morocco

Damascus

61

Mr. Muhammad Abduljalil Abdullah AlAnsari

United
Arab
Emirates

Damascus

Arab
Organization for
Human Rights

12-21903

S/2012/71

62

Mr. Lahsan Tahami

Algeria

Damascus

63

Mr. Abdullah Al-Tahir

Sudan

Homs (a) (leader)

64

Mr. Salah Abdulkarim Said Abdullah

Iraq

Homs (a)

65

Mr. Zaki Koko Khalid Al-Jak

Sudan

Homs (a)

66

Mr. Al-Jili Al-Bashir

Sudan

Homs (a)

67

Mr. Al-Sadiq Al-Fadil

Sudan

Homs (a)

68

Brig. Ihsan Ali Bu‘aywi Ali Al-‘Anuz

Iraq

Homs (a)

69

Mr. Aid Abdullah Iyad Al-‘Utaybi

Saudi
Arabia

Homs (a)

70

Maj. ‘As‘ad Abu ‘Ata

Jordan

Homs (a)

71

Mr. Umar Sulayman Khayr Abbas

Iraq

Homs (b)
(leader)

72

Mr. Zaid Muhammad Abdullatif
Muhammad Ali

Iraq

Homs (b)

73

Mr. Salih Walid Said Mahmud

Mauritania

Homs (b)

74

Mr. Muhammad Hassan Said
Muhammad

Iraq

Homs (b)

75

Mr. Muhammad Al-Bashir Walid Saidi
Hammadi

Mauritania

Homs (b)

Arab
Organization for
Human Rights

76

Mr. Islam Muhammad Abu Al-Aynayn
Sultan

Egypt

Homs (b)

Arab
Organization for
Human Rights

77

Mr. Mustafa Sulih

Morocco

Homs (b)

Permanent Arab
Committee for
Human Rights,
Paris

78

Mr. Muhammad Husayn Idris

Sudan

Homs (b)

79

Maj. Muhammad Salim ‘Ata Al-Salim

Jordan

Homs (b)

80

Mr. Salih Ahmad Muhammad AlGhamidi

Saudi
Arabia

Homs (b)

81

Brig. Sulayman Hassan Karim AlSiyahi

Iraq

Homs (b)

82

Gen. Ali Hassan Hussein Habib Al
Habib

Iraq

Latakia (leader)

83

Col. Akram Husayn Tahir

Sudan

Latakia (deputy)

84

Gen. Hassan Ali Mali Wali Al-‘Ubaydi

Iraq

Latakia

12-21903

27

S/2012/71

28

85

Gen. Muhammad Sa‘ud Munji Atya
Zayni

Iraq

Latakia

86

Mr. Said Mursi

Egypt

Latakia

87

Mr. Ali Muhammad Abdullah Al-Shahhi

United
Arab
Emirates

Latakia

88

Mr. Khalid Muhammad Ali Al-Shahhi

United
Arab
Emirates

Latakia

89

Mr. Muhammad Khalifa Ali Al-Kutbi

United
Arab
Emirates

Latakia

90

Mr. Abulqadir Azaria Bin Ahmad

Morocco

Latakia

91

Mr. Al-Karimani Muwali Muhammad

Morocco

Latakia

92

Gen. Sadiq Ja‘afar Hawsan Al-Wa’ili

Iraq

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra (leader)

93

Mr. Mubarak Said Musafir Al-Khayili

United
Arab
Emirates

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

94

Gen. Sattar Jabbar Zamil Al-Sa‘idi

Iraq

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

95

Mr. Muhammad Said Al-Kutbi

United
Arab
Emirates

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

96

Lt. Col. Muhammad Nasir AlHumaynan

Kuwait

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

97

Maj. Dr. Huquqi Yusuf Ya‘qub AlKandari

Kuwait

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

98

Mr. Khadr Husayn Salih

Iraq

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

99

Mr. Safa’ Husayn Ibrahim Radi AlA‘raji

Iraq

Raqqa and
Madinat AlThawra

100

Mr. Hadi Rashid Khalid

Qatar

Rif Dimashq
(leader)

101

Mr. Muhammad Hamad Jarullah

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

12-21903

S/2012/71

102

Mr. Muhammad Naji‘ ‘Awwad

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

103

Mr. Hassan Ali Rashid

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

104

Mr. Muhammad Sayf Muhammad

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

105

Mr. Hamad Tawim Muhammad

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

106

Mr. Said Ahmad Yati Al-Falasi

United
Arab
Emirates

Rif Dimashq

107

Mr. Ali Sultan Al-Suraydi

United
Arab
Emirates

Rif Dimashq

108

Maj. Muhammad ‘Ubayd Al-‘Anzi

Kuwait

Rif Dimashq

109

Mr. Nawaf Mubarak Sayf

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

110

Mr. Dayfullah Hasan Abdullah

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

111

Mr. Abdullah Sultan Abdullah

Qatar

Rif Dimashq

112

Mr. Muhammad Abdulman‘am Shadhili
Al-Shadhili

Egypt

Hama (leader)

113

Mr. Ghanem Mahya Al-Harbi

Saudi
Arabia

Hama

114

Mr. Muhammad Abdulaziz Mana‘a AlDusri

Saudi
Arabia

Hama

115

Mr. Ahmad Al-Nu‘aymi

Bahrain

Hama

116

Mr. Sami Jalil Salim

Iraq

Hama

117

Mr. Ali ‘Auda

Iraq

Hama

118

Mr. Fawaz Mukhlid Musafir Al-Mutayri

Saudi
Arabia

Hama

119

Mr. Jassim Muhammad Habib ‘Issa

Iraq

Hama

120

Mr. Abdulrahim Shalabi

Egypt

Consultative
team

121

H. E. Nazih ‘Umarayn

Jordan

Consultative
team

122

Brig. Muhammad Ahmad Zaza

Jordan

Coordination of
operations

123

Mr. Abdullah Said ‘Abbud Al-Asri

Saudi
Arabia

Operations
control

124

Mr. Razzaq Abd Ali Muhammad Al-Tali

Iraq

Committee on
detainees

12-21903

29

S/2012/71

30

125

Dr. Khalfan Sultan Hamad Al-Kindi

United
Arab
Emirates

Committee on
detainees

126

Mr. Mazen Ibrahim Al-Tamimi

Bahrain

Committee on
detainees

127

Mr. Ahmad Abdullatif

Sudan

Committee on
detainees

128

Mr. Tariq Al-Mawmani

Jordan

Public
information

129

Mr. Al-Shadhili Hamid

Sudan

Public
information

130

Mr. Abdulrahman Ben ‘Umar

Morocco

Advisers

131

Mr. Tali‘ Al-Sa‘ud Abdullah Al-Atlasi

Morocco

Adviser on
public
information

132

Mr. Abdulillah Muhammad Hassun
Haydar Al-Khafaji

Iraq

Transportation

133

Mr. Hamad Rashid Jabir

Qatar

Administrative
support

134

Mr. Salih Faraj Muhammad

Qatar

Administrative
support

135

Mr. Khalid Salim Salih Al-Saidi

United
Arab
Emirates

Medical support

136

Mr. Afifi Abdullatif Muhammad

Sudan

Chief, operations
room

137

Mr. Khalid Bin Rabi‘an

Saudi
Arabia

Operations
control

138

Mr. Adel Ahmad Sultan

United
Arab
Emirates

Operations
control

139

Mr. Farijat Bushu‘ayb

Morocco

Operations
supervisor

140

Mr. Fahd Muhammad Ali

Qatar

Communications
control

141

Mr. Ali Muhammad Ali

Qatar

Damascus
countryside

142

Ms. Ilham Al-Shajali

Yemen

Team office

143

Mr. Sidi ‘Uthman Walid Al-Sheikh

Mauritania

Team office

League of Arab
States

12-21903

S/2012/71

144

12-21903

Mr. Maslah Salih Maslah Al-‘Utaybi

Saudi
Arabia

Team office

31

S/2012/71

Annex II
Extent of compliance with paragraph 5 regarding the media
With regard to the media, the protocol states that the Mission should verify
that the Syrian Government gives accreditation to Arab and international media and
allows them free and unfettered movement throughout Syria.
The Mission teams have followed up the issue. They observed that members of
the media were exercising their profession in various regions. They noted some
complaints made by members of the media, who said that the Syrian Government
had given them four days in which to work in the country, a time frame that they
considered insufficient. In view of the complaints, and after the Head of the Mission
referred the matter to the Syrian side, the Government agreed to increase the time
frame to ten days including the initial four. The media were thus able to work freely
with the Mission teams.
While the Mission was present, there was only one killing. The victim was the
French journalist Gilles Jacquier, a correspondent for the channel France II, who
was walking through Homs. Each side blamed the other for his death and issued
statements condemning it. The Government formed a committee to investigate the
incident, in which a Belgian journalist was also wounded.
With regard to the decision whether or not to grant entry, the Syrian President
Bashar Al-Assad stated in his speech of 10 January 2012 that the media were
selectively allowed to operate in Syria. However, he did not define the criteria in
use. Government figures have indicated that the decision whether or not to grant
entry is based on the journalist's position regarding Syria and the events taking place
in the country. They stated that only two channels had been barred, namely AlJazeera and Al-Arabiya, which the Government believes to be targeting Syria and its
system of government.
In regions where media access is difficult, the events are being relayed through
high-technology devices incompatible with television, such as mobile phones and
simple cameras that give a poor picture on satellite television.
According to the latest information, the Mission teams have observed 44
media outlets and a number of freelance journalists. The Minister of Information,
Mr. Adnan Mahmud, stated that 147 Arab and international media outlets had been
accredited between the start of December 2011 and 15 January 2012, of which 112
had entered the country, in addition to 90 media outlets that were already based in
Syria and had permanent correspondents.
The media outlets observed covering the events in Syria are as follows.
I.

Monitoring by teams of observers

Name

Date of monitoring

Place

1.

Algerian delegation

31/12/2011

Daraa/Damascus

2.

Dubai Network

3/1/2012

Damascus

3.

BBC Arabic Network

5/1/2012

Rif Dimashq

32

12-21903

S/2012/71

4.

German television

7/1/2012

Damascus

5.

Iranian television

7/1/2012

Damascus

6.

German television

7/1/2012

Damascus

7.

Chinese media delegation (14 media
organizations)

7/1/2012

Damascus

8.

Russian television - RT

7/1/2012

Damascus

9.

TSR

8/1/2012

Damascus

10.

CNN

8/1/2012

Damascus

11.

RTL

8/1/2012

Damascus

12.

Associated Press Agency

8/1/2012

Damascus

13.

France 2 Network

9/1/2012

Homs

14.

Italian journalist

9/1/2012

Homs

15.

Lebanese journalist

9/1/2012

Homs

16.

Japanese television

10/1/2012

Daraa

17.

Al-Kawthar Iranian television network

10/1/2012

Damascus

18.

Iraqi network

12/1/2012

Damascus

19.

Canadian media delegation

12/1/2012

Damascus

20.

CBS Network - America

13/1/2012

Damascus

21.

Voice of America Radio

13/1/2012

Damascus

22.

Financial Times

15/1/2012

Damascus

23.

Belgian journalist and writer

15/1/2012

Lattakia

24.

Indonesian media delegation

16/1/2012

Aleppo

II.

Arab and foreign media that entered Syria since the signing of the protocol between 19/12/2011 and
16/1/2012, according to official reports:
Name

Date of entry

Remarks

1.

Chinese media delegation made up of 14
journalists from different Chinese media outlets

19/12/2011

Monitored by team of
observers

2.

Japanese TBS Network and Japanese journalist
Yuta Furukawa

19/12/2011

3.

Xinhua Chinese News Agency

20/12/2011

4.

Agence France Presse French News Agency

20/12/2011

5.

Yomiuri Japanese newspaper and Japanese
journalist Tao Shigeki

26/12/2011

12-21903

Monitored by team of
observers

33

S/2012/71

6.

Belgian journalist Pierre Piccinin

27/12/2011

7.

New TV - Firas Hatoum, Sa`d al-Din Al-Rifa`i
and Ali Sha`ban

27/12/2011

8.

Algerian National Television

30/12/2011

Monitored by team of
observers - part of
Algerian delegation

9.

Algerian National Radio

30/12/2011

Part of Algerian
delegation

10.

Algerian News Agency

30/12/2011

Part of Algerian
delegation

11.

Mainichi Japanese newspaper and Japanese
journalist Hiroaki Wada

1/1/2012

12.

TBS Japanese broadcasting network

3/1/2012

13.

Italian official television

3/1/2012

14.

French journalist Hervé Degal

3/1/2012

15.

BBC News Arabic network

3/1/2012

16.

Asahi Shimbun Japanese newspaper

3/1/2012

17.

RTL German television and Austrian journalist
Antonia Rados

4/1/2012

18.

ORF Austrian broadcasting network and
correspondent Fritz Orter

4/1/2012

19.

Aftenposten Norwegian newspaper and
Norwegian journalist Jørgen Lohne

5/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

20.

Milli Gazete Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers (Turkish media
delegation)

21.

TV5 Turkish network

5/1/2012

Part of the delegation

22.

Milliyet Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

23.

İhlas Turkish news agency

5/1/2012

"

"

24.

Vatan Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

25.

Akşam Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

26.

Vakit Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

27.

Yeni Şafak Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

28.

Today's Zaman English-language Turkish
newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

34

Monitored by team of
observers

Monitored by team of
observers

Monitored by team of
observers
Monitored by team of
observers

12-21903

S/2012/71

29.

KON Turkish television network

5/1/2012

"

"

30.

Hürriyet Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

31.

Star Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

32.

Turk online news site

5/1/2012

"

"

33.

STV Turkish television network

5/1/2012

"

"

34.

Yeni Asya Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

35.

Bugün Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

36.

Sözcü Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

37.

Cumhuriyet Turkish newspaper

5/1/2012

"

"

38.

Guardian British newspaper and British
journalist Ian Black

5/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

39.

NHK Japanese Government television and
Japanese journalist Yujiru Fuori

6/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

40.

Russian media delegation and journalist Dimitri

6/1/2012

41.

FR2 French television

7/1/2012

42.

Hebdo Swiss newspaper

7/1/2012

43.

Lebanese New TV network and correspondent
Firas Hatoum

7/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

44.

CNN network: British journalist Dominic
Robertson

8/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

45.

Spanish official television and journalist Oscar
Fernando Gómez

8/1/2012

46.

British journalist Elizabeth Cocker

8/1/2012

47.

Russian journalist Boris Dolgov

8/1/2012

48.

Polish journalist Marcin Domagala

8/1/2012

49.

Polish journalist Kornel Sawinski

8/1/2012

50.

VRT Belgian radio network

8/1/2012

51.

Newspaper of the Republic of Egypt and
journalist Sayyid Husayn Abdul`al

8/1/2012

52.

Sole 24 Italian newspaper and journalist Alberto
Negri

9/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

53.

Italian-Arab Centre and Lebanese journalist
Talal Khreis

9/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

54.

La Vie French magazine

10/1/2012

55.

Bild Zeitung German newspaper and journalist

10/1/2012

12-21903

Monitored by team of
observers

35

S/2012/71

56.

EFE official Spanish news agency and journalist
Javier Rodríguez

10/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

57.

CBC Canadian broadcasting network and
Canadian journalist Susan Ormiston

10/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

58.

VRT Belgian television and journalist Rudi
Vranckx

10/1/2012

59.

American CBS News network and British
journalist Elizabeth Palmer

11/1/2012

60.

Iranian journalist Mostafa Afzalzadeh

11/1/2012

61.

British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) News,
International news department and journalist
Timothy Whewell

11/1/2012

62.

Czech TV: Jan Molacek and Martin Bobin

12/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

63.

Asahi Shimbun Japanese newspaper, editor

13/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

64.

Sky News network and British journalist Jeremy
Thompson

13/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

65.

Voice of America radio and television network:
American journalist Elizabeth Arrott

13/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

66.

Financial Times newspaper and British
journalist Abigail Fielding-Smith

14/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

67.

Los Angeles Times newspaper and journalist
Alexandra Zavis

14/1/2012

Monitored by team of
observers

List of Arab and international media representatives who have entered Syria
since the start of December 2011

36

1.

The United States channel ABC News: Barbara Jill Waters on 3 December.

2.

Delegation of various French media outlets including the journalist Richard
Labévière, working from the Institut Français du Proche Orient (IFPO);
Professor Eric Denec, a teacher at IFPO; and Saida Ben Hbeibes, on
3 December.

3.

The Egyptian journalist Sana Al-Said, on 10 December.

4.

Abduh Maghribi, editor of the Egyptian newspaper Al-Anba Al-Duwaliyya on
10 December.

5.

Muhammad Al-Fawwal, deputy editor of the newspaper Al-Gumhuriyya, on
10 December.

6.

Ilham Al-Maliji, press journalist and analyst, 10 December.

7.

Muhammad Mahmud Al-Sayyid of the newspaper Al-Ahram, 10 December.

8.

Nura Khalaf, deputy editor of the magazine Hurriyyati, 10 December.

12-21903

S/2012/71

9.

Muhammad Said Galal, deputy editor of Akhbar Al-Yawm (Egypt),
10 December.

10.

Muhsin Abdulaziz of Al-Ahram, 10 December.

11.

Laarbi Usama Al-Dalil, head of the international section, Al-Ahram,
10 December.

12.

Ayman Al-Sisi, Al-Ahram, 10 December.

13.

Yasir Mishali, deputy editor of Ruz Al-Yusif, 10 December.

14.

Rami Al-Maliji of the newspaper Al-Yawm Al-Sabi`, 10 December.

15.

Shadiya Ahmad Al-Husri of the Kuwaiti newspaper Al-Ra'y, 10 December.

16.

Lenka Ardnašova, editor of the Slovak newspaper Extra Plus, 11 December.

17.

Robert Kolisek of the State publication Tasar, 11 December.

18.

Peter Durkovic, a journalist specializing in the Middle East, 11 December.

19.

Filip Fosfić, editor for Slovak television, 11 December.

20.

Martin Kubala of the Slovak channel JOV, 11 December.

21.

Josef Durica, editor of a weekly magazine, 11 December.

22.

Andrea Emkova, a journalist who publishes in the State media, 11 December.

23.

German radio and television, 12 December.

24.

Makoto Sasaki of the Japanese network Fuji, 13 December.

25.

Joerg Ambruster, Friedre Meissner and Heiko Viehl of the German television
channel ARD, 15 December.

26.

Dietmar Ossenberg of the German television channel ZDF, 15 December.

27.

Takeshi Tsuchiya of the Japanese news agency Kyodo , on 15 December.

28.

Giuseppe Bonavolontà of the Italian television channel RAI, 16 December.

29.

Sara Firth of the English-language channel Russia Today, 17 December.

30.

Mariana Belenkaya of the Arabic-language Russian channel Rusiya Al-Yawm,
17 December.

31.

Annalisa Rapanà of the Italian news agency ANSA, 18 December.
The Chinese delegation is composed of 14 journalists from various news
outlets and entered the region on 19 December:

12-21903

32.

Zhou Hu, correspondent for Travel News Weekly.

33.

Tao Haibin, editor of Global Travel Magazine.

34.

Li Wei, editor of Wings of China Magazine.

35.

Liu Qiang, editor of Wings of China Magazine.

36.

Lin Haidong, editor of Wang Jia Travel.

37.

Zau Yinghao, editor of Wang Jia Travel.

37

S/2012/71

38

38.

Zau Qi, editor of Shanghai Media Group.

39.

Jin Song, editor of Shanghai Media Group.

40.

Bao Gang, editor of Shanghai Media Group.

41.

Yu Meug, editor of Century Business Herald.

42.

Ruan Yuhong, editor of the website Blashe

43.

Ho Yanguang, editor of China Youth Daily.

44.

Qiu Xiaoyu, editor of Chinese international radio.

45.

Bao Limin, editor of Youth Reference News.

46.

Yuta Furukawa of the Japanese channel TBS, on 19 December.

47.

Zheng Kaijun, Li Muzi and Li Jia of the Chinese news agency Xinhua, on
20 December.

48.

The French news agency AFP on 20 December.

49.

Pierre Piccinin, Belgian author and journalist, entered the region on
27 December.

50.

Tao Shigeki of the Japanese newspaper Yomiuri, 26 December.

51.

Firas Hatoum, Sa`duddin Al-Rifa`i and Ali Sha`ban of the channel Al-Jadid,
27 December,

52.

Algerian national television, on 30 December.

53.

Algerian national radio, 30 December.

54.

Algerian news agency, 30 December.

55.

Hiroaki Wada of the Japanese newspaper Mainichi, 1 January 2012.

56.

The Japanese channel TBS, 3 January.

57.

Italian State television, 3 January.

58.

Hervé Degal, French journalist, 3 January.

59.

BBC News Arabic, 3 January.

60.

Correspondents for the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun, 3 January.

61.

The Austrian journalist Antonia Rados for the German television channel RTL,
4 January.

62.

Fritz Orter of the Austrian radio and television network ORF, 4 January.

63.

Jørgen Lohne of the Norwegian newspaper Aftenposten, 5 January.

64.

The Turkish newspaper Milli Gazete, 5 January.

65.

The Turkish channel TV5, 5 January.

66.

The Turkish newspaper Milliyet, 5 January.

67.

The Turkish news agency İhlas, 5 January.

68.

The Turkish newspaper Vatan, 5 January.

12-21903

S/2012/71

69.

The Turkish newspaper Akşam, 5 January.

70.

The Turkish newspaper Vakit, 5 January.

71.

The newspaper Yeni Şafak, 5 January.

72.

The Turkish English-language newspaper Today's Zaman, 5 January.

73.

The Turkish television channel KON, 5 January.

74.

The Turkish newspaper Hürriyet, 5 January.

75.

The Turkish newspaper Star, 5 January.

76.

The Turkish website Haber Türk, 5 January.

77.

The Turkish channel STV, 5 January 2011.

78.

The Turkish newspaper Yeni Asya, 5 January.

79.

The Turkish newspaper Bugün, 5 January.

80.

The Turkish newspaper Sözgü, 5 January.

81.

The Turkish newspaper Cumhuriyet, 5 January.

82.

Ian Black of the UK newspaper The Guardian, 5 January.

83.

Yujiru Futori of the Japanese State television NHK, 6 January.

84.

The journalist Dimitri of the Russian press delegation, 6 January.

85.

The British journalist Dominic Robertson of CNN, 8 January.

86.

Oscar Fernando Gómez of Spanish State television, 8 January.

87.

The French television channel FR2, 7 January.

88.

The Swiss publication Hebdo, 7 January.

89.

Firas Hatoum of the Lebanese channel Al-Jadid, 7 January.

90.

The British journalist Elizabeth Cocker, 8 January.

91.

The Russian journalist Boris Dolgov, 8 January.

92.

The Polish journalist Marcin Domalaga, 8 January.

93.

The Polish journalist Mateusz Piskorski, 8 January.

94.

The Polish journalist Kornel Sawinski, 8 January.

95.

The Belgian radio VRT, 8 January.

96.

Sayyid Husayn Abdul`al of the Egyptian newspaper Al-Gumhuriyya,
8 January.

97.

Alberto Negri of the Italian newspaper Il Sole 24 Ore, 9 January.

98.

The Lebanese journalist Talal Khreis of the Italian-Arab Centre, 9 January.

99.

The French magazine La Vie, 10 January.

100. Julian Reichelt of the German newspaper Bild Zeitung, 10 January.
101. Javier Rodríguez of the Spanish State news agency EFE, 10 January.

12-21903

39

S/2012/71

102. Susan Ormiston of the Canadian radio and television network CBC,
10 January.
103. Rudi Vranckx of the Belgian television channel VRT, 10 January.
104. Elizabeth Palmer of the US channel CBS News, 11 January.
105. The Iranian journalist Mostafa Afzalzadeh, 11 January.
106. Tim Whewell of BBC News, international section, 11 January.
107. Jan Molacek and Martin Bubin of Czech television, 12 January.
108. The editor of the Japanese newspaper Asahi Shimbun, 13 January.
109. The British journalist Jeremy Thompson of the channel Sky News, 13 January.
110. Elizabeth Arrot of Voice of America radio and television, 13 January.
111. Abigail Fielding-Smith of the British newspaper Financial Times, 14 January.
112. Alexandra Zavis of the newspaper Los Angeles Times, 14 January.
List of Arab and international media granted accreditation for the region since
1 January who have yet to enter the country:

40

1.

Kazuhide Iketaki of the Japanese agency Jiji Press, 26 December 2011.

2.

Kazayuki Bandok, Head of office and correspondent for the newspaper
Hokkaido Shimbun, accompanied by the Egyptian journalist Mahmud `Id
Mahmud, 26 December.

3.

Enrique Rubio of the Spanish agency EFE, 27 December.

4.

Salwa Al-Khatib, correspondent for Press TV, 9 December.

5.

Jon Anderson, correspondent for the magazine The New Yorker, 28 December.

6.

Jeremy Bowen of the BBC, 9 December.

7.

Roel Maria Geeraedts of the Dutch channel RTL4, 27 December.

8.

Paul Jørgensen of the Norwegian channel TV2, 28 December.

9.

William Spindle of the Wall Street Journal, 27 December.

10.

Hristo Petrov of the independent news agency Trinity M, 27 December.

11.

The Algerian newspaper Al-Khabar, 24 December.

12.

The US television channel NBC, 26 December.

13.

Vidal Dominguez of the Cuban station Radio Habana, 9 December.

14.

Tomas Avenarius of the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, 9 December.

15.

The Argentinean journalist Karen Marón, who is currently working for French
international radio and the Colombian press, 26 December.

16.

Fausto Biloslavo of the newspaper Il Giornale, 28 December.

17.

Toru Tomita and Kishi Tumura of the Japanese television channel Nippon,
1 January 2012.

12-21903

S/2012/71

12-21903

18.

The Arabic-language Russian channel Rusiya Al-Yawm, 1 January.

19.

The English-language channel Russia Today, 1 January.

20.

The Spanish-language Russian station, 1 January.

21.

The American author Charles M. Glass, 7 January.

22.

Alexandra Zavis of the Los Angeles Times, 7 January.

23.

Alice Fordham of the Washington Post, 7 January.

24.

Arwa Damon of CNN, 7 January.

25.

The American journalist Ayman Mohyeldin of NBC News Cairo, 8 January.

26.

The journalist Jorg Armbruster of the German channel ARD.

27.

The American journalist Kareem Fahim of the New York Times, 8 January.

28.

The British journalist and academic James Harkin, 8 January.

29.

The Chinese journalist Li Lianxing of the newspaper China Daily, 12 January.

30.

Karim Al-Jawhari of the Austrian channel ORF, 12 January.

31.

Toshihiro Fuji of the Japanese channel NHK, 12 January.

32.

Wang Chu of the Chinese news agency Xinhua, 12 January.

33.

Abigail Fielding-Smith of the Financial Times, 12 January.

34.

Claudie Abi Hanna of the Lebanese channel Al-Hurra, 12 January.

35.

Michael Robert Peel of the Financial Times, 12 January 2012.

36.

Jan Eikelboom of Dutch television, 12 January.

37.

Ahmad Jadullah Hasan Salem and Maryam Qar`uni of Reuters, 13 January.

41

S/2012/71

Annex III
Names of observers who withdrew from the League of Arab States
Observer Mission
Name

Nationality

Field team

Comments

Comments

1

Muhammad
Husayn Umar

Djibouti

Homs A

Qatar Charity

Departed

2

Anwar
Abdulmalik

Algeria

Homs A

Departed

3

Muhammad bin
Yusuf Al-Nafati

Tunisia

Idlib

Departed

4

Ahmad
Abdullah
Muhamamd
Abdullah

Egypt

Idlib

Departed

5

Abdulhamid AlWali

Morocco

6

Jamal Hamid
Barakat

Egypt

Hama

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

7

Nabil
Abdulmuhsin
Hasan AlShalabi

Egypt

Hama

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

8

Haidi Ali
Muhammad AlTayyib

Egypt

Hama

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

9

Ibrahim
Abdullah AlSulayman

Saudi Arabia

Hama

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

10

Karim
Abdulmuhsin
Hasan AlShalabi

Egypt

Homs A

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

11

Manina bint
Muhammad
Salim

Mauritania

Deraa

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Departed

12

Hisham
Bnay`ish

Morocco

Damascus

Departed

13

Isam
Abdulrahman

Sudan

Damascus

Departed

42

Departed

12-21903

S/2012/71

14

Muhammad
Salim
Muhammad
Rashid AlKa`bi

United Arab
Emirates

Deraa

15

Yahya
Abdulmuhsin
Al-`Itabi

Iraq

Deraa

Arab Human
Rights
Organization

Left without the
Mission's
permission and
at his own
expense

16

Isam Mansur
Muhammad
Miqdad

Jordan

Coordinator

Arab
Committee on
Human Rights

Departed

17

Muhammad
Uthman AlSudairi

Tunisia

Aleppo

Departed

18

Sabr AlRawashida

Jordan

Aleppo

Departed

19

Jalal bin
Ibrahim AlSanusi

Tunisia

Idlib

Departed

20

Muhammad bin
Husayn bin
Yusuf

Tunisia

Idlib

Departed

21

Muhammad
Salah Ali
Shawar

Egypt

Idlib

Egyptian
National
Council on
Human Rights

Departed

22

Hadi Al-Yami

Saudi Arabia

Committee on
detainees

Arab
Committee on
Human Rights

Special leave for
five days

12-21903

Departed

43

S/2012/71

Annex IV
Vehicle fleet
League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria
No.
1

Country
Iraq

Land Cruiser

Mercedes

Nissan

Cadillac

Total

Armoured

Regular

Armoured

Regular

Armoured

Regular

Armoured

Regular

7

-

10

-

-

-

-

-

17

Remarks
23
armoured

2

Qatar

-

5

-

-

-

4

1

-

10

(Toyota)
3

Saudi

15 g
armoured

5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

5

-

-

-

-

-

6

-

-

6

12

5

10

-

-

10

1

-

38

Arabia
4

United
Arab
Emirates

Total armoured
vehicles

44

12-21903

S/2012/71

Vehicles used by the League of Arab States Observer Mission to Syria
No.

Country

Make

Plate number

Regular/

Type

Sector

Remarks

armoured
1

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2192

Regular

4x4

Deraa

2

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2193

Regular

4x4

Homs (b)

3

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2194

Regular

4x4

Banyas

4

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2195

Regular

4x4

Hama

5

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2196

Regular

4x4

Idlib

6

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2197

Regular

4x4

Suwaida

7

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2198

Regular

4x4

Damascus

8

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2199

Regular

4x4

Qamishli

9

Qatar

Land Cruiser

2201

Regular

4x4

Damascus

10

Qatar

Cadillad

2212

Armoured

4x4

Damascus countryside

11

Saudi Arabia

GMS

2231

Armoured

4x4

Homs

12

Saudi Arabia

GMS

2232

Armoured

4x4

Homs

13

Saudi Arabia

GMS

2233

Armoured

4x4

Qamishli

14

Saudi Arabia

GMS

2234

Armoured

4x4

Hama

15

Saudi Arabia

GMS

2235

Armoured

4x4

Tadmur

16

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2214

Regular

4x4

Latakia

17

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2215

Regular

4x4

Latakia

18

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2216

Regular

4x4

Qamishli

19

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2217

Regular

4x4

Latakia

20

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2222

Regular

4x4

Tadmur

21

United Arab Emirates

Nissan

2223

Regular

4x4

Latakia

22

Iraq

Mercedes

2202

Armoured

Station wagon

Homs (a)

23

Iraq

Mercedes

2203

Armoured

Station wagon

Damascus countryside

24

Iraq

Mercedes

2204

Armoured

Station wagon

Aleppo

25

Iraq

Mercedes

2205

Armoured

Station wagon

Homs (a)

26

Iraq

Mercedes

2206

Armoured

Station wagon

Suwaida

27

Iraq

Mercedes

2207

Armoured

Station wagon

Deraa

28

Iraq

Mercedes

2208

Armoured

Station wagon

Deir Al-Zor

29

Iraq

Mercedes

2209

Armoured

Station wagon

Banyas

30

Iraq

Mercedes

2210

Armoured

Station wagon

With the team

31

Iraq

Mercedes

2211

Armoured

Station wagon

Homs (b)

32

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2224

Armoured

4x4

Latakia

33

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2225

Armoured

4x4

Damascus

34

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2226

Armoured

4x4

Idlib

35

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2227

Armoured

4x4

Raqqa and Al-Thawra

36

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2228

Armoured

4x4

Raqqa and Al-Thawra

37

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2229

Armoured

4x4

Deir Al-Zor

38

Iraq

Land Cruiser

2230

Armoured

4x4

Raqqa and Al-Thawra

12-21903

Ready for deployment
Ready for deployment

Inoperable

Inoperable

Undergoing maintenance

45
