Resolution.s adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

including the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development,
Recalling also that, in bis two statements, the Secretary-General indicated tbat a large part of tbe work
involved would be carried out in co-operation witb the
Economic Commission far Western Asia, and that the
Commíssion would require four economists, appointed
far six months eacb, and General Service secretaria!
support as well as travel funds far tbe preparation of
tbe report,
Noting tbat, in view of the staffing proposals for the
Economic Commission for Western Asia, the Advisory
Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions recommended 89 an additional provision in the
amount of $37,000 to cover tbe cost of two economísts
only far a period of six months eacb and tbat the General Assembly approved tbis additional appropriation
to supplement thc staff and resources of tbe Commission in the work involved in tbe preparation of the
report,
Noting also that the report of tbe Secretary-General 9º
was not prepared in conformity with paragrapb 5 of
General Assembly resolution 3336 (XXIX), the related statements made on bebalf of the co-sponsors and
by the Secretary-General, and the administrative and
financia! implications and provisions approved by the
Assembly, but contained only annexes setting farth infarmation available to Govemments and to sorne of
the relevant specialized agencies and United Nations
organs wbich were not involved in the preparation of
substantive studies related to tbe report,
l. Notes tbat the report of the Secretary-General is
inadequate as it did not incorporate the necessary substantive and comprehensive studies required in confor_mity witb paragrapb 5 of General Assembly resolut10n 3336 (XXIX) and related documents, including
the record of tbe meeting of tbe Second Commíttee, 86
the statements on administrative and financia! implications88 and tbe recommendation of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions;89
2. Requests the heads of the relevant specialized
agencies and United Nations organs, particularly the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and the Economic Commission far Western Asia
to co-operate actively and adequately witb the Secre~
tary-General in the preparation of a final comprebensive
report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty~first session bis final comprehensive report, whicb should fulfil the above-mentioned requirements.
2 441 st plenary meetin~
15 December 1975
3517 (XXX). Mid-term review and appraisal of
progrese in the implementation of the Jn.
ternational Development Strategy for the
Second United Nations Development Decade

The General Assembly,
Having undertaken, in accordance with paragrapb 83
of the Intemational Development Strategy far the Second United Nations Development Decade contained in
89 _O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-ninth
Sess1on, Annexes, agenda item 73, document A/9978/Add.1,
para. 4.
so Al !0290 and Add.2.

71

resolution 2626 (XXV) of 24 October 19 70, a midterm review and appraisal of progress achicved in thc
implementation of the Strategy,
Bearing in mind its resolutions 3201 (S-Vl) and
3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment
of a New International Economic Ordcr, and 3281
(XXIX) of 12 December 1974, containing thc Chartcr
of Economic Rights and Duties of States, which lay
clown tbe faundations of the new intcrnational economic order,
Recalling its resolution 3176 (XXVIII) of 17 Dc-cember 1973 on the first biennial over-all rcvícw ami
appraisal of progress in tbe implemcntation of thc lnternational Development Strategy for the Sccont! llnited
Nations Development Decade,
Further bearing in mind its resolution 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and intcrnational economic co-operation, wbich in the contcxt of
the foregoing calls far the implementation of its provisions by Governments and which would serw as the
basis and framework far the work of the competent
bodies and organizations of the United Nations systcm,
l. Reaffirms its adherence to a stratcgic framcwork
for international development co-operation as cm-bodied in the International Development Stratcgy for
the Second United Nations Development Decadc based
?n _mutually consi~tent and reinforced goals a~d obJecttves and comm1tments to tbe adoption and irnplc~e~tation of measures to realize those goals and obJechves;
2. Adopts the text of the mid-term ovcr-all rcvicw
and appraisal of progress in the implementation of tlll"
Int~rnation~ Development Strategy for tbe Sccond
Umted Natlons Development Decade as set forth in
sections I to III of the present resolution;
3. Urges Member States to implement the rneasures, undertaken within tbe framework of thc I11tc1national Development Strategy, set forth in scct1on J\:
of the present resolution;
4. Urges M_ember States to implcmcnt thc pultcy
measures unammously agreed upan by thc General
Assembly at its seventh special session in rcsolution
3362 (S-Vll) concerning international tradc, transfer
of resources far development, international monctarv
refarm, science and technology, industrialization, fon¿!
and a~riculture and co-operation among dcvclnping
countnes and, to that end, requests ali Governmcnts
to take the required measures and come to thc ;,,ter-nati~nal meetings sufficiently prepared so as to makc i1
poss1ble far the competent bodies of the United Nations
concemed, particularly tbe United Nations Confcrencc
on Trade and Development at its fourth sessio11, the
United Nations Industr!al Development Organization,
tbe World Food Council and the World Bank Grnup,
to reacb urgent and satisfactory agreements on !hose
matters referred to them for implementation;
5. Urges developed and developing countries tu
continue seeking new areas of agreement and widcning the existing ones, within the framework of thc ,npropriate intern~tional. organizations, through add rc:~mg themselves, mter alza, to tbe fallowing issucs ·
(a) Extension of preferential treatment in favorn
of developing countries in trade;
(b) Differential and more favourable treatmenl ;"
~avour of developing countries, in appropriate ~:,1:w~
m areas other than trade;

72

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

(e) Intemational norms and procedures to govern
departures from the provisions of the principie of
standstill;
(d) Transfer of resources to developing countries
on a predictable, continuous and assured basis, through,
inter alía:
(i) The establishment of a link between additional
development financing and special drawing
rights as and when they are created according
to the needs of international liquidity;
(ii) The possible utilization of the proceeds from
the exploitation of the resources of the sea-bed
and the ocean floor and the subsoil thereof beyond the limits of national jurisdiction;
(e) Increased financing of development in developing countries in accordance with their national plans
and priorities through new approaches such as increased
access on favourable terms to the capital market of
developed L:ountries;
(f) Full and effective participation of developing
countries in the international economic system and their
contribution to its functioning;
6. Invites Member States to take appropriate steps
to ensure the implementation of all the provisions of
the International Development Strategy;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an item entitled "Revision of the
International Development Strategy for the Second
United Nations Development Decadc", so that the
Strategy fully takes into account the principies and
policy decisions adopted w:thin the United Nations
since the adoption of the Strategy and. in particular,
resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI), containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on
the Establishment of a New International E-::onomic
Order, 3281 (XXIX). containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States. and 3362 (S-VII)
on development and international economic co-operation;
8. Invites the regional commissions, in thc light of
the present resolution, to carry forward work already
undertaken in preparation for this mid-term review
and appraisal, in co-operation with the other competent organizations of the United Nations system;
9. Requests the governing bodies of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Devclopment, the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Environment Programme and the specialized agencies, in the light of this mid-term revicw
and appraisal, to rccommend in their respective sectors
new goals and objectives, as appropriate, for the remainder of the Decade, taking into account the conclusions and recommendations of the intemational conferences which have taken place since the adoption of
resolution 2626 (XXV);
10. Invites the Committee on Development Planning
to submit to the Economic and Social Council at its
sixty~first session a report containing projections for
the remainder of the Decade and, as appropriate, proposals for revision of the goals and objectivcs of the
International Development Strategy, as well as recommendations for new goals and objectives, in the light
of the conclusions and recommendations of the international conferences which have taken place since the
adoption of resolution 2626 (XXV);

11. Requests .the Secretary-General to prepare and
subrnit to the Economic and Social Council at its sixtyfirst session appropriate documentation on the basis,
inter alia, of the preparatory work to be done in accordance with paragraphs 8 to 10 above;
12. Invites the Economic and Social Council to
include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-first session an ítem dealing with the revision of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade.
Review and apprnisal of pro~ress in the implementation
of the lnternational Development Strategy
CONTENTS

Paragraphs

1-4

l. INTRODUCTION

ll.
111.
IV.

ACHIEVEMENT OF GOALS AND OBJECTIVES . . . .
EVALUATION OF THE IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY
MEASURES
FURTHER ACTION

A. Co-operation among developing countries
B. Invisibles . .
. ............. .
C. Special measures in favour of thc least developed countries
D. Special measures in favour of the landlocked and island developing countries
E. Special measures in favour of the most seriously affected countries
F. Human development
G. Expansion and diversification of production
H. Mobilization of public opinion
J.
Elimination of foreign aggression and occupation. racial discriminat,ion, apartheid and
colonialism

5-13
14-46

47-75
56-57
58-59
60-62

63-65
66
67-68

69-73
74

75

l. INTRODUCTION

1. This mi<l-term review and appraisal of progress in the
implementation of the International Development Strategy for
the Second United Nations Development Decade takes place
at a time when the intemational economic situation is continuing to change and when events have been following each
other so rapidly as to shake the foundations of the existing economic order. In the first half of the Decade there has been a succession of crucial events. The Bretton Woods system broke
down in 1971. From January 1973, the prices of food, fue!
and fertilizer rose so rapidly that, together with ever-increasing prices of capital goods, equipment and scrvices, the balanceof-payments situation of most dcveloping countries deteriorated.
During 1974, most commodity priccs slumped. Existing structura.l imbalances in agricultura! production were aggravated
by, intcr alia, a continuation of unfavourable climatic conditions. The situation in developing conntries was further exacerbated by the economic recession in the developed market
economies, combined with thc acccleration of the pace of inflation. During the first half of the Decade, an alanning increase occurred in the ¡rnp between developed and developing
countries. and thcrc wa, also an irreversible and most promising change in thc relationship of forces of the world. The
devcloping countries emerged as a more powerful factor, as a
necessary consequence of the new and growing perception of
the reality of interdcpcndence. This newly found strength of
the developing countries opens up promising avenues for enlarging and reinforcing cc-opcration among thosc countries
on the basis of the fraternal solidarity of thcir pcoples in facing
the challenge of development, justice and cquity. Particularly
important is the joint action of the devcloping countries to
safeguard their permanent sovereignty ovcr thcir natural resources and economic activities, and to strengthcn thcir .icgotiating power for obtaining a just and equitablc trcatmcnt for
their exports of both primary prcxlucts and manufactured
goods. Fmthermore, parts of thc developing world are sti.11
subject to foreign aggression and occupation, apartheid and

73

Resolutions adopted on the reporta of the Second Committee

colonial and neo-colonial domination, this being one of the
grea1est obstacles to the economic emanoipation and development of the developing world as a whole as well as one of the
greatest threats to peace and security throughout the world.
2. This situation led to the call for the establishment of a
new international economic order at the sixth special session of
the General Assembly, based on true internacional economic
ioterdependence, full equity, sovereignty of States, sovereign
equality, common interest and co-operatñon among ali States,
irrespective of their economic and social systems. In this context, severa! priority areas were identified by ad hoc world
conferences which considered problems of enwronment, population, food, industrialization and the role of women in development, and by the General Assembly at its seventh special
session, which was a major follow-up to the sixth special
session. However, the results of the implementation of action
taken at these conferences did not have any impact on the
situation prevailing in the first half of the Decade.

3. Developed countries have not, by and large, implemented
the policy measures of the International Development Strategy,
and indeed there has been sorne retrogression. The inadequate
implementation of policy measures embodied in the Strategy,
compounded with a continuing economic crisis which affects
particularly the developing countries because of their greater
vulnerability to externa! economic impulses, produced the
most discouraging results w,ith minimal progress in the advancement of the cause of development.
4. Despite agreement at the first biennial review on the
necessity to implement the policy measures agreed upon, there
has been inadequate movement on the part of the developed
countries towards making the development objective a central
focus of issues to which the international community should
urgently seek effective and consistent solutions.

Table J. Cross domestic product of developing countries
(International Development Strategy target, 1971-1980:
6 per cent per annum)

1961-1970

1971-1974

1971

1972

5.5

5.9

5.2

5.6

6. The average growth rate in developing countries has
continued at approximately the target set for the Decade,
though the annual growth rate per capita was 3.3 per cent, ora
little below the targe,t of 3.5 per cent se1 by the International
Development Strategy.

1973

1974

SouRcE: Wo,·ld Economic S1<rvey, 1974 (United Nations publication,
Sales No. E.75.II.C.1).

7. A major a rea of shortfall was in the agricultura! sector,
where less than half the target rate of 4 per cent was realized
by the developing countries as a whole.
Table 2. Agricultura/ production of developing countries
(lnternational Developmen~ Strategy target, 1971-1980:
4 per cent per annum)
Percentage change
from preceding year

A1,:erage annual rate of change
( perce11ta11e)
1961-1970

1971-1974

1971

1972

1973

1974

2.8

1.5

1.6

-0.8

3.9

1.5

SouacE:

World Economic Survey, 1974.

8. The over-all target of 8 per cent per annum in manufacturing output was attained in general, and in sorne cases
exceeded.
·

Table 3. Manufacturing production of deve/oping countries
(lnternational Development Strategy target, 1971-1980:
8 per cent per annum)
Percentage change
/rom preccd1"ng yeur

Average annua{ rate of change
( percenla_qe)

11. ACHIEVEMENT OF GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
5. Sorne of the aggregate targets set in the Internacional
Development Strategy were met or exceeded, owing mainly to
the developing countries' own efforts and to a certain extent to
externa! factors such as thc "commodily boom". These aggregate figures, however, do not reflect the variation in achievements by individual developing countries. The main features
of achievement are set forth in paragraphs 6 to 13 below.

Pcrcenta¡¡e citan.ge
from preceding y•ar

Average annual rate of change
( percenta¡¡e)

SouncE:

1971-1974

1971

1972

1973

1974

8.3

6.7

8.9

9.0

8.7

IVorld E . :otiomic Survey, 1974.

9. Developing countries as a whole have achieved the
domestic savings rate of 20 per cent set for 198C, though for
many developing countries the rate was somewhat less.
10. A main factor conduaive to the over-all achievements
of the developing countries during this period was trade. In
externa! trade and payments, quantum increases for many
developing countries in the early years of the Decade decelerated in 1974, resulting in an average rate of somewhat less
than the 7 per cent target of the Intemational Development
Strategy.

Table 4. Change in exports and imports of developing countries
(International Development Strategy target, 1971-1980~
7 per cent per annum)
Average ama, al
rate of increase
( percentaqe)

1971-1974

1971

1972

1973

1974

6.5
7.9

7.1
7.1

8.4
1.9

8.3
9.8

2.5
13.1

Quantum of exports
Quantum of imports
SouRcE:

Percentage change
from precedinq year

World Economic Survey. 1974.

11. The net flow of financia) resources of official development assistance, a major area of development policy, has
decreased in real terms and as a percentage of gross national
product.
Table 5. ,Vet fiow of offecial development assistance from
developed market economy countries
(lnternational Development Strategy target, 1971-1980:
0.7 per cent per annum)
Period
1969-1970

1971-1973

1974 4

0.34

0.32

0.32

SouRCE: World Economic Survey, 1974.
• Provisional data.

12. The burden of debt service payments of developing
countries has continue<l to increase in relation to their export
earnings.
Table 6.

Service payments on externa[ public debt of
seventy-eight developing countries
Percentage share of public debt service
payment to the exports of goods and
non-factor .serviC(!S ( seventy-eight
dwcloping countries)

1967
1970
1973

9.9
11.2
10.9

SouRCE: Centre for Development Planning, Projections and Policies
of the l}nited ::-,¡'ations Secretariat.

74

General Auembly-Thirtieth Seuion

13. Population policies have, by and large, been implemented by developing countries within the context of their
development plans and priorities, and the target of 2.5 per
cent of average annual increase in population in developing
couI)tries has almost been reached.

20. In spite of growing awareness in the international
community of the adverse effects on trade and development
of restrictive business practfoes, which are being studied actively, ínter alía within the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development; no international action has been taken
to elüninate this problem.

lll. EVALUATION OF 1HE IMPLEMENTATION OF
POLICY MEASURES

21. There has not been systematic progress by developed
countries in the implernentation of measures called for to
evolve a programrne to assist in the adaptation and adjustment
of their non-cornpetitive industries.

14. Little progress has been made on international action
in the field of cornmodity trade. In spite of internacional efforts to achieve stable, equitable and rernunerative prices for
prirnary cornmodities exported by developing countries, there
has been little progress in the field of cornmodity trade. Toe
protection of domestic production and restrictive trade practices in sorne developed countries and/or the emergence and
increased production of synthetic subsdtutes have contrúbuted
to a slowing down of growth of demand for agricultural
products. However, a scheme for the stabiliza,tion of export
earnings on selected cornrnodities was agreed upon between
the European Econornic Cornrnun.ity and forty-seven developing countries.
15. Li-ttle has been accornplished on the issue of access to
markets for primary cornmodities, particularly agricultura!
products of export interest to developing countries, in spite of
the agreernent reached by the Ministers of the Contracting
Parties to the General Agreernent on Tariffs and Trade at
their meeting held at Tokyo frorn 12 to 14 Septernber 1973.
16. These negotiations, which according to the Tokyo Declaration were to have been concluded by the end of 1975,
have not yet had substantive results, to the particular detriment of developing countries whose econornies are particularly
sensitive to externa! conditions. Toe removal and/or elirnination of trade barriers were not satisfactorily achieved during
the first half of the Decade in spite of the irnplementation of
the generalized systern of preferences. In certain instances, the
principie of standstill was not observed by sorne major trading
countries, causing social and economic problems in developing
countries.
17. The impact of tariff escalation on processed products is a
major obstacle to vertical diversification. Despite the objectives of facilitating improved access to the markets of developed countries for serni-processed and processed cornmodities
of developing countries, adequate intemational action to achieve
those objectives has not yet been forthcorning, thereby hampering the efforts of the dcveloping countries to divcrsify their
econornies. In fact, the adverse effects of the Kennedy Round,
which actually increased the degree of discrirnination against
sorne processed products, still rernain a matter of concem.
18. Although the generalized system of preferences represents a break-through in the traditional concept of international trade and co-operation, its benefits to developing
countries have so far been of a rnodest nature, owing rnainly
to its delayed irnplernentation, to limitations in application
by restrictive conditions regarding product coverage, the leve!
of "ceiling", the degree of preference, the size of the preferential tariff quota, as well as the inadequacy of relevant
information, which prevents benefioiaries frorn taking full
advantage of the existing schernes. Even such lirnited benefits
as accrue to developing countries from the generalized systern
of preferences may be eroded both by preferential arrangements arnong sorne developed countries and by the prospect
of reduction in trade barriers among them following the multilateral trade negotiations within the General Agreement
on Tariffs and Trade.
19. Developed countries have in sorne cases dcpartcd from
the standstill referred to in the International Developrnent
Strategy by applying new restrictions affecting a wide range
of developing countries' exports, specifically those products in
which the developing countries are becoming cornpetitive in
intemational rnarkets, such as textiles, leather products, certain types of steel and electronic products. Sirnilarly, the new
restrictive measures irnposed by sorne developed countries
against exports of agricultura! products of developing countries, both in raw and processed forms, have severely affected
the export earnings of those countries.

22. There has been a growing effort in developing countries
to make greater use of trade promotion as an instrument for
the expansion of their exports. The application of countervailing duties by sorne developed countries has lirnited the efforts
of developing countries in prornoting their trade through export policies which include such measures as subsidies and
export incentives.
23. During the first three years of the Decade a substantial
growth occurred in trade between developing countrúes and
the socialist countries of Eastern Europe. However, there are
still certain irnportant problems which trade and economic
relations between those countries and developing countries
rnust face. The trade of those socialist countries witll developing countries is largely concentrated on a limited number of
established partners. There is clearly room for acceJerating
the growth of trade between those socialist coun.tries and developing countries, as well as a need to intensify further the
efforts to adopt specific measures, as called for by the relevant
paragraphs of the Intemational Development Strategy, the
relevant resolutions of the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Developrnent and the Charter of Econornic Rights and
Duties of States.
24. The current economic situation has given added irnpetus
to the expansion of econornic co-operation among developing
countries. This need was reflected in the Prograrnme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order
and decisions adopted by the non-aligned countries and other
groups of developing countries as well as subregional and regional groups of developing countries, which stressed the need
for further co!Jective self-reliance and growing co-operation
among developing countries. Sorne progress has been made
wí,thin interregional and regional grou¡,6. On the basis of trade
figures up to 1972, the growth of trade among developing
countries has accelerated to over 15 per cent per annurn since
1970, cornpared to 6 per cent during the First United Nations
Development Decade. During the rernainder of the Second
Development Decade, a more vigorous approach is required for
joint action by developing countries. The Programrne of Action
contains sorne of the steps which should be taken to expand
co-operation at the regional, subregional and interregional levels
while action is being taken arnong various groups of developing countries. The fields for such expansion of economic cooperation include industry, raw rnaterials, science, technology,
transport, shipping and communication media.
25. The targets for net financia! flows in the lnternational
Development Strategy were set to provide the critica\ rnargin
of externa! financing over and above the financia! resources
developing countries could obtafa through export eamings to
meet the mínimum growth objectives of the Strategy. Toe
Programrne of Action on the Establishment of a New lnternational Economic Order also emphasized thc need to rea.ch
and even exceed at an accelerated pace the proportion of the
flow of total net financia! resources frorn developed countries
to developing countries and multilateral institutions. This flow,
expressed as a percentage of the gross national product, fell
from a level of 0.76 per cent in the early period 1961-1963 to
0.70 per cent during the period 1968-1970 and rernained at
that leve! during ,the period 1971-1973.
26. The performance of countries mernbers of the Developrnent Assistance Cornmittee under the official development assistance target has been even less sat.isfactory as a
whole. The ratio of official development assistance to their
combined gross national product declined frorn 0.53 per cent
during the early 1960s to about 0.39 per cent during the
period 1966-1969 and to 0.32 per cent during the period 19701973. The poor performance of rnost of the developed market

Resolutiom adopted on the reporta of the Second Co~mittee

economy countries with regard to the 0.7 per cent target is
due, ínter alia, to a lack of political will to reach that tar!!et
by the middle of the Decade.
27. In the face of the declining flows of official development assistance in real terms, developing countries have resorted even more to borrowing on relatively harder terms.
This has increased debt-servicing problems, which are rlow extremely acute for a number of developing countries. Debtservice payments have grown from an annual average of 9.6 per
cent during the 1960s to abóut 16.5 per cent during the period
1970-1972. According to the latest available figures, the ratio of
debt-service paymen,ts to export earnings for a number of developing countries exceeded 10 per cent in 1974 and in sorne
cases passed the 20 per cent level.
28. The aggregate terms and conditions of financial assistance to developing countries do not reveal the fact that overall efforts to soften and harmonize these terms and conditions
of financia! assistance to developing countries, as envisaged in
the Intemational Development Strategy, have not been adequate. In addition, an excesSiive amount of development assistance continues to be tied. In paragrnph 45, however, the
Strategy states that, where loans continue to be ,tied, the
harmful effects should be mitigated; there has been little progress in this area.
29. Within the framework of their national plans and
priorities, many developing countries have taken appropriate
measures to attract foreign investment. At the same time,
concern regarding those aspects of foreign prívate investment
having negative consequences in developing countries has been
reflected, inter alía, in the continuing consiideration of thls
subject by intemational economic forums, thus motivating a
series of resolutions reaffirming the permanent sovereignty of
States over their na,t,ional resources and economic activities.
30. The Commission on Transnational Corporations has
been established by the United Nations in order, ínter afia, to
formulate a code of con,duot.
31. Concern was also expressed regarding the corrupt practices of certa.in transnational and other corporations, their intermediaries and others involved which violate the laws and
regulation.s of host countries. The international community
solemnly condemned such practices. Both home and host Governments were called upon to take within their respective national jurisdictions ali necessary measures which they deem
appropriate, including legislative measures, to prevent such
corrupt practices and to take consequent measures against the
violators. Home Governments were called upon to co-operate
with host Governments to prevent such corrupt practices and
to prosecute, within their national jurisdictions, those who
engaged in such acts.
32. Consideration has been given to the establishment of a
link between special drawing rights and additional development financing. It was agreed at the seventh special session of
the General Assembly that the establishment of a link between
the special drawing rights and development assistance should
form part of the consideration by the International Monetary
Fund of the creation of new special drawing rights as and
when they are created according to the needs of international
liquidity. This small advance is the onJy progress made to date.
33. The most seriously affected countries continue to face a
critical situation, despite international efforts carried out under
the United Nations Emergency Operation. The flow of resources
designed to assist them in meeting their balance-0f-payments
problems, as agreed in General Assembly resolution 3202
(S-V,I) of 1 May 1974, has been slow and less than adequate.
34. The code of conduct for liner conferences has not to
date been adhered to by the major shipping countries.
35. The main objective of the International Development
Strategy in the field of insurance an,d reinsurance is the establishment and growth of domestic insurance and reinsurance
markets in developing countries. During the first half of the
Decade, sorne preparatory steps have been taken which could
lead to important results in this area in the remainder of the
Decade.

75

36. Despite the series of resolutions · adopted after 1970,
the essential facts concerning progress in the least developed
countries are disappointing. While financia! flows to the least
developed countries have clearly improved in the 1970s as
compared with the late 1960s, the per capita flow of official
development assistance to these countries is still onJy slightly
above that to other developing countries, and the total flow
of financial resources from ali sources to these countries still
remains well below the average to other developing countries.
37. Little has been done in concrete terms to implement
the special measures in favour of the least developed countries,
particularly in the field of commercial policy.
38. Likewise, the special measures in favour of the landlocked and island developing countries to assist them in solving their most critica! and urgent problems due to their geographical position have yet to be implemented by the
international community, especially in regard to compensation for their transportation and additional transit costs, including through the establishment of a special fund.
39. There has been progress in the drafting of a code of
conduct for the transfer of technology, though substantive
action has still to be taken.
40. There has been sorne movement towards the revision
of the patent system but as yet there has been no concrete
action.
41. A number of positive changes have taken place in the
world social siluation since the advent of the Second United
Nations Development Decade. In the context of the increased
awareness of the gravity and complexity of human development problems facing the world commuillity, developing countries have made sorne gains in identifying problems and adopting policies to meet them and also in improving the actual
situation, though there is clearly room for further advancement. Such matters as a more equitable distribution of income
and wealth, employment, agrarian reform, including reform
of Jand tenure systems whenever appropriate, land improvement, population policies, education and training policies, rural
and integrated rural-urban development and the mobilization of
interna! resources, ali of which wouJd contribute appreciably
towards a solution to the development problem, remain a
source of great national and international concern.
42. Significant advancement has been attained in the field of
education, both in the provision of opportunities and in policies.
In the area of health, basic health services are sti!J to be extended to cover the entire population, though there has been
notable success in sorne other areas. There is still room for
improvement in the provision · of housing and related community facilities in both urban and rural areas, particularly in
the area of town planning. With respect to the welfare of youth
and children, malnutrition, disease, infant mortality, lack of
schooling facilities and employment opportunities for youth are
still major areas of concern. The integration of women in the
development process has still to be complete. Sorne progress
has been noted in securing active support and participation of
ali segments of the population in socio-economic development
programmes.
43. In spite of intensified national and international efiorts
to arrest the deterioration of the human environment, environmental problems in the fields of land, water and energy use and
climatic change have made themselves increasingly felt.
44. A unified approach to the analysis and planning of development at the national leve! covering all sectors of the national economy, both public and prívate, is being increasingly
regarded as a means for the attainment of a balanced economic.
social and human development in the light of the circumstances
prevailing in the countries concerned.
45. Although developing countries give priority to development programmes for the benefit of the masses, much remains to be done to achieve an integrated rural development.
46. The primary responsibility for the development of developi ng countries rests upon the countries themselves. However, as is stated in the preamble of the International Development Strategy, the efforts of the developing countries will not
be sufficient to enable them to achieve the desired devefopment

.........

76

General Assembly-Thirtieth Session

goals as expeditiously as they must unless they are assisted
through increased financia! resources and more favourable economic and cornmercial policies on the part of the developed
countries. In both areas there has been slow progress in the
implementation of these policy measures.
IV. FURTHER ACTION
47. A more balanced and equitable system of internationaJ
economic relations should be promoted, inter alia, by efforts to
adjust the present pattern of world trade in favour of the developing countries so as to increase their participation therein
and to reduce to a mínimum the negative impact of economic
fluctuations. A number of options are open to the international
cornmunity to preserve the purchasing power of developing
countries. These need to be further s11Udied on a priorúty basis.
Toe Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development should continue to study direct and
indirect indexation schemes and other optioru; with a view to
making concrete proposals to the Conference at its fourth
session.
48. The efforts of the developing countries to diversify
their economies with a view to expanding the production and
export of semi-manufactured and manufactured goods, as well
as of semi-processed and processed commodities, and broadening the pattern of exports in favour of commodities with
relatively dyn:imic demand conditions, should be supplemented,
inter alia, by resources from developed countries and by the
provision of specific funds far diversification as a feature of
commodity arrangements whenever possible.
49. There should be intensive research and development
efforts designed to improve market conditions and cost efficiency
and to diversify the end uses of natural products facing competition from synthetics and substitutes; there should also be
financia! and technical assistance to developing countries producing natural products which suffer from competition with
synthetics and substitutes, in order to help them to diversify
into other areas of production. Where natural products are
able to satisfy present and anticipated world market requirements, no special encouragement should be given to the creation and utilization of new production, particularly in the
developed countries, of directly competing synthetics.
50. Toe trade between the socialis,t countries of Eastern
Europe and developing countries should continue to expand at
an accelerated rate and cover a large number of developing
countries. While measures should be taken to increase the rate
of growth of imports from developing countries, particular
attention shall be paid to increasing the rate of expansion of
the share of manufactures and semi-manufactures. Efforts should
be intensified to enter into new trade arrangements and initiate
other improvements in order to bring about greater flexibility
and multilateralization of payments.
51. Financia! and technical assistance should be directed
exclusively towards promoting the economic and social progress of developing countries and should not in any way be used
to the detriment of the national sovere,ignty of recipient
countries.
52. Taking into account existing agreements and those under
consideration, discussions and negotiations should be vigorously
pursued with a view to making arrangements far the transfer
of resources to stabilize and improve the export earnings of
developing countries. In the context of the search for appropriate means for dealing with the problems of disruption' of development arising from the adverse rnovements in the export
proceeds of developing countries, efforts should be contlnued
in arder to work out a scheme of supplementary financing.
53. All Governments should co-operate within the framework of the Commission on Transnational Corporations with
a view to formulating, adopting and implementing an international code of conduct referred to in the report of the
Commission on its first session.91
54. Developing countries should continue to implement their
undertaking in the International Development Strategy for the
mobilization of domestic resources.
91 Of]icial Records of tlze Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 12 (E/5655 and Corr.1).

55. Toe role which producers' associations may play within
the framework of intemationaJ. co-operation should be facilitated and, in pursuance of their aims, inter alía, assistance in
the promotion of sustained growth of the world economy
should be provided and the development of developing countries should be accelerated.
A.

CO-OPERATION AMONG DEVELOPING COUNTRIES

56. Developing countries should take specific measures
to iintensify their current efforts and initiate new ones to
negotiate and put into effect commitments to expand their
mutual trade and to extend their economic and technical cooperation at the subregional, regional and interregional levels
through, ínter alia: the establishment of payments arrangements; the mutual liberalization of trade; the utilization of
available financia) resources for financing development in the
developing countries; the promotion of industrial co-operation;
co-ope,ration in the field of science and technology; the promotion of subregional, regional and interregionaJ financia} support
and co-operation; the increase in the production of agricultural
inputs, particularly fertilizers and pesticides; and the etJtablishment of national, regional and interregional shipping companies.
57. Developed coun~ries and intemational organizations
should take measures, or, when appropriate, strengthen existing measures, to support economic and technical co-operation among developing countries.
B.

INVISIBLES

58. National and international measures should be taken
to increase substantially the earnings of developing countries
from invisible trade, in particular shipping and other modes
of transportation, insurance and tourism and the profitability
of their trade, and to improve their balance of payments on
a permanent basis.
59. All countries, especially developed countries, which
have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention on a
Code of Conduct for Liner Conferences,92 are invited to
take appropriate and urgent actiion to do so.

C.

SPECIAL MEASURES IN FAVOUR OF THB
LBAST DEVBLOPED COUNTRIES

60. All efforts should be made by the intemational community to ensure the sustained economic and social progress
of the least developed countries through the urgent and comprehensive implementation of the agreed measures in their
favour.
61. Concerted efforts should be made by developed countries and international organizations through their programmes
of technical and financia! assistance to meet the needs of
the least developed countries in their development objectives.
Toe ,terms and conditions of financial assistance to these
countries should be improved so as to include a preponderant
grant element.
62. Developed countries and developing countries in a
position to do so should take special measures to assist in
the structural transformation of the economies of the least
developed countries.
D.

SPECIAL MEASURES IN FAVOUR OF THE LAND-LOCKED AND
ISLAND DEVELOPINO COUNTRIES

63. National and intemational financia! institutions should
accord special attention to the particular needs of the landlocked and geographically disadvantaged island develaping
countries in extending adequate financia! and technical
assistance to projects and prograrnmes designed for the development and improvement of the transport and communication infrastructure needed by these countries. Toe terms
and conditions of financia! assistance to these countries should
be improved so as to include a preponderant grant element.
92 United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries on a Code
of Conduct for Liner Conferences, vol. 11, Final Act (United
Nations publication, Sales No. E.75.11.D.12), pa.rt one, annex l.

77

ResolutioW1 adopted on the reports of the Second Cq.nmittee

64. Ali States are invited to become parties to the Convention on Transit Trade of Land-Locked States of 8 Júly
1965.98
65. Implementation of measures designed to assist the
above-mentioned countries in overcoming the handicaps of
their geographically disadvantaged positions should take into
account the relevant decisions and resolutions of the General
Assembly:, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development and other relevant bodie!!.

E.

70. Developing countries should aim at achieving a growth
rate of manufacturing output of considerably more than
8 per cent per annum during the second half of the Decade.
To this end, the international community should implement
the decisionf of the Second General Conference of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, 95 held al Lima
from 12 to 26 March 1975, in the field of industrialization.
71. Developing countries should aim to achieve the minimum annual rate of growth in agricultura! production of
4 per cent during the second half of the Decade. To this end,
both developing and developed countries should implement
the decisiions of the World Food Conference,96 held in Rome
from 5 to 16 November 1974, in particular, developed countries should assist developing countries in their efforts to
achieve this target.
72. Concrete and speedy measures should be adopted and
implemented for combating desertificatfon, salination and damage by locusts or any other adverse natural phenomena
affecting agricultura! production in developing countries.
73. Free and effective exercise by a!J countries of permanent sovereignty over their natural resources and economiic
activities will play an important role in the achievement of
the goals and objectives of the Decade. Developing countries
will take steps to develop the full potential of their natural
resources. Concerted efforts will be made in the defence of
the free and effective exercise of the right of every State to
full and permanent sovereignty over its natural resources.
Competent agencies of the United Nations svstem will assist
developing countries, at their request, in con'nexion with the
operation of nationalized means of production.

SPECIAL MEASURES IN FAVOUR OF THE MOST SERIOUSLY
AFFECTED COUNTRIES

66. Industrialized countries and other potential contributors
and intemationaJ. organizations, such as the World Bank and
the lnternational Monetary Fund, are called upon to extend
to the most seriously affected countries immediate relief and
assistance, as provided for in General Assembly resolutions
3201 (S-VI), 3202 (S-VI) and 3362 (S-Vll). in order to
enable them to rejoin the developmental mainstream and to
reach the targets laid down in the International Development
Strategy.

F.

HUMAN DEVELOPMENT

67. In accordance with their development requirements, the
developing countries should devote increasing attention to the
implementation of the policy measures in the field of human
development contained in the lnternational Development Strategy and other relevant United Nations decisions for the
benefit of their populations as a whole as well as for every
individual. In accordance with their development plans and
objectives, the developing countries should give prfority to the
poorest strata of the population in such policy areas as integrated rural development, agrarian and land reform, basic
health services, nutritional standards, education and training, population, housing and related community facilities in
both urban and rural areas and employment. Recognizing
the miportance of the human environment as a basis for
economic and social development, ali countries should intensify efforts for ,the protection, preservation and enhancement of the environment. Developed countries and international institutions should, upon request, assist thc developing
countries in the above tasb.

ff.

74. The growing recogni•tion at government leve! of the
reality of interdependence and of the urgent need to close
the widening gap between developed and developing countries
calls for renewed efforts to mobilize public opiníon, particuIarly in developed countries, in support of the objectives and
policies of the International Development Strategy to the
point where it sustains Governments in the early imp1ementation of commitments made. In view, especially, of the present
economic recession in both developed and developing countries, the -task is even more essential now than it was in 1970.

68. With a view to ensuring the maximum participation
of women in the total development effort, ali States and
competent organizations should give priority to the implementation of the recommendations of the World Conference
of the lnternational Women's Year,94 held at Mexico City
from 19 June to 2 July 1975, in the formulation of their
economic and social policies.

J.

ELIMINATION OF FOREIGN AGGRESSION AND OCCUPATION,
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION, apartheid AND COLONIALISM

75. In accordance with the relevant provisions of General
Assembly resolutions 2626 · (XXV) and 3 176 (XXVIII),
vigorous and concrete steps and action still remain to be
taken collectively and individually by ali members of the
international community to end ali forms of foreign aggression and occupation, racial discrimination, apartheid and
colcnialism. It is the duty of ali States to support and extend
assistance to the countries, territories and peoples concerned,
so as to resto re their national sovereignty, territorial integrity and their undeniable and fundamental rights.

G. Ex:PANSION AND DIVERSIFICATION OF PRODUCTION
69. Developing countries should adopt and implement
measures to increase production and improve productivity in
order to provide goods and services necessary for raising
Jevels of living and improving economic viability. Developed
countries and competent international institutions should take
the necessary steps to support those measures.

2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

93 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 597, No. 8641, p. 42.
94 See Report of the World Conference of the Intemational
Wome11's Year (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.76.IV.1).

*

MOBILIZATION OF PUBLIC OPINION

m; See A/ 10112.
96
See Report of the World Food Conference (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.75.II.A.3).

*

*

Other decisions
Report of the Economic and Social Council
(Item 12)
At its 2441st plenary meeting, on 15 Dccember 1975, the General Assembly, on the recommendation of the Second Committee: 9 7
97
O[Jicia/ Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Sessio11, Annexes, agenda itero 1.,
document A/10467, para. 58.
~,
