IV.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

nation attempts against the Mayors of Nablus, Ramallah
and Al Bireh and called for the immediate apprehension and
prosecution of the perpetrators of these crimes,
Recalling once again the Geneva Convention relative to
the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War. of 12
August 1949, 20 in particular article 27. which states. inter
alia:
"Protected persons are entitled, in all circumstances,
to respect for their persons . . . . They shall at all times
be humanely treated, and shall be protected especially
against all acts of violence or threats thereof . . . · · .
Reaffirming the applicability of the Geneva Convention
to the Arab territories occupied by Israel since 1967. including Jerusalem,

l. Expresses deep concern that Israel, the occupying
Power, has failed so far to apprehend and prosecute the
perpetrators of the assassination attempts;
2. Demands that Israel, the occupying Power, inform
the Secretary-General of the results of the investigations
relevant to the assassination attempts;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly, not later than 31 December 1981. a report
on the implementation of the present resolution.
100th plenarv meeting
16 December 1981

36/148.

International co-operation to avert new flows
of refugees

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 35/ 124 of I I December 1980 on
international co-operation to avert new massive flows of
refugees,
Having examined the report of the Secretary-General.~'
Taking note of the comments and suggestions submitted
by Member States, organs of the United Nations and specialized agencies in response to General Assembly resolution 35/124,
Gravely concerned about the continuing massive flows
of refugees in many parts of the world and the human suffering affecting millions of men, women and children who
flee or are forcibly expelled from their homelands,
Reaffirming the strong condemnation of policies and practices of oppressive and racist regimes, as well as aggression.
colonialism, apartheid, alien domination, foreign intervention and occupation, which are among the root causes of
new massive flows of refugees throughout the world resulting in great human suffering,
Taking into account the importance of socio-economic
factors in the creation of refugee situations.
Reaffirming the inviolability of the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights 24 and of other existing international instruments, norms and principles relevant, inter alia, to responsibilities of States with regard to averting new massive
flows of refugees, as well as to the status and the protection
of refugees, and also reaffirming the framework of competences of existing international organizations and
institutions,
Stressing that massive flows of refugees may not only
affect the domestic order and stability of receiving States
but also jeopardize the political and social stability and the
23 A/36/582 and Corr. I
24

and Add. I

Resolution 2 I 7 A (III)

91

economic development of entire regions and thus endanger
international peace and security,
Noting that. in addition to creating individual human
misery. massive flows of refugees can impose great political. economic and social burdens upon the international
community as a whole, with dire effects on developing
countries, particularly those with limited resources of their
own.
Com·inced that averting new massive flows of refugees
is, therefore. a matter of urgent concern for the international
community as a whole.
Reaffirming its resolution 2625 (XXV) of 24 October
I 970. by which it approved the Declaration on Principles
of lnterPational Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation among States in accordance with the Charter of
the United Nations.
Commending the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and his staff for their untiring humanitarian and
social efforts. for which the Office of the High Commissioner has twice been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize.
Commending also for their contributions all Governments. organs of the United Nations. specialized agencies
and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
which have provided aid, and stressing the importance of
their efforts in this tie Id.
Conscious of the importance of developing. in order to
avert new massive flows of refugees. appropriate means of
international co-operation in accordance with the principles
of the Charter of the United Nations and, in particular. with
the principle of non-intervention in the internal affairs of
sovereign States and also with the principle that nothing in
the Charter shall authori1,e the United Nations to intervene
in matters that arc essentially within the domestic jurisdiction of any State,
I _ Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
,.,
Welcomes the comments and suggestions submitted
in response to General Assembly resolution 35/ 124 by Member States, organs of the United Nations and specialized
agencies on international co-operation to avert new massive
flows of refugees and on facilitating the return of those
refugees who wish to return;
3. l:'mphasizes the right of refugees to return to their
homes in their homelands and reaffirms the right. as contained in its previous resolutions. of those who do not wish
to return to receive adequate compensation;
4. Decides to establish a group of governmental experts
of seventeen members who shall be appointed by the Secretary-General. upon nomination by the Member States concerned after appropriate consultation with the regional
groups and with due regard to equitable geographical distribution. and whose expenses as a rule shall be borne by
each nominating State for its expert;
5. Requests the Group of Governmental Experts on International Co-operation to Avert New Flows of Refugees.
in the light of the existing relev<W,t international instruments,
norms and principles and with d'ue regard to the rights mentioned in paragraph 3 above. to undertake as soon as possible. in order to improve international co-operation to avert
new massive flows of refugees. a comprehensive review of
the problem in all its aspects, with a view to developing
recommendations on appropriate means of international cooperation in this field, having due regard to the principle
of non-intervention in the internal affairs of sovereign States;
6. Requests the Group of Governmental Experts to be
mindful of the importance of reaching general agreement
whenever that has significance for the outcome of its work;
7. Calls upon the Group of Governmental Experts to
take into account the comments and suggestions submitted

General Assembly-Thirty-sixth Session

92

to the Secretary-General in response to resolution 351124
and any further comments and suggestions from Member
States, organs and organizations of the United Nations and
specialized agencies, as well as the views expressed during
the debate on this item at the thirty-sixth session of the
General Assembly and also the study to be submitted to the
Commission on Human Rights at its thirty-eighth session
by the special rapporteur. pursuant to its resolution 29
(XXXVII) of 11 March 198 I ,2 5 and furthermore the deliberations on this study by the Commission:
8. Calls upon Member States that have not yet submitted to the Secretary-General their comments and suggestions on this item to do so as soon as possible:
9. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a further
compilation of the replies received in accordance with paragraph 8 above and to provide the Group of Governmental
Experts with all necessary assistance and facilities for the
completion of its task;
10. Calls upon the Group of Governmental Experts to
submit a report to the Secretary-General in time for deliberation by the General Assembly at its thirty-seventh
session;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
thirty-seventh session the item entitled "International cooperation to avert new flows of refugees·'.
100th plenary meeting
16 Decemher /98/

36/149.

Questions relating to information
A

The General Assemhly,
Recalling its resolutions 34/ I 8 I and 34/ I 82 of 18 December 1979 and 35/201 of 16 December 1980.
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Final Declaration
of the Sixth Conference of Heads of State or Government
of Non-Aligned Countries, held at Havana from 3 to 9
September 1979, 26 of the Declaration of the Conference of
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries.
held at New Delhi from 9 to 13 February 1981, 27 and of
the Fifth Meeting of the Intergovernmental Council of Ministers of Information of Non-Aligned Countries. held at
Georgetown in May 1981,
Recalling the relevant resolutions adopted by the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the Organization
of African Unity at its eighteenth ordinary session, held at
Nairobi from 24 to 27 June I 981, 28
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Final Act of the
Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, signed
at Helsinki on I August 1975,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the Declaration on
the Preparation of Societies for Life in Peace, 2"
Recalling the Intergovernmental Conferences on Communication Policies, held respectively at San Jose in July
1976, Kuala Lumpur in February 1979 and Yaounde in July
1980, the preparatory meeting of experts for the intergovernmental planning conference to develop institutional
arrangements and systematic collaborative consultation on
communication development activities, needs and plans.
held at Washington in November 1979. and the Intergov25
Official Records of the t:conomic and Social Council, 19/!J. Supple
ment No. 5 (E/1981/25 and Corr. I). chap. XXVIII. sect. A
26
See A/34/542, annex, sect. I. paras. 280-299.
27
See A/36/ 116 and Corr. I. annex
28
See A/361534, annex II
29
Resolution 33173.

ernmental Conference for Co-operation on Activities, Needs
and Programmes for Communications Development, held
in Paris from 14 to 21 April 1980, as well as the international
seminars on the development of commtmication held under
the auspices of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization, such as that which took place
at Tashkent in September 1979.
Recalling resolution 4/21 adopted by the General Conference of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization at its twenty-first session, in which
it resolved to establish, within the framework of the organization, the International Programme for the Development
of Communication and to elect the Intergovernmental Council of the Programme,3°
Recalling also that the implementation of the objectives
of the International Programme frJr the Development of
Communication requires the co-operation of all those interested and concerned,
Considering that communication plays a fundamental role
as a vehicle of information and an instrument for acquiring
knowledge and know-how and, consequently, represents an
important dimension in the life of societies,
Conscious of the important contribution which the mass
information and communication media and the free circu
lation and wider and better balanced dissemination of information can make to co-operation between all countries.
the strengthening of international peace and security, the
promotion of human rights. international understanding,
progress of education and science, the preservation of their
cultural identities and the promotion of their socio-cultural
values,
Recognizing the central role of the United Nations Educational. Scientific and Cultural Organization in the field
of communications and information. within its mandate. as
well as the progress accomplished by the organization in
that field.
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Director-General of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization on the implementation of
the International Programme for the Development of
Communication;' 1
2. Considers that resolution No. I adopted by the Intergovernmental Council of the International Programme for
the Development of Communication of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization at its first
session, held in Paris from 15 to 22 June 1981. 12 constitutes
an important step in the implementation of the Programme;
3. Expresses its appreciation to all Member States that
announced their contributions to the Programme, in the form
of _fi~ancial means, manpower, materials, technology and
trammg for the development of communication, especially
taking note of the contributions in this regard from developing countries;
4. Calls upon Member States---developed and developing alike-and organizations and bodies of the United
Nations system, as well as other intergovernmental organizations and concerned public and private enterprises, to
lend their support to the expansion of the Programme's
resources;
_5._ Invites M~m~er States to take the necessary steps,
w1thm the orgamzat10ns and bodies of the United Nations
system and other organizations of which they are members.
to secure satisfactory implementation of the Programme
through the allocdtion of additional resources:

m A/35/362/Add. I. annex I.
" A/36/530. annex.
" !hid.. appendix I
