A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/50/112
16 February 1996

Fiftieth session
Agenda item 96 (a)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/50/618/Add.1)]
50/112.

Elaboration of an international convention
to combat desertification in those countries
experiencing serious drought and/or
desertification, particularly in Africa

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 44/172 of 19 December 1989 and 44/228 of
22 December 1989 and its other relevant resolutions and decisions, and the
recommendations made in Agenda 21, 1 adopted by the United Nations Conference
on Environment and Development,
Recalling also its resolution 47/188 of 22 December 1992, by which it
decided to establish the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the
Elaboration of an International Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa,
Recalling further its resolution 49/234 of 23 December 1994, in which it
decided that the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee should continue to
function in order, inter alia, to prepare for the first session of the
Conference of the Parties to the Convention, as specified in the United
Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing

1

See Report of the United Nations Conference on
Environment and Development, Rio de Janeiro, 3-14 June 1992
(A/CONF.151/26/Rev. 1 (Vol. I and Vol. I/Corr.1, Vol. II, Vol. III
and Vol. III/Corr.1) (United Nations publication, Sales No.
E.93.I.8 and corrigenda), vol. I: Resolutions Adopted by the
Conference, resolution 1, annex II.
96-76639

/...

A/RES/50/112
Page 2

Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa, 2
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 49/234 3 and on possible requirements for
intergovernmental and secretariat work on the implementation of the Convention
and its regional implementation annexes, 4 and having also considered
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee resolution 7/1 of 17 August 1995 5 on
dates and venue of the sessions of the Committee during the period up to and
including the first session of the Conference of the Parties to the
Convention,
Expressing its concern about the present level of the Special Voluntary
Fund for participation in the negotiation process of developing countries
affected by desertification and drought, in particular the least developed
countries,
Noting that the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee has established
two working groups in order to be able to discharge its responsibilities in
the preparation for the first session of the Conference of Parties to the
Convention,
Expressing its concern about the present level of the Trust Fund,
established pursuant to its resolution 47/188, to support the work of the
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee and the interim secretariat,
Considering that the Convention is one of the main steps in the
implementation and follow-up to the United Nations Conference on Environment
and Development,
1.
Welcomes the signing of the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa, 2/ by a large number of States and
one regional economic integration organization and the ratification of the
Convention by a growing number of States, and urges States that have not yet
signed or ratified the Convention to do so, so that it may enter into force as
soon as possible;
2.
Decides that the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee for the
Elaboration of an International Convention to Combat Desertification in Those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in
Africa, shall continue to prepare for the first session of the Conference of
the Parties to the Convention as specified in the Convention;
3.
Also decides, for this purpose, to convene two sessions of the
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in 1996, each of up to two weeks’
duration, the eighth session to be held at Geneva from 5 to 16 February and

2

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II.

3

A/50/515.

4

A/50/347.

5

See A/50/74/Add.1, annex, appendix II.
/...

A/RES/50/112
Page 3

the ninth session in New York from 3 to 13 September;
4.
Further decides to convene the tenth session of the
Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee, which is to be held in New York from
6 to 17 January 1997 and, pending the entry into force of the Convention, to
convene, as necessary, a further session of the Committee in 1997, of up to
two weeks’ duration, the exact dates and venue of which shall be determined at
a later stage;
5.
Recommends that, upon the entry into force of the Convention, a
session of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention be convened in the
second and third weeks of June 1997 or, alternatively, in the second and third
weeks of August 1997, the exact dates and venue of the session to be
determined at a later stage;
6.
Requests all countries, the United Nations system, including the
regional commissions, relevant subregional and regional organizations,
appropriate scientific and business communities, trade unions, relevant
non-governmental organizations and other interested groups, to take action for
the prompt implementation of the Convention and its relevant regional
implementation annexes 6 upon its entry into force and in this regard to
respond effectively to the needs in the African, Asian and Latin American and
Caribbean regions;
7.
Urges all countries, the United Nations system, including the
regional commissions, relevant subregional and regional organizations and all
other relevant actors to undertake actions and measures for the full and
effective implementation of the provisions of Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee resolution 5/1 of 17 June 1994 on urgent action for Africa, 7 as
well as to promote actions for other affected developing countries and
regions, and invites all States to continue to communicate to the interim
secretariat of the Convention, in addition to the information they have
already provided, information on actions undertaken and/or envisaged for the
implementation of the provisions of resolution 5/1;
8.
Decides that the work of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee and the interim secretariat shall continue to be funded through
existing United Nations budgetary resources, without negatively affecting its
programmed activities, and through voluntary contributions to the Trust Fund
established pursuant to General Assembly resolution 47/188 specifically for
that purpose and administered by the head of the interim secretariat under the
authority of the Secretary-General, with the possibility of using the Fund, as
appropriate, to support the participation of representatives of nongovernmental organizations in the work of the Committee and of carrying over
resources contributed from one fiscal year to the other;
9.
Urges States, regional economic integration organizations and
other interested organizations to reinforce the capacity of the interim
secretariat of the Convention through substantial contributions to the Trust
Fund;

6

A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix II, annexes I-IV.

7

See A/49/84/Add.2, annex, appendix III, sect. A.
/...

A/RES/50/112
Page 4

10.
Renews its appeals to Governments, regional economic integration
organizations and other interested organizations, including non-governmental
organizations, to make early contributions to the Special Voluntary Fund in
order to ensure an enhanced effective participation in the negotiation process
of developing countries affected by desertification and/or drought, in
particular the least developed countries;
11.
Notes the arrangements and contributions made by the SecretaryGeneral and relevant organizations active in the fields of desertification,
drought and development, including the United Nations Development
Programme/Office to Combat Desertification and Drought, 8 the United Nations
Environment Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and the World Bank,
as regards the Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee and the interim
secretariat in the conduct of their mandate, and invites them to intensify and
expand such support and collaboration in the future, as appropriate;
12.
Also notes the arrangements concluded between the interim
secretariat of the Convention and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development and the World Meteorological Organization, whereby appropriate
actions are taken for an active collaboration and support of activities at the
national and regional levels in affected developing countries, in particular
those in Africa, and the least developed countries;
13.
Requests the Chairman of the Intergovernmental Negotiating
Committee to submit progress reports on the work of the Committee to the
General Assembly, the Commission on Sustainable Development and other
appropriate bodies of the United Nations;
14.
Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to
the attention of all Governments, the relevant specialized agencies and
programmes of the United Nations, international financial institutions, other
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and other relevant
institutions;
15.
Also requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General
Assembly at its fifty-first session a report on the implementation of the
present resolution relative to the United Nations Convention to Combat
Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
Desertification, particularly in Africa, under the item entitled
"Implementation of decisions and recommendations of the United Nations
Conference on Environment and Development".
96th plenary meeting
20 December 1995

8

Formerly, United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO).
The acronym UNSO is retained with the new name.
