t

\

THIRTY-SECOND

,

‘b

YEAR

st

MEETING:

NEW

24 MARCH

1977

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

9

$
*,
c

Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/l99

1) . . . , . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption

of the agenda

. . . . . . . , . , . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative
of Nigeria to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/ 12295) ,

1

p.

s/FT. 199 1

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. , .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
,Secuvity Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

1991 ST MEETING
Held in New York

on Thursday,

President: Mr. Andrew YOUNG (United States of America).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, Canada, ClGna, France, Germany, Federal Republic
of, India, Libyan Arab Republic, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l991)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The question of South Africa:
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2295)
The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The question of South Africa
Letter dated 9 March 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Nigeria to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/12295)
1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisions
taken by the Council at previous meetings, I invite the
representatives
of Algeria, Bahrain, Botswana, Egypt,
Guinea, Indonesia, Liberia, Madagascar, Nigeria, Senegal,
Sierra Leone, Sri Lanka, the Syrian Arab Republic, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved for them at the
side of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. Rahal (Algeria),
Mr. S. M. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr, T. Tlou (Botswna),
Mr. A. E. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. M, S. Camara
(Guinea), Mrq A. Marpaung (Indonesia), Mrs. A. BrooksRandolph (Liberia), Mr. H. Rasolondraibe (Madagascar),
Mr. L. 0. Harriman (Nigeria), Mr. M Fall (Senegal), Mrs. S.
Y; Gbujama (Sierra Leone), Mr. 1: B. Fonseka (Sri Lanka),
Mr. M. Allaf (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr. J. Petri6 (Yugoslavia) and Mr. D. W. Kamana (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

24 March 1977, at 10.30 a.m.
2. The PRESIDENT: In addition, I should like to inform
members of the Council that letters have been received
from the representatives of Ghana, Kenya, Mauritania, the
United Republic of Tanzania and Zaire in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of the
question on the Council’s agenda. Accordingly, I propose,
in accordance with the usual practice and with the consent
of the Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussion, without the right to vote, under the
provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the
provisional rules of procedure.
3. In view of the limited number of places available at the
Council table, I invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
on the understanding that they will be invited to take a
place at the Council table whenever they wish to address
the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. T. B. Sam (Ghana),
Mr. F. M. Kasina (Kenya}, Mr. M El Hassen (Mauritania),
Mr. S. A. Saline (United Republic of Tanzania) and
Mr. Umba di Lutete (Zaire) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT: I wish to inform the members of the
Council that I have received a letter dated 23 March 1977
from the representatives of Benin, the Libyan Arab
Republic and Mauritius, which has been distributed as
document S/12304. It reads as follows:
“We, the undersigned, members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that during its current
meetings devoted to consideration of ‘The question of
South Africa’, the Council extend an invitation, under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure, to
Mr. William P. Thompson.”
Is there any objection to the Council’s acceding to that
request?
5. I caIl on the representative of the United Kingdom on a
point of order.
6. Mr. RICHARD (United Kingdom): I am not making
any formal objection to this request, but I should like, if I
may, merely to make a point which is relevant to our future
conduct of work.
7. In this debate there have been a number of requests
that the Council should listen to persons under rule 39 of

the provisional rules of procedure. As we know,
says that:

the people of Benin wish to extend to the fraternal people
of the Congo our profound and militant sympathy. The
assassinationof Comrade Ngouabi can only serve to
strengthenthe determination of the peopleof the Congoin
their strugglefor total liberation.

rule 39

“The Security Council may invite members of the
Secretariat or other persons, whom it considers competent for the purpose, to supply it with information or to
give other
assistance in examining matters within its
competence.”

14. Turning now to the subject before us, namely, the
question of South Africa, my delegationwould like to
stressthat this question is of the greatestconcern to all
African peoplesand all the peoplesof the world that love
peace and justice. Apartheid, which is nothing but a
colonial system of the most atrocious kind and the most
inhumane ever imposed upon human beings,constitutes
today not only a crime againstmankind but alsoa potential
dangerto peaceand security in the whole of Africa.

8. It would be extremely helpful to the Council in
deciding whether or not to exercise the discretion which it
has under rule 39 to hear persons who are neither representatives of Member States nor members of the Secretariat, if
in the letter of request some indication could be given as to
who the person in question is. 1 make IIO reflection at all on
Mr. William P. Thompson except to say that his qualifications for rendering assistance to the Council do not actually
appear in the letter which has been distributed. Unless we
know
whether or not Mr. Thompson can assist the Council,
it seems a little strange that we should acquiesce quite so
easily in allowing him to address the Council.

1.5. My delegation will not recount the history of npartheid. We have today objective and clear documentationon
the system, thanks to the very careful and objective MDork
done for many years now by the membersof the Special
Committee against Apartheid, by national organizations
and by international bodiesengagedin the struggleagainst
apartlzeid In the light of that documentation, which is
availableand which everyone is free to peruse,it is easyto
elucidatethe following questions.

9. As I said, I make no objection to it formally. But it
does seem to me that this is a point which the members of
the Council, and particularly those members of the Council
who make this sort of request under rule 39, might care to
bear in mind in future.

16. First, where does the white racist minority which at
present dominates South Africa allegedly on behalf of
Western Christian civilization come from and what doesit
represent? My delegation, still in the light of the aforementioned documentation, can answerthat questiononly
by saying that that white racist minority is of European
origin and hasnever lacked encouragementin the elaboration of its systemof domination andbarbarousexploitation
of the black man in South Africa.

IO. The PRESIDENT: I take it that the Council agrees to
the request that it extend an invitation under rule 39 to
Mr. Thompson.
It was so decided.
11. Mr. HOLJNGAVOU
(Benin) (hterpretution
fronz
French): Mr. President,my delegationwishesto congratulate you most warmly on your assumptionof the presidency of the Council for the month of March. As a
fighter for civil rights in your own country, the United
Statesof America, you have the necessaryqualifications for
a better understandingand a more objective perception of
this greatdebate on the questionof South Africa.

17. Secondly, why is it that when everyone agreesto
condemnapartkeid andis ready to proclaimaloud the need
for its elimination, that systemwhich is soinhumaneis still
such a fortified bastion and so protected today? My
delegationwould like to reply to this secondquestionby
saying publicly here that it is only fair to recognizethat
thoseshameless
entities responsiblefor helpingto strengthenthat systemare in fact WesternPowerswhich, alongwith
us, pay lip serviceto the condemnationof apartheidbut do
not take any decisive measuresto eliminate it. On the
contrary, independent Africa and the peoplesof the whole
world, concerned for the maintenanceof international
peaceand security, are witness to the developmentand
strengtheningof relations of all kinds as well as of the
closepolitical co-operation which haslong existedbetween
the WesternPowersand the white minority colonial regime
of South Africa. Whether in the economic, military,
political, scientific, nuclear, diplomatic, cultural or sports
field, co-operation with the Westhasbeenraisedto sucha
high level that the African peopleshave good groundsfor
concernand for remainingdistrustful.

12. Before saying anything else, I should like to express
the whole-hearted sympathy of my delegation to the
friendly people of Romania, which has recently suffered
the effects of a terrible earthquake. We are sure that the
peopleof Romania, a heroic and revolutionary people, will
be ableto overcome the catastrophic consequencesof that
natural disaster. We also associateourselves with the
expressionsof sympathy addressedto the people of Iran,
which hasbeena victim of a similarcatastrophe.
13. Benin, having itself recently been the victim of a
cowardly act of aggression,is the more dismayedto seethat
the forces of evil, which have been working for the
destabilization of the progressive regimes of the third
world, are more and more determined to carry through
their work of sabotage, The cowardly assassinationof
ComradeMarien Ngouabi of the People’sRepublic of the
Congo, another crime against the freedom of peoples,
demonstratesthat all peopleswho love peace and justice
must remainmobilized for a concerted and decisivestruggle
againstall the forces of foreign domination. Through me,

18. Without going back over the detailsof that co-operation betweenthe imperialist West and the Pretoria rt?gime,
suffice it to note that, thanks to the WesternPowers,that
regimeconstitutes today-as somany speakers
have already
said-a military fortress usedin the oppressionandmurder
of the indigenouspeople of the country. From Sharpeville
2

to Soweto, the crimes of the apartheid racists are innumerable. It is that same military strength on which the Pretoria
racists rely in their persistent refusal to grant legitimate
self-determination to the heroic people of Namibia. And it
is the Pretoria rigime, through its stubbornness and its
example, which now makes it possible for Smith and his
clique to feel free to do anything they choose in Southern
Rhodesia.

and to recover their dignity and their inalienable right to
independence.
24. In conclusion, if the Western Powers really want to see
a peaceful settlement of the question of South Africa, along
with all the other questions connected with it-those of
Namibia and Rhodesia for example-and thus avoid a
bloodbath before it is too late, they must commit themselves unequivocally to an immediate cessation of all arms
deliveries to the Pretoria r6gime and undertake to put an
end to any co-operation with the Pretoria racists. They
must undertake to help the black majority to accede to
power, not only in Southern Rhodesia but also in Namibia
and South Africa.

19. Throughout each day we can hear the anti-African
propaganda, disseminated to free Africa by the Pretoria
radio, proclaiming that:
“The Republic of South Africa is the most powerful
and can intimidate and punish any recalcitrant African
communist. The Republic of South Africa is there to
defend Western civilization and fend off the communist
danger.”

25. Mr. LA1 Ya-li (China) (translation from Chinese): At
present, the great African people are launching offensives
against barbarous colonialism and racism. The Zimbabwe
freedom fighters, who are rapidly expanding their ranks,
have been launching ceaseless attacks against and dealing
heavy blows at the Smith racist rCgime. The armed struggle
of the Namibian people is developing in depth, whining
continual new victories. Since the Soweto massacre last
June, the heroic Azanian people have started a mammoth
and earth-shaking mass struggle against violent repression,
directing its spearhead against the criminal system of racial
discrimination and apartheid. This is an important hallmark
of the new awakening of the Azanian people since the
Sharpeville carnage in 1960. The flames of the struggle
spread swiftly from an area where Africans are concentrated to three of the four provinces of South Africa, and
have reached Johannesburg, Cape Town and many other
large and medium-sized cities, involving the broad masses of
the people, from youths and students to workers and
people from other walks of life. The struggIe has been
unprecedented in its momentum and scale, in the areas
affected and in its duration, The people have put forward
clear-cut militant slogans. The crux of the matter lies in the
question of system rather than of language; an end must be
put to the system of apartheid in South Africa and black
power must be attained. All this has intensified the Azanian
people’s struggle against racism and for national liberation.

That is the source of the famous policy of hot pursuit
which has been behind so many acts of aggression and
caused so much distress to many African countries in the
combat zone.
20. My third question is: For whose purposes has the
Pretoria rCgime determined, in spite of “pressure”, to
pursue a policy of aggression and savage exploitation, a
policy disavowed by all the peoples of the world? The
reply to that question seems fundamental to us. In the light
of everything we are able to observe it is clear that the
Pretoria regime has a specific role to play in the imperialist
strategy of domination and exploitation of Africa; for that
regime controls a strategic route, the famous Cape route. As
everyone knows, that route played a decisive role in the
period of the so-called industrial revolution in Europe. It is
well known that a good proportion of the wealth of
third-world countries was drained out of the continent via
that route to swell the treasuries of the countries which
support apartheid. Furthermore, South Africa constitutes a
vast reservoir of strategic ores which are of vital importance
for the development of the Western machinery of provocation and aggression.
21. So no one should attempt to mislead us. The Pretoria
rCgime is very definitely a preserve of international imperialism, it has always been our enemy, an enemy with which
there can be no peace or compromise. For us Africans, at
any rate, it is obvious that no dialogue is possible with
South Africa. The only language which the Pretoria racists
understand is the language of violence.

26. The emergence of the mounting struggle of the people
of southern Africa against the racist regimes is the
inevitable result of the brutal racial oppression and colonial
domination practised by those rigimes over a long period.
Racism and apartheid are the product of colonialism as well
as its manifestation. In order to strengthen their colonialist
domination over the Azanian people, the South A&can
reactionary authorities, over the past half century, have
issued countless decrees and regulations for racial discrimination, such as the racial segregation law, the public
security law and so forth, subjecting the Africans to
ruthless persecution in the political, economic, cultural and
educational fields as well as in other aspects of social life.
The South African reactionary authorities have confined 16
million black people to the arid native reserves which
account for only 13 per cent of the total area of the
country, whereas the remaining 87 per cent of fertile land is
occupied by the 3 million or so whites. As the millions of
black labourers, who suffer greatly from racist exploitation
and oppression, are leading a life even worse than the beasts

22. The Azanian people, a peace-loving people, have
understood that language, which has been imposed upon
them. By the revolt at Soweto and in other places in South
Africa where blacks are herded like animals, the people of
Azania have proved to the world their growing awareness,
which is the ultimate weapon that will lead to thefinal and
total elimination of that ill-famed rkgime. That, in fact, is
what the colonialists are afraid of, for the awareness of the
Azanian people is an invincible weapon.
23. The people of Benin, like all people who love peace
and justice, WU do their utmost to support the people of
Azania in their struggle to attain their self-determination
3

--

29. The just struggle of the people of Azania and the rest
of southern Africa for national independence and liberation
is an important component of the struggle of the whole
African continent for national liberation as well as an
important component of the liberation struggle of all the
oppressed peoples and oppressed nations the world over.
Hence it is bound to receive the broad sympathy and
resolute support of the people of the whole world.

of burden, South Africa has become a virtual hell on earth
for the Africans. Things are not different in Namibia which
is under illegal South African occupation. The South
African colonialist authorities also collude with and support
the Smith racist regime in Southern Rhodesia in repressing
the national liberation movement of the Zimbabwe people.
The criminal rule and perverse acts practised by the South
African reactionary authorities have naturally aroused firm
resistance on the part of the Azanian people and broad
sections of other African people. These people demand an
immediate end to the evil colonial rule in the whole of
southern Africa and thereby a total eradication of the
system of racism and apartheid.

30. A heated debate on the question of apartheid went on
for nearly two weeks during the thirty-first session of the
General Assembly. The representatives of the numerous
third-worId and all justice-upholding countries actively took
the floor and indignantly condemned the South African
racist rt$gime for its towering crimes, voicing powerful
support for the struggle of the Azanian people against
colonialism and racism and for national independence and
liberation. The General Assembly, at its thirty-first session,
not only adopted a correct resolution condemning the
South African authorities for stage-managing the sham
independence of the Transkei [resolution 3116 A], but also
pointed out explicitly, in its resolution on the situation in
South Africa, that the racist regime leaves “no alternative
to the oppressed people of South Africa but to resort to
armed struggle to achieve their legitimate rights” (resolution 31/6 I/. It is entirely proper for the General Assembly
once again to request the Security Council to take urgent
action to implement the arms embargo against South Africa
[resolution 3116 D].

27. To sustain its tottering reactionary rule, the Vorster
racist regime is stepping up its counter-revolutionary
dual
tactics. Not long ago, after the repeated failure of its tactics
of so-called “racial reconciliation”,
“dialogue” and “detente”, it stage-managed in South Africa the farce of the
sham independence of the Transkei, which is a kind of
bantustan in disguised form, in an attempt to impose, in a
legal form, the yoke of perpetual apartheid on the Azanian
people and thus maintain its racist rule. Furthermore, in
Namibia it is proceeding with its fraud of rigging up a
puppet interim government, in an attempt to weaken the
struggle of the Namibian people and to attain its aim of
perpetuating its illegal occupation of Namibia. However,
this farce and fraud has been exposed and sternly condemned by the African people and the people of the whole
world. In these circumstances, the South African reactionary authorities, while continuing their political manoeuvres, have intensified their violent repression of the Azanian
and Namibian peoples and their armed provocations against
the neighbouring independent African countries, thereby
demonstrating once again to people the world over that the
nature of the racists will never change.

31. The significant first Afro-Arab Summit Conference
Meeting, held recently at Cairo, strongly condemned the
racist regimes in southern Africa and voiced strong support
for the just struggle of the people of southern Africa for
national independence and liberation. The Conference
vividly demonstrated the continual strengthening of the
militant unity of the third-world countries and peoples in
their struggles against imperialism, colonialism, racism,
hegemonism and zionism.

28. While the people of southern Africa are waging fierce
struggles against the racist regimes, the two super-Powers
are locked in intensified rivalry over it. One super-Power is
trying, by every possible means, to preserve its enormous
vested interests in southern Africa. The other super-Power,
which parades itself as a natural ally of the African people,
harbours even wilder ambitions. Flaunting the signboard of
“opposing racism” and “supporting the national liberation
movement”, it is bent on dividing the national liberation
movements and undermining the militant unity of the
African countries in an intensified effort to carry out
infiltration and expansion in southern Africa and thus to
establish its hegemony there. Recently, social-imperialism
has mustered large numbers of mercenaries for a flagrant
large-scale invasion of the Republic of Zaire. This is the
latest example of its adamant hostility towards the African
people as well as another glaring revelation of its unbridled
hegemonic design in Africa. All this has enabled the people
of southern Africa to realize ever more clearly that, in order
to overthrow
the colonial and racist domination and
achieve genuine national Jiberation, it is imperative to link
the struggles against colonialism and racism closely with
those against hegemonism, to “prevent the tiger from
entering through the back door while repulsing the wolf
from the front gate” and do away with super-Power
meddling and sabotage.

32. The Chinese Government and people have always
stood firmly by the great people of Azania, Namibia,
Zimbabwe and the rest of Africa and resolutely supported
their struggles against racism, imperialism and hegemonism.
We firmly support the just demands of the African
countries. We hold that the Security Council should adopt
resolutions strongly condemning the crimes of the South
African authorities, applying a mandatory arms embargo
and economic sanctions against South Africa, enjoining the
South African authorities to stop all repression and
persecution of the Azanian people and calling upon all
peoples and Governments to support and assist the people
of Azania and the rest of southern Africa in their just
struggles for independence and liberation.
33. As Chairman Mao Tsetung predicted, “the evil system
of colonialism and imperialism arose and throve with the
enslavement of Negroes and the trade in Negroes, and it will
surely come to its end with the complete emancipation of
the black people”. We are deeply convinced that the great
people of Azania and the rest of Africa will further
strengthen their unity, persevere in struggle, surmount all
difficulties and hardships, clear away all obstacles on their
road of advance and win greater victories.
4

_-_--

34. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic. I invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.

_._

-__

-_1-_1_

____-----~~

which is not worth the paper on which it is printed and
which, anyway, will remain unimplemented? Will those
great Powers that rumbIe so loudly today about human
rights and the freedom and dignity of man advocate the
same rights and dignity for the African people? Or will
they cast their vetoes again in protection of the murderous
Pretoria racists?

35. Mr. ALLAF (Syrian Arab Republic): Mr. President,
permit me first of all to extend to you, on behalf of my
delegation and on my own behalf, warmest congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. My delegation associates itself with
all the praise and tributes expressed to you by previous
speakers. We are confident that under your leadership this
important discussion will be most rewarding, and especially
conducive to meeting the expectations of our struggling
African brothers, on whose behalf this debate was initiated.

41. Everyone knows today that it would have been
completely impossible for the racist minority regimes in
southern Africa to survive had it not been for the tacit
support and encouragement accorded to those ugly regimes
by certain Western Powers and by similar racist regimes,
such as the Zionist regime.
42. The General Assembly adopted no fewer than 11
resolutions during its thirty-first
session condemning the
policies of apartheid of the Government of South Africa as
well as the collaboration of certain countries with the
South African regime in political, economic, military,
cultural and scientific fields. The Zionist regime of Tel Aviv
was considered by the Summit Conference of the nonaligned countries held at Colombo to be the northern end
of the racist axis formed by the regimes of Israel, South
Africa and Rhodesia. The Conference declared:

36. / Since this is the first time I have spoken in the
Security Council this year, I should like to welcome the
new members of the Council: India, Mauritius, Venezuela,
the Federal Republic of Germany and Canada. We hope
that their membership will contribute to the success and
effectiveness of the Council’s work.
37. On the other hand, it is my painful duty to express to
our colleagues the representatives of Romania and Iran our
feelings of deep sympathy in connexion with the tragic
earthquakes that have struck their countries and caused
great losses of life and property.

“The racist regimes in Israel, South Africa and Rhodesia
established by alien colonial settlers combine the ugly
features of colonialism and racism as they all practise
racism and subject the indigenous population to every
form of discrimination, oppression, occupation and alien
domination. These regimes form a racist axis aimed at
the . . . domination of Africa and the Arab world.“1

38. Three days ago, the international community solemnly
observed the International Day for the Elimination of
Racial Discrimination, on the sad occasion of the seventeenth anniversary of the brutal massacre at Sharpeville
perpetrated by the racist white minority regime of South
Africa. The Sharpeville massacre was not, of course, the
only or the last crime committed by the ugly racist South
African regime. In fact, the whole history of that rdgime is
nothing but a succession of crimes and massacres. Countless
thousands of persons have been detained, tortured, injured
and killed since Sharpeville; and only last June the racist
regime carried out the same kind of massacre at Soweto. In
its appeal issued last month on the occasion of the
International Day for the Elimination of Racial Discrimination, the Special Committee against Apartheid confirmed
that at least 14 political detainees were known to have died
at the hands of the security police since March 1976.

43. The Zionist regime was the subject of a separate strong
condemnation, in General Assembly resolution 31/6 E, for
its ever-increasing collaboration with the racist regime of
Pretoria. As a matter of fact, the collaboration between
Israel and South Africa goes much further than the
traditional co-operation between two imperialist racist
r&imes, That is not surprising, because the similarity
between Tel Aviv and Pretoria exceeds by far the common
identity between two regimes practising colonialism in
its classical form. There is undoubtedly no other entity
besides South Africa, except Israel, which adopts the myth
of racial or religious superiority as the basic law of the
country. In Pretoria you are superior because you are
white; in Tel Aviv you are superior, in addition, because
you are Jewish. In South Africa they call themselves the
‘$chosen race”; in Israel they call themselves the “chosen
people”. Both regimes practise oppression against the
indigenous population and restrict the movement of that
population to isolated ghettos and villages. Both regimes
resort to settler colonialism as a means of usurping the land
and uprooting the original inhabitants.

39. The overwhelming world condemnation of the aborninable crime of apartheid is most impressive, But what relief
has this world-wide condemnation offered the suffering
populations of Azania and Namibia? What good have the
hundreds of resolutions, decisions, condemnations and
statements of sympathy done the oppressed people of these
usurped territories, when the very same big Powers that
pretend to deplore and condemn apartheid are themsleves
the closest collaborators with and the real protectors of the
racist South African regime?

4.4. In his important statement before the first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting, which was held at Cairo
earlier this month, President Assad of the Syrian Arab
Republic directed the attention of the African and Arab
peoples to this common danger which is threatening Africa
and the Arab region equally. President Assad pointed to the

40. Today, the Security Council is once again considering
the dangerous situation in South Africa. Will it be able this
time to take the effective measures needed to put an end to
that tragic situation-as it is its duty and responsibility to
do in accordance with the Charter of the United Nationsor will it be content again with a watered-down resolution

1 A/31/197, annex I, para. 30.

5

must be abolished without delay, by the forces of the
United Nations if necessary. The racist South African
r6gime must be driven out of Namibia. The legitimate
majority must be enabled to assume power in Zimbabwe.

evil of settler colonialism as incarnated in Africa by the two
racist rBgimes in control of Azania, Namibia and Zimbabwe
and in the Arab region by Zionism and its racist basis, Israel.
The President affirmed that the racist Zionist r6gime was
synonymous with the racist regimes in southern Africa. All
these rdgirnes are nothing but the embodiment of the same
concept, which emanates from the immoral theory of racial
superiority based on injustice and the denial of the rights of
the legitimate population-indeed
the denial of their very
existence.

47. The Syrian Arab Republic remains committed to the
struggle for the liberation of every inch of African territory
with the same determination as shown in its commitment in
the struggle for the liberation of every inch of the occupied
Arab territories. The cause of freedom and peace is
indivisible. If peace is a quarter of a century overdue in the
Middle East, as President Carter said the other day, it is
more than a quarter of a centmy overdue in Africa. As a
matter of fact, the two tragedies of apat’rheid and Palestine
began nearly at the same time. Apurtheid became the
official policy of the white minority rigime in South Africa
in 1948; that was the same year in which Palestine was
dismembered and the latest chapter in the tragedy c$ the
Palestinian people began. It is not only peace which is three
decades overdue in Africa and the Middle East, it is also
justice, because peace cannot be established without justice.

45. The first Afro-Arab
Summit Conference Meeting
reaffirmed in its Political Declaration the riced to strengthen the united front of the African and Arab peoples in their
struggle for national liberation, and condemned imperialism, colonialism, neo-colonialism, zionism, apartheid and all
other forms of discrimination and racial and religious
segregation, especially “under the forms in which they
appear in southern Africa, Palestine and the other occupied
Arab and African territories” [S/12298, annex,
Para.
5/.
In that Political Declaration, the Conference invited the
Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab
States

48. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is Mr. William P.
Thompson, to whom the Council has agreed to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.

“to exchange information regularly on the development
of the common struggle for the liberation of their
respective peoples in Africa and the Middle East to enable
member States to play an effective and positive role in
this respect” [ibid., para. 6/.

49. Mr. THOMPSON: Mr. President, I should like to begin
by expressing to you personally the congratulations and
good wishes of your former colleagues within the ecumenical molement.

The Conference decided, furthermore, that increased efforts should be made within OAU, the League of Arab
States, the United Nations and all other international
forums in order to find

50. I regret, as I know you do, that Mr. Philip Potter,
General Secretary of the World Council of Churches, was
unable to accept your invitation to appear and address
himself to the situation in South Africa from the perspective of the ecumenical movement. I am pleased that I have
been able to accept your invitation to appear in his stead.
On behalf of the Christian Churches of the world, I express
appreciation for your invitation to take part in this
discussion.

“the most effective ways and means of accentuating at
the international level the political and economic isolas
tion of Israel, South Africa and Rhodesia so long as the
regimes of these countries persist in their racist, expansionist and aggressive policies”
and, to this effect, the Conference affirmed

51. I am a member of the Central Committee of the World
Council of Churches. That Council is a world fellowship of
289 Protestant, Anglican and Orthodox Churches throughout the world, involving approximately 400 million Christians, I am President of the World Alliance of Reformed
Churches, an international body of Presbyterian and Congregational Churches. The World Alliance has a membership
of 143 Churches in 85 countries with a membership of
more than 55 million. The National Council of the
Churches of Christ in the United States of America, of
which I am also President, has 30 Orthodox and Protestant
member Churches with a total constituency of about 42
million. I am also the Stated Clerk of the General Assembly
of the United Presbyterian Church in the United States of
America. I hasten to add that I do not presume to speak for
the member Churches of these ecumenical bodies, much
less for their individual communicant members. I appear
today as an individual.

“the necessity to continue to impose total boycott,
political, diplomatic, cultural, sporting and economic, and
in particular the oil embargo against these regimes” (ibid.,
para. 81.
Finally, the Conference, fully convinced that the causes of
Palestine, the Middle East, Zimbabwe, Namibia and South
Africa are Afro-Arab causes, decided
“to extend its total support to the peoples struggling
against the racist and Zionist r&imes and to the front-line
States bordering confrontation zones for their assistance
to the national liberation struggle” [ibid., para. IO].
46. The international community cannot permit the tragic
situation in South Africa to go on for ever. It is no longer
sufficient to adopt resolutions or issue condemnations. The
racist regimes in southern Africa must be defeated and
compelled to surrender power to the overwhelming majority of the indigenous population. Apartheid, which has
plagued the African continent for more than three decades,

52. I was trained as a lawyer and practised that profession
for 20 years before being elected to the office I now hold in
6

the United Presbyterian Church. Early in my career, while
on active duty in the United States Army following the
Second World War, I served as an assistant prosecutor of the
International Military Tribunal for the Far East at Tokyo,
which tried the leaders of Japan, includirig General Hideki
Tojo. I visited South
Africa in 1973 and Mozambique in
1975.

racism. However, betweeu 1925 and 1960 about 30 major
ecumenical statements against racial discrimination were
made. South Africa became the central issue because it
practises the most explicit, systematic and vicious form of
racism.
59. I was present at the fourth Assembly of the World
Council of Churches which met in 1968 at Uppsala,
Sweden. That Assembly urged the World Council to embark
on a vigorous campaign against racism and “to undertake a
crash programme to guide the Council and the member
Churches in the urgent matter of racism”. By that time, the
membership of the World Council of Churches had become
much more representative of world Christian opinion and
the burning issues of the third world began to receive
priority on its agenda. The Uppsala Assembly met in the
shadow of the death of Martin Luther King, Jr., who
originally was scheduled to be the guest preacher at the
opening worship service. In that atmosphere, the Assembly
was challenged to move beyond words to action. The result
was the launching, in collaboration with member Churches,
of the World Council’s Programme to Combat Racism, to
express solidarity with the racialiy oppressed. I participated
in the 1969 Central Committee meeting of the World
Council, which singled out white racism as the most
dangeroll., form of the present racial conflict. It was only
natural that South Africa should have received special
attention. That Central Committee, meeting at-Canterbury,
approved the details of the Programme.

53. The system of apartheid as practised in South Africa is
an affront to the religious, moral and ethical convictions of
the Churches, the United Nations and the world. Apartheid
as a system has economic, political, social and cultural
ramifications, expressed in a multitude of discriminatory
laws and practices. However, it involves a more basic issue
because it violates the meaning of creation, the very nature
and destiny of all humanity. Apartheid embodies a pattern
of injustice and oppression imposed on a people solely
because of their race. It involves a denial of the inherent
claims of all people to dignity, equality and freedom. It
borders on the denial of even the right to life itself. In a
religious sense it involves the breaking of the fellowship of
those who believe in God as the creator of all people.
54. The concerns of the United Nations are prescribed in
Article 1 of its Charter, which speaks of “the principle of
equal rights and self-determination of peoples” and of
“respect for human rights and for fundamental freedoms
for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or
religion” and in the principles enunciated in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, which in article 1 proclaims
that “All human beings are born free and equal in dignity
and rights”.

60. Mr. President, I know that you are personally a&
quainted with the details of the Programme from your own
participation in shaping it and implementing it.

55. The practical issues include, first, how to achieve
justice and make possible liberation from a system which
oppresses peoples and denies basic rights and, secondly,
how to avoid world-wide conflict because of a threat to
peace in this particular situation.

61. The Programme and other agencies of the World
Council, such as the Commission of the Churches on
International Affairs, have attempted to interpret the
struggle for liberation in South Africa from the perspective
of the oppressed people. The World Council of Churches
has given financial aid to the liberation movements of
South Africa for humanitarian programmes, primarily in
health and education. That financial support has however
been minimal. The moral support has doubtless been more
significant, The educational impact, both within and
outside the Churches, has been considerable. For more than
a decade, the World Council has also carried out a
programme of assistance to victims of oppression in South
Africa as well as to those who have become refugees
because of their struggle against injustice.

56. The focus of concern is upon two systems, The first is
the evil system of apartkeid which exists in South Africa.
The second, without which the first could not survive, is
that international system which supports and enables the
South African Government to continue policies in gross
violation of the Charter and the Declaration. That international system undergirds the military and police structures
of South Africa through the sale and transfer of technology
and military hardware used in and required for the support
of a totalitarian system. It strengthens the economic
structure through the continued operation of transnational
corporations in South Africa and the continued flow of
investments and loans which make the apartheid system
profitable.

62. In 1972, I participated in the meeting of the Central
Committee of the World Council
of Churches at Utrecht,
which adopted two resolutions. The first stated that the
World Council itself should withdraw
its funds from
corporations which were involved in investment and trade
in South Africa. The second urged member Churches,
Christian agencies and individual Christians to use their
influence to press corporations to withdraw investments
from and cease trading with South Africa. Those actions
have also been of symbolic and educational value.

57. I understand that the draft resolutions under consideration by the Council concern the second system. While I
cannot speak on the specific draft resolutions, it is my
privilege to share with the Council somelhing of the
attitudes held by the Churches in this matter.
58. For more than five decades, the Churches of the
ecumenical movement have been expressing their deep
concern about racism. This is not to deny that, in many
parts of the world, Churches themselves have been guilty of

63. I also participated in the World Council Central
Committee meeting at Geneva in 1976. At that meeting the
Committee reiterated its support of the struggle for justice
7

in South Africa and stated that “South Africa’s enormous
militarism and its reinforcement by active military and
economic c0operation with major Western Powers constitute a major threat to world peace”, It urged “member
Churches in countries which maintain military and KOnomic links with South Africa to press their Governments
t0 end this collaboration and to intensify their efforts to
discourage white emigration to South Africa”. Most recently the World Council Executive Committee, in February this year, condemned the torture and killings 0f
detainees in South African prisons and the holding of
detainees without trial.
64. The actions of the National Council of the Churches
0f Christ in the United States of America have been similar.
In 1963, speaking about the meaning of human rights, the
Counc~ stated that “denials of rights and freedoms that
inhere in man’s worth before God are not simply a crime
against humanity, they are a sin against God”. That same
statement drew attention to the failure of the world
community to translate the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights into effective action. It also pointed specifically to “the denials of racial equality , . . in the Republic
of South Africa”, It called for “renewed dedication of our
citizens and our Government to the manifold concerns for
human rights . . . in the growing world community and thus
to larger measures of justice and freedom making for more
peace on earth”.
65. In 1975, the National Council of the Churches of
Christ specifically condemned “the South African Government for continuing its racist apartheid practices in the face
of almost unanimous international opposition, for its
repressive acts of torture, imprisonment and detention
without trial, for denying the black majority their right to
vote or own land and for their illegal occupation of
Namibia”. It also condemned “the policies of the United
States and other Western countries which assist the white
minority Governments of southern Africa”.
66. Those statements have been supported by actions in a
number of ways, not only by the National Council of
Churches but also by separate denominations, Those
actions include support for the World Council’s Programme
to Combat Racism and the development of methods of
influencing United States-based corporations through stock.
holder activity. This work is now coordinated by the
Interfaith Center for Corporate Responsibility, an agency
supported by 14 Protestant groups and 150 Roman
Catholic orders. The Churches have also been engaged in
educational activity within the United States, They have
sought, in various ways, to maintain communication and
fellowship with religious groups in South Africa, giving
support and encouragement in their struggle for justice.
67. Concerning the military situation, it is my belief that
the continued flow of arms, matt!rieZ and military technology, through sales or transfer to South Africa from
whatever source, serves to maintain the capability of the
South African Government-which
represents a minorityto oppress and control the majority of its citizens, We have
witnessed and have been appalled by the increasing level of
violence which that Government is willing to employ to
prevent change in the apartheid system and to perpetuate

its unjust rule. 1 am aware that the failure to achieve
significant change increases the desperation of the oppressed and encourages them to turn to violence as the last
resort. For this reason, I am concerned about the military
support which the South African Government continues to
receive. I realize that a number of countries, including the
United States, have indicated that they are practising
voluntary prohibition on arms sales and transfers. Those
limited efforts have not been effective in eliminating
oppression. The danger of an escalating international
conflict involving the major Powers remains. I therefore
believe that the time has come for an end to all sales and
transfers of arms, mat@el and military technology through
a mandatory embargo, such. as has been applied against
Rhodesia.
68. The economic situation in South Africa exploits the
labour of the oppressed people. It utilizes the natural
resources, which should be the common heritage of all the
country’s citizens, for the benefit of the privileged few. The
continued supportive practices of rnany countries, especially the industrialized nations, help to perpetuate the
apartheid system. I have become convinced that, to respond
to such economic support, economic measures are a
permissible and necessary form of international action. I
believe that the call for an end to new investments and new
loans, public or private, is more and more urgent, and that
the time has come to call upon transnational corporations
to close shop in South Africa and withdraw from their
involvement there as soon as possible. Already six United
States denominations and two Roman Catholic orders have
filed stockholder resolutions with United States-based
corporations, calling for such withdrawal.
A growing
number of Christians now believe that the time has come
for the international community to boycott South Africa
economically,
69. Two weeks ago, as part of a continuing dialogue with
Churches in southern Africa, a group of Church leaders met
at Marty, New York, That consultation included more than
20 persons from southern Africa, together with others from
Europe and the United States, The message of that
consultation contains the following statement that summarizes the position of many Churches throughout the world:
“Our special concern is the liberation from oppression
and the development of the people in the nations of
southern Africa and the realization of the full potential of
persons. Our gathering is not in support of any Government; it is religious, because we work for justice, and we
do so in the understanding that the entirety of human life
is of concern to God. Hence, the Christian community
must confront any forces that deny human dignity,
equality, freedom or life itself. Most especially we affirm
our conviction that institutions, political or otherwise,
which deny human worth on the basis of race are evil.”
70. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the represen
tative of Madagascar, I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
71. Mr. RASOLONDRAIBE
(Madagascar) (interpretation
jkonz French): Since my Ambassador has been called
abroad on mission, it is 1 who have the honour to

congratulate you, Mr. President, on behalf of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar, on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council. You may be sure that it
gives me much pleasure and personal satisfaction to do so. I
wish to assure you that you will have our full support and
that I believe that your presidency will be very effective,
because we know you are extensively acquainted with the
problems of southern Africa, problems which you have,
moreover, been able to study in consultation with the
highest authorities on the spot.

great fear, a horrible fear which prevents Vorster and his
acolytes from seeing clearly where their true interests lie
and which prompts them to commit extremist acts, acts in
which they will waste their energies in vain and which,
instead of making new friends for them, threaten to convert
into enemies those on whose support they had hoped to
rely in order to remain in power.
78. There is a very strange kind of psychology which
consists in boosting one’s sense of personal power by
sowing death, desolation and hatred among the population
whose labour and goodwill are necessary for one’s own
economic well-being. It is a very peculiar psychology, that
of the 4 million racists, who are condemned by the rest of
mankind and yet remain determined to perpetuate by force
of arms a strange and grotesque world of their own
choosing. 1-10~ can one explain, indeed, that there are two
firearms for each white citizen in South Africa’? How can
one explain the increase in the military budget of that
country which, in 20 years, went from 41.5 million rand to
1.5 billion rand?

72. For three decades now our Organization has been
dealing with the question of apartheid in South Africa,
three decades at the end of which we have to note with
regret that the problem remains unsolved, not to say more
complicated and even more threatening owing to its
implications, on the one hand, for the life of the oppressed
masses and, on the other, for international peace and
security.
73. The justice that we claim for the victims ofapu?%&+d,
the respect for their dignity as men and the recognition of
their rights-these are the objectives that continue to elude
us, despite the concerted efforts of the victims, of the
liberation movements which protect and help them and of
the Governments or international organizations which are
concerned with this question.

79. The inevitable triumph of the just cause of the
majority justifies our describing the reaction of South
Africa as futile and irrational, However, it is dangerous too,
because ;t takes the form of a crude and arrogant desire for
dominalion come what may. This coincides with the
observations of the author of an article which appeared in
the review Foreign Affairi in October 1976, in which we
read that, compeIled to choose between dominating,
dealing with the majority or dying, the South African
racists chose domination, without any concessions what.
soever to the majority population.

74. Speaking after so many others who have described in
moving terms the sombre situation in which the non-white
majority of South Africa lives, I may perhaps refrain from
recalling well-known
facts and confine myself to state
briefly my Government’s assessment of the evolution of the
question which we are now debating.

80. The liberation movements-the
African National Congress, the Pan Africanist Congress and the South West
Africa People’s Organization-were
not mistaken about the
nature of that decision. Neither do they believe in
negotiation, for they do not believe that the liberation of
the oppressed masses will be brought about by a hypothetical act of sudden contrition or generosity inasmuch as
men do not gratuitously renounce their privileges unless
they are budding saints, which certainly cannot be said of
the Vorster clique.

75. We see, first of all, that despite the extortions of the
oppressing Power, the political consciousness-raising of the
vast majority of the South African population continues
and is being more clearly reaffirmed, to the point that the
racist minority regime can no longer claim to ignore the
fact that its legitimacy and its reprehensible acts are being
questioned by the whole world. We see that, despite many
prohibitions and arbitrary decisions, despite the acts of
violence and intimidation of all kinds, the nationalism of
the African majority is growing in intensity. That nationalism is becoming organized and its adherents renounce
neither their aspirations to freedom and justice nor their
legitimate ambitions to accede one day to power and
preside over the fate of an independent Azania, sovereign
and free from the shackles of apartheid. And even though
some people might describe all this as an impossible dream,
those of us who have experienced the same forms of
persecution, alienation and exploitation have no difficulty
in understanding and espousing those objectives.

81. This leads me to the third fact we have noted, that is,
the total breakdown
in communications
between the
opposing groups in South Africa, which only engage in
violent exchanges during their periodic confrontations. Is it
possible to change this situation? Only the future will tell,
but pessimism does not seem out of place here.
82. We have come before the Security Council, like many
other Governments, aware that if there are to be changes in
South Africa some external factor will be needed to act as a
catalyst. We are convinced that the United Nations, acting
through the Council, is in the best position to play this
part. The international situation today seems to favour
decisive action by the Organization, whose moral authority
has so far not been fully exercised owing to certain
differences of opinion not only with regard to the
interpretation of certain clauses of the Charter but also
concerning the nature of the changes which must be
brought about in South Africa,

76. We observe further the horrifying reactions of the de
facto authorities of Pretoria in the fact of that nationalist
awakening which is causing cracks that defy repair to
appear in the political foundations of the regime and, at the
same time, frustrating the efforts the r&me is making to
acquire a measure of respectability and acceptance in the
community of nations.
7’7. The psychosis to which the racist minority of southern
Africa has fallen prey has for us a very simple name. It is a
9

83. We think the time has come when we should rise
above or forget the legal quibbles that have divided US in
the past on the colonial or non-colonial nature of the South
African rigime. It seems possible to us at this time to take a
further step forward beyond the consensus which has
always existed among us with regard to the condemnation
of the principle of apartheid. Now that the objective-that
of establishingmajority rule in South Africa-is Clearly
defmed, the only obstaclethat might persistand prevent
decisive action by the Organizationwould be the introduction into the debate of considerationslinked to the
economic,political andmilitary concernsof certainspecific
groups of countries.When the day comeswhenthe caseof
South Africa can be examinedin this forum on its Own
merits and without the introduction of the particular
considerationsI havejust mentioned,then, we believe,the
cohesion, the authority and the true role of this Organization will be restoredto it.

stated that only through the coming together ot’ the
African’s armedstrugglefor liberation andthe international
struggle againstaparlheid, could positive results be obtained. The eradication of that scourge could not be
achievedif one or the other of thosetwo componentswas
lack~lg. It is up to us, not only materially to assistthe
liberation movements,but alsoto make them part of all
internationalefforts aimedat restoringa legitimate political
authority in South Africa. In sayingthis, we arein no way
moved by emotional reasons,but rather by full awareness
of the fact that we must do everything in our power to
encourageand prepare our brothers of Azania to take
responsibiIityfor their national affairs in full sovereignty
andindependence.

X4. It would bc superfluousat this stageto refer againto
the seriousbreachesof the spirit and the letter of the
Charter, to the innumerablecontraventionsof the purposes
and principlesof the United Nationsor to the challenges
to
its authority of which the Pretoriardgimeis guilty. Wehave
before us a casein which the legalargumentsin favour of
the application of Articles 5, 6, 41 and 42 of the Charter
are consistentwith the facts. we have beforeus a situation
in which it is no longer possibleto disregardthose
provisions of the Charter, whose application, however
delicate or difficult it may be,mustbe absoluteandcan by
no meansbe suspended
indefinitely, because
that would be
to invite the de facto authoritiesof Pretoriato give further
proof of their intransigence
andarrogance.The worst thing
that the Councilcould do would be not to act.

88. Mr. TLOU (Botswana): Mr. President, allow me to
extend to you my very warm congratulationsand those of
my delegationon your assumptionof the presidencyof the
Security Council for this month. From your performance
sincethis debatebegan,we havealreadyreceivedassurance
of your qualitiesas an ablehelmsman.You bring with you,
asseveralwho spokebefore mehavestated,vast experience
asa committed activist in the field of humanrights in your
own country, an experiencewhich shouldindeedbe useful
asyou now grapplewith the issuebefore the Council. One
noteswith interest the fact that, before you assumed
your
duties at the United Nations, you visited Africa to
familiarize yourself with the vital issuesat stake. We are
confident, therefore, that you will pilot this debate to a
fruitful conclusionand we wishyou well.

87. The PRESIDENT: The next speakeris the representative of Botswana.I invite him to take a place at the
Counciltableand to makehisstatement.

85. To make the deepermeaningof what we advocate
quite plain, I shouldlike to say that we are not concerned 89. The questionof which the Council is seizedtodaywith punitive measures,
eventhough the crimescommitted that of apartheid-is a very old andgraveone indeed.If we
againstthe lives, the physicalwell-being,the freedomand are talking about a political systemin which racialbigotry,
the dignity of South African citizens call for redressand racial discrimination and fallacious doctrines of racial
superiority are the basison which society in South Africa is
compensation.In this respect,we know that the blood of
organized,if we are speakingabout a society in which a
the martyrs has not beenshedin vain, We alsoknow that
handful of whites dominate and intend to dominate in
those who sow the wind of oppressionwill reap the
perpetuity the overwhelmingblack majority on no other
whirlwind of the liberatingrevolution. What concernsusat
this stageis the adoptionby the Councilof all the measures basisthan that of race, then we aretalking about a political
systemwhich is over three centuriesold, a political system
proposedby the African countriesand their friendson the
basisof GeneralAssemblyresolutions.Thosemeasures
are which dates back to the coming of Europeansto South
within the limits authorizedby the Charterand cannot be Africa in 16.52.
describedasexcessive.But their adoptionwould meanthat
90. Whether South Africa wasunder British colonial rule,
the international communitywasnow united in its desireto
translate into action the support it givesthe liberation which it was in fact until the formation of the Union of
movements.It would meanthat, underthe leadershipof the South Africa in 1910, or whether it was under the
Council, Member Stateshad decidedto undo the obstinate Afrikaners, which hasfor all intents and purposesbeenthe
casesince191O-for sincethat date all South African Prime
resistanceof the forceswhich havenot yet givenup on the
idea of perpetuating white supremacy in Africa. The Ministershave invariably been Afrikaners who, over the
years, consciouslyfashioneda racialistpolitical systemthat
adoption of thosemeasures
would meanthat we hadfinally
cameto be called apartheid in 1948, when racialism was
resolved,as it were, to “destabilize” that illegalPower by
formally institutionalized as the basisfor the organization
depriving it of its economic,military and even political
of South African society-racialism is certainly the basison
support.
which society has always been and still is organized in
86. Speakingon the samesubjectat the thirty-first session South Africa.
of the General Assembly,2my Ambassadorin particular
91. Apartheid, the latest and most viciously oppressive
2 Official Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-first
Session,
Phaseof that racialistpolitical system,wasindeed institunl_.._.... Ir..l.
“IL -an+:..”
tionafized and implementedonly in 1948. Thenceforth, the
10

Government marshalled all the instruments of State power,
economic, political, military, legal and social, together with
propaganda through the medium of radio, and now even
television, to entrench racialism. Indeed, racialism is the
most dominant and persistent theme in South African
political history.
92. When the leaders of the npartheid State openly and
frankly State that they have never contemplated, do not do
SO 110~ and will not in the near future contemplate
dismantling apartheid, whell they boldly and arrogantly
assert that they are ready to defend apartheid eve11if they
have to stand alone in the world, then we must take them
seriously, for they are articulating dangerous feelings and
prejudices deeply embedded in history.
93. In the 183Os, the forefathers of the present leaders left
what was then called the Cape Colony, to colonize the
interior of South Africa, depriving Africans of their land.
That is how 87 per cent of the land came to be
white-owned and 13 per cent came to be black, They left
the Cape because, as they claimed, British liberalism as they
.saw it, threatened to give a minimum of civil rights to the
African-not that it did in fact make any significant change.
In their own words, the Afrikaners left the Cape in order to
establish states in the interior where they would maintain
“proper relations between black and white”. Indeed, the
Constitution of the Transvaal, the first viable Afrikaner
State in the interior, clearly stated that there would bc “no
equality in Church or State between black and white in the
Transvaal”. This was in the early 185Os, and the spirit of
that Constitution is the spirit of the present South African
Constitution. The spirit of that early State of the 1850s is
the spirit of the present apartheid State, and that spirit is
apartheid. It was in defence of that kind or political system
that the Afrikaners fought many wars against the British
who, of course, at that time fought not so much for human
rights as for control of the vast gold deposits in the
Johannesburg area.
94, It should be noted that the Constitution of the Union
of South Africa negotiated between the British, as the
colonial Power, and the Afrikaners opened the way for the
rise of a virulently exclusivist Afrikaner nationalism that
was to triumph in 1948. The opportunity to thwart the rise
of that phenomenon was lost at that very moment,
especially because the colonial Power was negotiating with
a people that had just been defeated in the Boer war of
1899-1902. Writing about this tragic episode in South
African history, a white South African historian observed
that the whites of South Africa compromised and collaborated at the expense of the Africans. Nothing that has
happened so far would belie that very observant thesis.
That has been a consistent theme ever since 1910.
9.5. Let us today, during this last quarter of the tWentk!th
century, during this decade when the United Nations is
committed to eradicating all forms of racial discrimination,
ensure that our decisions regarding the elimination of
apartheid will be so effective that future historians will not
accuse us of collaborating with the apartheid State. So far,
the voting pattern of some Members of the United Nations,
both in the General Assembly and in the Security Council,
would regrettably lay them open to such charges.

96. What I have said so far is all familiar knowledge, but
we need constantly to remind ourselves that apartheid is
deeply embedded in the minds of the whites of South
Africa. Thus any proposals or programmes for the elimination of apartheid, if they art: to be effective at all, must
take cognizance of that stark reality. We are dealing here
with an arrogant minority which has for centuries imbibed
so much racialist indoctrination that it cannot be expected
voluntarily to dismantle apartheid, History is instructive
here. The r6gime has persistently and flagrantly ignored
world opinion. In the face of international criticism, the
rGgime has, in fact, further strengthened ‘the apartheid
system and intensified its oppression of the people of South
Africa. The recent massacres of innocent schoolchildren at
Soweto and elsewhere are cases in point.
97. The leaders of South Africa have so far shown
themselves to be indifferent to international pleas and
admonitions to abandon apartheid and build a free society
of equals in South Africa. What this means, then, is that
this cancer in the body politic of South Africa calls for
major surgery if the chaos which its continued existence is
bound to bring about is to be avoided, There are those,
both in the Security Council and outside it, who have the
power and influence to coerce Pretoria into abandoning its
mad course. Let those nations which after all have, at least
theoretically in this case, expressed humanitarian concerns
help to defuse this highly charged, volatile sifuation.
98. In dealing with South Africa, we must not see illusions
or mirages; we must not be deceived by cosmetic changes
which the regime is now trying to sell to the world. We are
told that in South Africa itself petty apartheid is on the
way out, that blacks can now use parks hitherto reserved
for whites, that certain careMy selected hotels are open to
blacks, that multiracial sport is on the way, that politically
the Africans can exercise their right to self-determination in
the bantustans. We are told that, in Namibia, the Turnhalle
talks will bring about independence soon-and SO forth,ad
injinitW72.
99. All these are mere smoke-screens, and dangerous ones
at that, since those who usually see mirages when they deal
with South Africa may see these as the beginnings of
positive change-dangerous, I say, because they can only
weaken international solidarity against South Africa. These
are mere stratagems employed by the regime to buy time.
The only acceptable change is a political one that will
eliminate apartheid and give genuine political right{ to all
the people of South Africa regardless of race, colour or
creed.
100. We are constantly, told that peaceful change is the
acceptable method to bring about desired change in South
Africa. This is nothing new to the Africans generally and to
the South African blacks in particular. In fact, to all
mankind, peaceful resolution of disputes is always preferable to war, The South African blacks need no sermons on
this because theirs has been one of the longest peaceful
struggles in the history of African nationalist protest on the
entire continent of Africa. On the other hand, the apartheid
State has always resorted to violence to silence legitimate
peaceful protest. It is for that reason that the path of the

105. The situationin southernAfrica is already a threat to
international peaceand security. The Rhodesianregime,
with the full supportof South Africa which suppliesit with
essentialcommoditiesincluding war materials,is engaging
h viciousattacksagainstindependentneighbouringAfrican
States.Without the existence of apartheid South Africa,
therewould be no Namibiaandrebel Rhodesiawould have
longsincecollapsed.

South African peaceful liberation movement is strewn with
the corpses of non-violent protesters.
101. In that context, Sharpeville should be seen as the
turning point in the history of the liberation movement, for
on that fateful day the apartheid State violently forced the
people of South Africa to go underground to fashion new
methods of struggle. It is all the more surprising that, after
Sharpeville, there could still have been peaceful protests at
Soweto as recently as 1976, protests which met with the
same fate as those at Sharpeville.
102. The Organization of African Unity for its part has
always preferred peaceful solutions to war, hence the
Lusaka Manifesto,3 which South Africa in its characteristic
fashion has disdainfully ignored. South Africa, by its
intransigence and violence, is forcing the people to resort to
violence. The President of the Republic of Rotswana,
Sir Seretse Khama, succinctly put this point across when he
addressed the American Council of Foreign Relations in
New York in 1976. He told his audience: “I am confident,
however, that you will agree that the days of peaceful
change in southern Africa are almost over”, and went on to
say that violence was inevitable, “primarily because those
who still hold the people of southern Africa in subjugation
have chosen the path of war rather than the path of peace”.
He said, furthermore, that Africans agreed in principle with
those who decried violence as an instrument of change, but
that the Africans did not “agree with those who refuse to
see why it is that in southern Africa the freedom fighters
have resorted to violence as an instrument of change”.
103. If the minority rigimes in southern Africa abandon
their disastrous courses and opt for meaningful negotiations
aimed at the transfer of power to the majority, the
liberation movements will surely be ready and willing, as
always, to talk, for they have nothing to fear. The
alternative to this is a racial war which we in Africa have
spared no effort to prevent, a war whose consequences can
can only be very ghastly, not only for Africa but for the
entire world. Your own President, Sir, recently warned of
the gathering racial conflict that threatens all of southern
Africa.

106. South Africa itself boastsof a flourishing munitions
industry and reports indicate that it may soon acquire
nuclearweapons.The apartheid regimeis heavily militarizing the internationalTerritory of Namibia,disregardingthe
decisionsof the International Court of Justice, which carry
the force of international law. The regime has now
amendedits DefenceLaw sothat, whenit feelsthreatened,
its armedforcescanstrike anywhereup to the equator. The
apartheid leadersat Pretoria makeno secretof the fact that
their defensiblebordersextend far beyond South Africa.
Indeedthe attacksagainstAngolaand Zambiaattest to this.
107. Within South Africa itself, oppressionis the order of
the day as more Draconian legislation is passedand the
police and army treat the African people with utter
disregardfor humanlife.
108. The Security Council should now act unanimously
and resolutely in arriving at the solution to this problem.
The solution should match the gravity of the situation,
bearingin mind alsothe fact that hitherto South Africa has
ignored all the resolutionsof both the General Assembly
and the Security Council. The Charter of the United
Nations providesfor peaceful but resolute solutions. The
credibility of the United Nationsprovidesfor peacefulbut
resolutesolutions.The credibility of the Council is at stake
unlesswe emergefrom this debatewith positive decisions,
whichwill help usto solvethe problemof apartheid
109. South Africa cannot stand alone in this world, its
pronouncementsto the contrary notwithstanding. So far,
the regimehasdisregardedUnited Nations decisionsin the
full knowledgethat it could count on the support of certain
Western membersof the Security Council. During the
thirty-first sessionof the GeneralAssembly, the Minister
for External Affairs of Botswanacalled upon the Western
Powers“not to sacrificethe indigenouspeopleof Africa on
the altar of mercantileand mercenaryintests”. Werepeat
that call today.

104. We live in that part of Africa, a part of our great
continent with great potential for growth and development
endowed as it is with vast mineral resources, rich agricultural lands, rivers and seas which teem with fish, hydroelectric potential and a population of about 50 million
which would provide a viable market for its manufactured
goods. But the full utilization of that potential is impossible
SO long as the minority dgimes, whose kingpin or nerve
centre is South Africa, continue to exist.

Themeetingroseat 12.50 psm.

3 fiid., Twenty-fourth Session, Annexes, agenda iteln 106, dacumerit A/7154.

4 Ibid., Thirty-Jrst

para.44.

12

Session, Plenary Meetings, 21th meeting,

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

United
Nations
publications
throughout
the world. Consult
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

PUBLICATIONS

may
be obtained
your
bookstore

LES

PUBLICATIONS

or

from
bookstores
and distributors
write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairias
et les agences
d6positaires
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire
ou adressez-vous
B : Nations Unies. Section des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
ICAK

in United

Nations,

R3A.4HHJ-f

JHHaX

Opranu3aquu
N areHTCTs.aX

BarneM

~A)I(HOM

HasuB,

CeKnuR

COMO

CONSEGUIR

EInm.~wrr

Lltho

IIOllY’IHTh

OPrAHtI

Ob%e~unennbrx
BO BC~X paRoHaX

M~X~HH~

URN

no npoflaxe

~H~HTS

wafis,w~R,

PUBLICACIONES

3AqliH

OJKbEAHHEHHhIX

HAUZIR

Haunfi
htoxoio tcynn~b
B ~rnixtnbIx
MaraMupa. HasoAwTe
cnpaaKu
06
W3RaHWsX a
no
aflpecy:
Opranu3aqns
06-be~uuemibrx
Hbro-Ffopx
H,-IH
XeHeea.
DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones
Unidas
estin
buidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consutte
Unidas, Seccicn de Ventas, Nueva York o Ginebra.

en venta en librerias
a su librero
o dirijase

New York’

in other

Price:

$U.S.

1.00 (or equivalent

currencies)

y casas distria: Naciones

70001-December

1977-2,200
