VI.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

4. Reaffirms that the States and organizations which
give assistance to the colonial and racist regimes in
southern Africa are accomplices in the inhuman practices of racial discrimination, apartheid and colonialism
perpetrated by those regimes;
5. Invites the Security Council to impose a total
embargo on sales, gifts and the transfer of arms or any
other kind of military supplies to South Africa;
6. Calls upon all States scrupulously to observe the
sanctions imposed on the illegal minority regime in
Southern Rhodesia;
7. Calls upon all States, specialized agencies and
intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
to offer all possible assistance to the liberation movements of southern Africa that are recognized by the Organization of African Unity and the United Nations;
B. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in
collaboration with the Commission on Human Rights,
to examine the question of the consequences of the use
of the veto by the above-mentioned three permanent
members of the Security Council on the enjoyment of
human rights by the oppressed peoples of southern
Africa and to submit a report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-third session;
9. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
give the Special Rapporteur the assistance he needs to
complete his study;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to transmit the
preliminary report of the Special Rapporteur to the Special Committee against Apartheid and to the United
Nations Council for Namibia;
11. Decides to consider this item at its thirty-third
session as a matter of priority in the light of any recommendation by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, the Commission on Human Rights and the Economic and Social
Council, as well as by the Special Committee against
Apartheid and the United Nations Council for Namibia.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/34.

Importance of the universal realization
of the right of peoples to self-determination and of the speedy granting of independence to colonial countries and peo•
pies for the effective guarantee and
observance of human rights

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2649 (XXV) of 30 November 1970, 2955 (XXVII) of 12 December 1972,
3070 (XXVIII) of 30 November 1973, 3246 (XXIX)
of 29 November 1974 and 3382 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Recalling also its resolutions 2465 (XXIII) of 20 December 1968, 2548 (XXIV) of 11 December 1969,
2708 (XXV) of 14 December 1970, 3103 (XXVIII)
of 12 December 1973 and 3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 on the use and recruitment of mercenaries
against national liberation movements and sovereign
States,
Reaffirming its faith in General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,

93

Reaffirming the importance of the universal realization of the right of peoples to self-determination, national sovereignty and territorial integrity and of the
speedy granting of independence to colonial countries
and peoples as imperatives for the enjoyment of human
rights,
Affirming that bantustanization is incompatible with
genuine independence, unity and national sovereignty
and would have the effect of perpetuating the power
of the white minority and the racist system of apartheid in South Africa,
Reaffirming the obligation of all Member States to
comply with the principles of the Charter and the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise
of the right to self-determination by peoples under colonial and alien domination,
Welcoming the independence of Seychelles,
Reiterating the need to respect the independence and
to maintain the territorial integrity of the Comoros,
Indignant at the continued violations of the human
rights of the peoples still under colonial and foreign
domination and alien subjugation, the continuation of
the illegal occupation of Namibia and the perpetuation
of the racist minority regimes in Zimbabwe and South
Africa,
1. Reaffirms the legitimacy of the peoples' stru~le
for independence, territorial integrity, national umty
and liberation from colonial and foreign domination
and alien subjugation by all available means, including
armed struggle;
2. Calls upon all States to implement fully and
faithfully the resolutions of the United Nations regarding the exercise of the right to self-determination by
peoples under colonial and alien domination;
3. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the peoples of
Namibia and Zimbabwe, of the Palestinian people and
of all peoples under alien and colonial domination to
self-determination, independence and sovereignty without external interference;
4. Condemns the policy of bantustanization and
reiterates its support for the oppressed people of South
Africa in their just and legitimate struggle against the
racist minority regime in Pretoria;
5. Condemns any interference in the internal affairs
of the Comoros and demands the immediate withdrawal
of the French Administration from the Comorian island
of Mayotte;
6. Reiterates that the practice of using mercenaries
against movements for national liberation and independence constitutes a criminal act and that the mercenaries themselves are criminals, and calls upon the
Governments of all countries to enact legislation declaring the recruitment, financing and training of mercenaries in their territory and the transit of mercenaries
through their territory to be punishable offences and
prohibiting their nationals from serving as mercenaries;
7. Condemns the policies of those members of the
North Atlantic Treaty Organization and of other countries whose political, economic, military or sporting
relations with the racist regimes in southern Africa
and elsewhere encourage these regimes to persist in
their suppression of the aspirations of peoples for selfdetermination and independence;
8. Strongly condemns all Governments which do
not recognize the right to self-determination and in-

94

General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

dependence of all peoples still under colonial and foreign domination and alien subjugation, notably the
peoples of Africa and the Palestinian people;
9. Strongly condemns the massacres of innocent
and defenceless people, including women and children,
by the racist minority regimes of southern Africa in
their desperate attempt to thwart the legitimate demands
of the people;
10. Demands full respect for the basic human rights
of all individuals detained or imprisoned as a result
of their struggle for self-determination and independence, and strict respect for article 5 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights under which no one shall
be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, 4 and their immediate release;
11. Notes with appreciation the material and other
forms of assistance that peoples under colonial and alien
regimes continue to receive from Governments, United
Nations agencies and intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and calls for a maximization
of this assistance;
12. Keenly awaits the conclusion of the following
studies by the Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities:
(a) Historical and current development of the right
to self-determination on the basis of the Charter of the
United Nations and other instruments adopted by
United Nations organs, with particular reference to the
promotion and protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms;
(b) Implementation of United Nations resolutions
relating to the right of peoples under colonial and alien
domination to self-determination;
13. Decides to remain seized of this item at its
thirty-second session on the basis of reports that Governments, United Nations agencies and intergovernmental
and non-governmental organizations are requested to
submit concerning the strengthening of assistance to
colonial Territories and peoples under alien domination
and foreign subjugation.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/35.

Report of the United Nations High Com•
missioner for Refugees

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, 5 transmitted by the
Economic and Social Council under its resolution 2011
(LXI) of 2 August 1976, and having heard his statement,6
Recalling its resolutions 3454 (XXX) and 3455
(XXX) of 9 December 1975 relating to the activities
of the High Commissioner for the benefit of refugees
and displaced persons,
Recognizing the importance of the essential humanitarian tasks which the High Commissioner is called
4 Resolution 217 A (III).
5 Official Records of the General Assembly,

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12 (A/31/12), Supplement No. 12A
(A/31/12/A?d.1) and Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/Add.2).
6
lbtd., Th1rty-fir~t. Sessio1;, Third C?mmittee,. 49th meeting,
paras. 1-12; and 1b1d., Third Committee, Sesswnal Fascicle
corrigendum.
'

upon to perform and for which his Office has acquired
particular expertise and experience,
Bearing in mind the increasingly useful co-operation
between the High Commissioner and other members of
the United Nations system, resulting in better co-ordination of action and greater efficiency,
Recognizing the need for further strengthening the
international protection of refugees,
l. Endorses Economic and Social Council resolution 2011 (LXI) on the report of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees;
2. Commends the High Commissioner and his staff
for the efficient manner in which they continue to discharge their manifold activities on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons;
3. Requests the High Commissioner to intensify
his efforts, in co-operation with Governments, United
Nations bodies and voluntary agencies, to promote permanent and speedy solutions to the problems facing his
Office through voluntary repatriation and assistance in
rehabilitation of returnees, integration in countries of
asylum or resettlement in other countries as needed;
4. Further requests the High Commissioner to continue his humanitarian assistance on behalf of refugees
and displaced persons in Africa and urges the fullest
co-operation of all concerned for this purpose;
5. Urges Governments to strengthen further their
support for the humanitarian activities which the High
Commissioner is carrying out in accordance with pertinent resolutions of the General Assembly and the
Economic and Social Council by:
(a) Facilitating his efforts in the field of international protection by means of accession to international instruments relating to refugees and respect for
the rights of refugees;
(b) Co-operating in the promotion of permanent
and speedy solutions to the problems faced by his
Office;
( c) Providing the necessary financial means to attain the objectives of his humanitarian assistance programmes.
83rd plenary meeting
30 November 1976
31/36.

Question of the establishment, in accordance with the Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness, of a body to which
persons claiming the benefit of the Convention may apply

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3274 (XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Having considered the report of the United Nations
High CoI?mission~r for Refugees: on the question of
the establishment, m accordance with the Convention on
the Reduction of Statelessness of 1961, 8 of a body to
which persons claiming the benefit of the Convention
may apply,
Noting_ that th~ High Commissioner is carrying out
the fu1;1ct1?ns r_equ_rred under the Convention without any
financial 1mphcat10ns for the United Nations
7 Ibid.,

'

Thirty-first Session, Supplement No. 12B (A/31/12/

Add.2).
s A/CONF.9/15, 1961.
