S/PV.8132

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8132nd meeting

Tuesday, 12 December 2017, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kawamura. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Li Yongsheng
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Zagaynov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mrs. Dickson
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-43743 (E)
*1743743*

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 11.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of the Sudan to participate in
this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Prosecutor Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Allow me at the outset to
congratulate Japan on assuming the presidency of this
organ for the month of December, and to acknowledge
publicly the notable support your country, Sir, has
provided to my Office, and the International Criminal
Court (ICC) more generally, as an active and committed
State party.
Today, I provide the Council with my twenty-sixth
report on the situation in Darfur pursuant to resolution
1593 (2005). In the Darfur situation, effecting warrants
of arrest remains a difficult challenge and a crucial area
where greater collaboration is sorely needed. The entire
judicial machinery of the Court can be frustrated and
held in abeyance unless persons sought by the ICC appear
before it. Similarly, States party reception of suspects
the Court seeks to arrest cannot become business
as usual, not least out of respect for the suffering of
victims and their yearning for accountability, and in the
interest of greater enforcement of international justice.
I regret to note that over the years my reports have
highlighted the consistent failure of the Council to act
when a number of States parties to the Rome Statute
have welcomed Mr. Omar Al-Bashir as an ICC suspect
to their territories. These States parties have failed to
comply with the Court’s requests for his arrest and
surrender, despite a clear treaty obligation to do so. In
most cases, a lack of legal clarity has been claimed to
justify the failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir.
2/19

12/12/2017

As the Court’s legal jurisprudence, including recent
judicial pronouncements, have reaffirmed, there is no
legal lacuna or ambiguity concerning States parties’
obligation to arrest and surrender ICC suspects to the
Court’s custody when they travel to their territories.
My Office has been of the firm and consistent view
that such failures to apprehend Mr. Al-Bashir are
not only a flagrant violation of the Rome Statute but
equally undermine the Council’s own reputation and
are an affront to the respect owed to its resolutions. I
have thus repeatedly urged the Council to employ its
powers as a tangible demonstration of its disapproval
of such failures.
For those who may have entertained doubts about
the legal obligations of States parties and the Republic
of the Sudan to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir,
all such doubts have since been dispelled following
the decision of Pre-Trial Chamber II of 6 July. That
decision, it is recalled, related to South Africa’s failure
to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the ICC in June
2015. The Chamber found that South Africa failed to
comply with the Court’s request to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir, contrary to the Rome Statute, and that
this failure prevented the Court from exercising its
functions and powers under the Statute. That important
decision by the Chamber, which was not appealed by
either party, establishes that there is no legal or factual
justification for South Africa’s failure to comply with
its obligations under the Statute to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court.
The Chamber, through that decision, has sent a
clear message that, in such circumstances, there can
be no justification for States parties to fail to arrest
a suspect against whom an ICC warrant of arrest has
been issued, irrespective of that person’s official status.
It is my Office’s hope that this message will be heeded
and, furthermore, that the Council will do its part to
enforce decisions by the Court in relation to situations
that the Council itself has referred to the Court. This
specific inter-institutional role is clearly envisaged by
the Rome Statute and codified, as negotiated during the
Rome Conference, which also saw the participation of
permanent members of the Council.
Ultimately, despite its finding of non-compliance,
the Chamber chose not to refer South Africa to either
the Assembly of States Parties or the Council. The
Chamber’s decision in that regard was informed by a
number of factors, in particular that South Africa was
the first State party to utilize article 97 of the Statute to
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

consult with the Court in relation to a request for arrest
and surrender. In addition, the Chamber took note of
the robust domestic proceedings which concluded that
South Africa acted contrary to its obligations under the
Statute by not arresting and surrendering Mr. Al-Bashir
to the Court. As a further factor in its decision not to
refer South Africa, the Chamber noted that States parties
have been referred to both the Assembly of States Parties
and the Council in six instances in relation to failures
to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir. Additionally, the
Chamber noted that despite 24 meetings of the Council,
including my biannual reports, the Council has taken no
action against States parties that have failed to comply
with their obligations to cooperate with the Court.
That, the Chamber observed, is despite proposals from
different States, including Council members, stressing
the need to develop a follow-up mechanism concerning
the referral of States by the Court to the Council.
These developments once again cast the spotlight on
the repeated inaction of the Council in response to any
of the Court’s referrals of those States parties, as well
as the Sudan, that have failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while in their territory. That
is a matter of grave concern, in particular for the victims
of the crimes allegedly committed by Mr. Al-Bashir
and the four other suspects in the Darfur situation.
Furthermore, this costly inaction has the potential to
undermine the fight against impunity, the effect of
which is to lower the bar of accountability that many
have fought to raise. This continuous nonfeasance only
serves to embolden others to invite Mr. Al-Bashir to
their territory, safe in the knowledge that there will be
no consequences from the Council for such breaches.
Continuing on the issue of non-cooperation, just
yesterday, Pre-Trial Chamber II of the Court found that
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan failed to comply with
its obligations under the Statute by not executing the
Court’s request to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
to the Court when he was in Jordanian territory in late
March. The Chamber found, by majority, that because
the rights and obligations provided for in the Statute are
applicable to the Sudan, the immunities of Mr. Al-Bashir
as Head of State under customary international law do
not bar States parties from executing a request for his
arrest and surrender. The Chamber decided that Jordan’s
non-compliance should be referred to the Assembly of
States Parties and the Council. The Chamber noted, in
particular, that at the time of Mr. Al-Bashir’s presence in
Jordan in March, the Chamber had already expressed in

S/PV. 8132

unequivocal terms that South Africa, also a State party,
had in similar circumstances, the obligation to arrest
and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir and that consultations
pursuant to article 97 of the Statute did not suspend
this obligation.
In short, since my last report to the Council (see
S/PV.7963), Mr. Al-Bashir has travelled to a number
of countries, some of which are States parties and all
of which are members of the United Nations. In that
regard, in relation to other States parties, most recently,
the Republic of Uganda, despite having been referred
to the Council in July 2016 for its failure to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while he was in
Ugandan territory in May 2016, once again invited and
hosted Mr. Al-Bashir during the week of 13 November.
As per protocol, in advance of the visit, the Registry
once again reminded Uganda of its obligation under the
Rome Statute to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to
the Court. To date, there has been no response from
Uganda. It is my understanding that due to the efforts
of civil society, in particular the Uganda Victims’
Foundation, an application was filed at the International
Crimes Division of the High Court of Uganda
requesting, among other things, a warrant of arrest
to be issued and executed against Mr. Al-Bashir. The
Ugandan court declined to issue that warrant of arrest,
in part, according to reports, due to the fact that Uganda
is currently awaiting sanctions from the Council for its
previous failure to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir
on his visit in May 2016. That latest development
emphasizes the importance and consequences of the
Council’s inaction on non-compliance referrals by
Pre-Trial Chambers of the ICC in respect of Uganda
and other States that failed to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir.
Like Uganda, the Republic of Chad was previously
been referred to the Council for its failure to arrest and
surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the ICC while he was on
Chadian territory. The two prior referrals are dated
13 December 2011 and 26 March 2013. It is with regret
that I note that public records show that Chad again
hosted Mr. Al-Bashir on an official visit during the first
week of December.
In relation to Mr. Al-Bashir’s travel to non-States
parties, I note his official travel to the Russian
Federation, which is a permanent member of the
Council, during the week of 20 November.

17-437433/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Taken altogether, those events underscore the
detrimental impact on the Court’s reputation and
credibility in the eyes of victims, who have pinned
so much hope in the Court to deliver justice for their
suffering. I once again urge the Council to act on the
sensible, moderate and entirely actionable proposal
placed before it by New Zealand and other States.
Concerted and uniform efforts should be made to
discuss the Court’s referrals of non-compliance by
States parties to the Council, with the aim of exploring
the options available to compel the States concerned
to comply with their statutory obligations. That will
encourage States to render cooperation to the Court
for the arrest and surrender of the Darfur suspects and
dissuade other States from breaching the cooperation
provisions of the Rome Statute.
I welcome the declarations made on behalf of the
European Union (EU) in relation to Mr. Al-Bashir’s
recent visits to Uganda and Russia. In particular, I
welcome the call of the European Union to all States
Members of the United Nations to abide by and
implement the resolutions adopted by the Council
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations,
notably resolution 1593 (2005). In relation to Uganda,
the EU also urged it to honour its obligations as a
State party to the ICC. I note with appreciation the
expressions of support for the ICC that were provided
in those declarations.
While cooperation has been a significant challenge
in the Darfur situation, I also acknowledge with
gratitude the support and cooperation that my Office
has received, and continues to receive, from other States
parties. That support has been crucial in obtaining
additional information and evidence. Without such
cooperation, the effective discharge of the Court’s
mandate can be undermined.
I also note that the Sudan continues to adopt an
antagonistic posture towards the ICC and refuses to
cooperate with the Court. I invite the Sudan to rethink
that position. My Office stands ready to constructively
engage the Sudan on the issue of surrendering any or all
of the Darfur suspects to the Court.
As in the past, I again take this opportunity to
recall that Mr. Al-Bashir and the other suspects in the
Darfur situation are alleged to have committed serious
crimes under the Rome Statute against the people of
Darfur, including murder, torture and persecution. My
Office will continue to independently and impartially
4/19

12/12/2017

investigate those allegations. Let me once again stress
that Mr. Al-Bashir and all other suspects from the
situation in Darfur are presumed innocent until they
are proven guilty, and the burden of proving their guilt
rests with my Office.
Allow me to also recall that the Council recently
adopted resolution 2363 (2017), which extended the
mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. In that resolution, the Council
called on all parties to comply with their obligations
under international humanitarian law, while stressing
the importance that the Council attaches to ending
impunity, including by ensuring accountability and
bringing to justice the perpetrators of crimes, including
sexual and gender-based violence, that were allegedly
committed by all parties in Darfur. The work of the ICC
is essential for fighting impunity for the world’s most
serious and destabilizing crimes, as well as for ensuring
accountability in Darfur. To that end, I respectfully
submit that the Court ought to be actively supported
by the Council and by the international community as
a whole.
Notwithstanding the decrease in the scale of
violence in Darfur, my Office continues to receive
reports of unlawful killing of civilians, as well as of
the continuing forced displacement of approximately
40,000 people due to the conflict. Moreover, while
there has also been a decrease in reports of sexual
and gender-based crimes, my Office notes with great
concern that those crimes are reportedly continuing,
particularly against young girls. Those crimes cannot
be left unaddressed.
Finally, I stress that the annual operating budget
of my Office is increasingly insufficient to support our
ever-growing workload. I again urge the Council and
the United Nations to make suitable arrangements to
provide financial support towards my Office’s ongoing
investigative activities in Darfur, as envisaged by the
Rome Statute.
To conclude, I thank you, Mr President, as well
as the Council and all those who are following the
proceedings before the Council, within the Chamber
or through video-link, for their concern and attention
to the important issues that are the focus of today’s
discussions. In sum, concrete follow-up action by the
Council on matters relating to outstanding ICC arrest
warrants will demonstrate the commitment of the
Council, as a pillar of the United Nations system, to
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

peace and security in Darfur through the vector of
international criminal justice. Accountability for crimes
under the Rome Statute is a necessary complement to
sustainable peace and stability in Darfur. As such, I call
on the Council to prioritize action on the outstanding
warrants of arrest that have been issued by the Court.
To the victims of Rome Statute crimes allegedly
committed in Darfur, I pledge to them that my Office and
I will continue our efforts to bring those responsible for
such crimes to justice. Notwithstanding the challenges
that we face, our resolve is unshakable. I hope that
there will be solace in knowing that, as the history of
international criminal justice has often demonstrated in
practice, time is not on the side of perpetrators. Rather,
it is on the side of the victims and the cause of justice.
The President: I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for
her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Security Council.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would like to
thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-sixth report on the
situation in Darfur, for the unwavering commitment
that she and her staff have shown for the investigation
and for her briefing to the Security Council today.
The International Criminal Court (ICC) has an
important role to play in global efforts to end impunity
for the most serious crimes of international concern.
The United Kingdom fully supports its efforts to hold
perpetrators to account and achieve justice for victims.
The United Kingdom welcomes the reduction of
armed conflict between Government forces and the
armed opposition, as well as the extension of unilateral
cessations of hostilities by both sides to the conflict.
We are also encouraged by the improvements in
humanitarian access and the operational environment.
While the situation in Darfur is beginning to show signs
for cautious optimism, the international community
would be remiss to accept the narrative that the situation
has normalized. As noted in the Prosecutor’s report, the
security and human rights situation remains volatile
and unpredictable, particularly for Darfur’s 2.1 million
internally displaced persons. Also of particular concern
is the continued use of sexual violence in conflict,
although it is noted that reported incident purportedly
declined during this reporting period.
It has been said many times before in this Chamber
that lasting peace in Darfur can be realized only

S/PV. 8132

with the agreement of a permanent ceasefire and an
inclusive political settlement that addresses the root
causes of conflict. Disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration (DDR) will be vital in this regard. We note
the Government’s ongoing disarmament campaign but
are concerned by tensions and armed confrontations that
have emerged as a result and that threaten to undermine
the recent improvements in the security situation.
We therefore urge the Government of the Sudan to
pursue balanced DDR and security sector reform
with full respect for human rights and international
humanitarian law and in close cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
With regard to the currently stalled peace process,
we urge all parties to capitalize on the recent security
and humanitarian improvements by refocusing their
efforts on implementing the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel road map.
The United Kingdom welcomes the progress that
UNAMID has made in completing the first phase of
its reconfiguration and the Government of the Sudan’s
improved cooperation with the Mission. However, it
is regrettable that the Government of the Sudan has
yet formally to agree to the opening of a temporary
UNAMID base in Golo, Jebel Marra. Such a base would
be vital to ensuring that a smaller UNAMID is able
to focus its efforts on the Jebel Marra area, including
supporting the provision of humanitarian assistance in
that high-need area. We therefore urge the Government
of the Sudan to agree formally to the opening of the
base without further delay.
As UNAMID reconfiguration continues, it is
crucial that the Mission and the Security Council
closely monitor the impact of the reconfiguration on
the situation on the ground, as well as the cooperation
afforded to the Mission by the Government of the Sudan.
The United Kingdom therefore requests other Council
members to engage constructively in the upcoming
assessment of phase 1 of the reconfiguration and
consider carefully whether phase 2 remains appropriate.
In adopting resolution 1593 (2005), the Security
Council committed to supporting the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to investigate the situation in
Darfur. In the 26 reports that have followed since, the
Prosecutor has consistently reminded us of the need for
State cooperation and the Council’s support in order
to make progress in the investigation. In that regard,

17-437435/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

12/12/2017

we must do better. We encourage our fellow Council
members to consider carefully what more we as a Council
can do to ensure that the Court receives the necessary
support. The United Kingdom will continue to call on
the Government of the Sudan to meet its obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) and to cooperate fully
with the Court to execute outstanding arrest warrants
and to fulfil its international obligations.

Al-Bashir of the Sudan and urged the Security Council to
withdraw its referral of the case concerning the matter.
We have always thought, together with African Union,
that the case is so weak that its continuation makes no
sense at all. No more evidence is required to validate
this point of view than the report of the Prosecutor.
The spectrum of countries in non-compliance is a call
for change.

The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated that
fugitives of Court, including Mr. Al-Bashir, Mr. Harun
and Mr. Hussein, are still traveling to certain countries
unhindered. We note the Chamber’s finding on 6 July
that, vis-à-vis the Court, the Sudan cannot claim the
immunity of Mr. Al-Bashir as Head of State in the
context of a request to arrest and surrender him to the
Court. For our part, the United Kingdom will continue
to raise our concerns with the relevant Governments,
including through the European Union, as noted in the
Prosecutor’s report.

As ever more information emerges and the fog
enveloping the issue lifts, the case is losing any leg it
may have had to stand on. Frankly, it is almost becoming
an embarrassment, with the ICC, under what seems like
marching orders from the Security Council, chasing an
African Head of State in what appears to many to be
a charade or the fight against impunity gone haywire.
This will only damage the credibility of the Council,
since what to many looks like a lack of seriousness
concerning the matter is inconsistent with the immense
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security incumbent on the Council. This is
becoming even more manifest as recent events have
accentuated the need for the Council to seriously
reexamine its position on the matter.

We renew our call on all States parties to cooperate
with the Court and abide by their obligations under the
Rome Statute. We also urge them to consult the Court
if they feel that they are unable to cooperate with it for
any reason.
We welcome and express our gratitude for the
continued efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor to
achieve justice for victims in Darfur despite the fragile
security situation, access restrictions and lack of
cooperation. The United Kingdom also appreciated the
efforts to the Prosecutor’s Office has put into making
the most effective and efficient use of the resources that
has available while recognizing the lack of resources
does impact on these investigations.
Finally, I should like to take this opportunity
to reaffirm the United Kingdom’s commitment to
supporting the Court, both as a State party to the Rome
Statute and as a member of the Security Council. We
thank the Prosecutor again for her report.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her briefing and for the efforts she has
made under difficult circumstances. Notwithstanding
the following remarks, we maintain very high respect
for her.
Ethiopia’s position on the issue of the Sudan in
the International Criminal Court (ICC) reflects that
of the African Union, which has repeatedly called for
the suspension of proceedings against President Omar
6/19

The fact that the Sudan has been playing a
constructive role in fighting terrorism, combating
human trafficking and illegal migration, and dealing
with other regional peace and security issues is now
widely recognized. It has enhanced its bilateral and
multilateral cooperation and engagement on all these
issues, with enormous positive implications for the
respect of human rights and for peace and security,
which we believe are intertwined with development.
The lifting of the bilateral economic sanctions imposed
on the Sudan by the United States for the past two
decades is a major positive development resulting from
the Sudan’s enhanced International engagement.
Fairly or not, the Security Council is often
criticized for underperformance. On this matter, it has
been hyperactive, at the cost of its credibility.
President Omar Hassan Al-Bashir has demonstrated
the necessary political leadership and commitment
to resolve the Darfur issue as well as in addressing
outstanding issues with South Sudan. As we have said
for some time and as acknowledged by various reports
of the Secretary-General, the situation in Darfur
continues to show marked progress. The hostilities
between the Government of the Sudan and rebel forces
have decreased substantially and the security situation
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

on the ground has improved significantly. The Darfur
peace process, led by the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel and supported by African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, has
also achieved some progress, despite the fact that the
lack of constructive engagement by the leaders of the
remaining armed movements has been a major obstacle.
Of course, we also recognize that a lot remains to be
done in addressing the root causes of conflict in Darfur
and ensuring long-term stability. It is for this reason
that we call on the Government to redouble its efforts
to implement all remaining tasks. The international
community should also live up to its commitments;
the Council in particular should exert pressure on the
armed movements to negotiate seriously in order to end
the suffering of the people of Darfur.
As I conclude, I must stress that, in light of the
positive developments I have highlighted and the
constructive role of the Sudanese Government on a range
of issues, it is only appropriate that the international
community changed its approach in dealing with the
Sudan. That is why we welcomed the lifting of the
unilateral sanctions imposed by the United States
against the Sudan. It is also high time that the Council
began to seriously consider the issue of the Sudan and
the ICC. It is in the interest of the Council to do so, as
the status quo does not serve to enhance its credibility.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her detailed
briefing to the Council, and reiterate France’s full
support and trust in the fulfilment of her mandate.
On 31 March 2005, the Council adopted resolution
1593 (2005). This decision had three clear goals: first,
to promote the fight against impunity; secondly, to
prevent new atrocities in Darfur; and thirdly, to foster
reconciliation and stability in the Sudan. More than 12
years later, unfortunately, we note yet again that these
goals have not been achieved and that impunity prevails.
Only prosecutions will put an end to this situation,
and it is only with the cooperation of States that it
will be possible to successfully conduct such judicial
procedures. That is why France calls on all States
concerned — and, of course, the Sudan — to implement
the arrest warrants issued by the International Criminal
Court (ICC) and to respect the remainder of their
obligations under resolution 1593 (2005).

S/PV. 8132

It is the Council’s responsibility to act resolutely in
the fight against impunity, which is critical to helping
end the instability that continues to blight Darfur,
where civilians are the primary victims. It is true that
the recent reports of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Darfur have reflected certain encouraging
developments on the ground, particularly a lessening
of confrontations between the Government and rebel
forces in Darfur, as well as an overall reduction in the
level of violence. However, intercommunity conflict
remains one of the main sources of violence in Darfur.
The activities of militia continue to threaten civilian
populations and many of the displaced are still too
afraid to return home or even simply to venture outside
the camps. The proliferation of weapons continues to
contribute to such activities and sexual exploitation and
grave human rights violations persist.
In light of the situation outlined by the Prosecutor,
the protection of civilians can be assured only if
these encouraging developments are consolidated,
entrenched and maintained over time. To that end, it is
essential that the Sudanese authorities allow the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) to fulfil its mandate in accordance with the
decisions of the Council and of the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union. That would require,
inter alia, facilitating access to all areas mandated for
UNAMID intervention. It also requires facilitating
the implementation of the Mission’s reconfiguration
pursuant to resolution 2363 (2017), particularly through
the establishment of the base in Golo.
Let us not forget that today 2.1 million of Darfur’s
inhabitants are still displaced — almost a third of the
region’s population. Encouraging their return requires
us to put an end to all forms of violence and to address
the deep-rooted causes of the conflict. In order to
break the spiral of violence, those responsible must be
held to account. That is why now, as in the past, we
must not allow our attention to this issue to wander.
The perpetrators of the crimes must be prosecuted and
brought to justice. We owe that to the victims. This also
serves as an imperative for the future.
France once again recalls the importance of the
obligation to cooperate with the Court in accordance
with resolutions adopted by the Council. That applies
not only to the implementation of the arrest warrant
issued against Mr. Al-Bashir but also with regard to
the other four suspects identified by the Court. France
refuses to allow this refusal of States Members of

17-437437/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the United Nations to cooperate to become the norm,
especially if they are States parties.
Of course, this obligation falls primarily upon
the Sudan, which must implement the arrest warrants
against its nationals for crimes committed on its its
territory and cooperate with the Court, pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). States parties to the Rome
Statute have a special role to play with regard to their
statutory obligation to cooperate with the Court and
to implement arrest warrants when suspects are found
within State territory. In this connection, France regrets
that this has not been the case, particularly with regard
to Mr. Al-Bashir.
The Council’s responsibility is clearer than ever.
We must respond to the legitimate demands of the Court
so that it can fully accomplish its mandate. We must
make cooperation with the ICC effective and ensure
that arrest warrants are implemented. The same goes
for the Council’s implementation of its own resolutions,
especially resolution 1593 (2005). In that regard,
France remains determined to consider the Council’s
modalities of action based on the proposals made by the
New Zealand delegation in December 2016.
In that spirit, France reiterates its proposal that
States deemed by the Court to have breached their
obligation to cooperate be invited to address the
Council and that, on the basis of such an exchange, the
Council then determine the next steps to be taken.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I would like to
join others in welcoming Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda
back to the Security Council. I thank her for her
comprehensive briefing and report, as well as for her
Office’s continued work in the fight against impunity.
Let me once again reiterate our strong support for the
efforts of the Office of the Prosecutor, whose call for
the full backing of the Security Council and all Member
States must be heeded.
The challenges that the Office of the Prosecutor
faces in relation to the Darfur situation and the support
needed to overcome them are known to all of us. It is
time for action to resolve them. Ultimately, it is the
survivors and victims in Darfur who pay the highest
price when justice and accountability are not ensured.
It is vital that the Security Council follow through on
its decisions so that neither the Council’s authority nor
the functioning of the Court is undermined. We share
the Prosecutor’s view that the success of the referral
of the Darfur situation to the Office of the Prosecutor
8/19

12/12/2017

continues to depend heavily upon the cooperation of
States, in particular States parties to the Rome Statute
and members of the Council.
Sweden is yet again disappointed that there
have been few developments since the last briefing
(S/PV.7963) that would allow the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to pursue its investigations further. All
suspects remain at large. We reiterate our call on the
Government of the Sudan to cooperate fully with the
ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005), and to
fulfil its obligations to arrest and surrender individuals
subject to arrest warrants. Further steps are also needed
on the part of the Government of the Sudan to ensure
justice for the women, men and children who suffered
horrendous crimes during the conflict in Darfur.
It is a matter of concern that President Al-Bashir
has been able to continue to travel internationally,
including to States parties to the Rome Statute. We
are also deeply concerned about the ability of other
suspects in the Darfur situation, including Mr. Hussein
and Mr. Harun, to travel. We echo the declaration
issued on 14 November by the European Union and
its member States, which expressed regret regarding
President Al-Bashir’s recent visit to Uganda, a State
party to the Rome Statute. We also note yesterday’s
finding of the Pre-Trial Chamber of the Court regarding
Jordan. We urge States parties and other Member States
to cooperate fully with the Court and to arrest and
surrender suspects. As stipulated in the Rome Statute
and, as the Court has concluded, the official capacity
of a person shall not bar the Court from exercising its
jurisdiction over such a person.
Like others, we continue to raise the issue of
non-cooperation with the relevant Governments. In
order for the ICC to fulfil its important mandate, and
without its own enforcement mechanism, the Court
relies on the cooperation of States, including for the
implementation of arrest warrants. As we said when we
last met on this item, the Council should approach cases
of non-cooperation in a structured manner and — as a
minimum — discuss which tools it has, if any, for an
appropriate response.
Sweden recognizes the ongoing debate on the ICC
among African countries. The ICC was not set up to
be a court for Africa. The Rome Statute for the ICC
is based upon global values and needs more States
parties, not fewer. We stand ready to listen to the
concerns of States parties and discuss the challenges
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

experienced in their relations with the ICC. In that
regard, as the Prosecutor has said, we urge any State
party that identifies a challenge precluding it from fully
cooperating with the ICC under the Statute to consult
with the Court in a timely manner so as to resolve
the matter. We also believe that the Council should
stand ready to meet with the Open-ended Ministerial
Committee of Ministers for Foreign Affairs on the ICC,
established by the African Union.
We note in the report that the number of reported
cases of rape in Darfur has declined, but the issue of
sexual and gender-based violence remains a serious
problem. A holistic approach for sustaining peace and
addressing the root causes of instability, including
building effective rule-of-law institutions, is essential
as we address remaining challenges. Impunity and the
lack of accountability for violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of
international human rights law can never be accepted.
We must give the Court all our support as it carries out
its important work.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the convening of
this briefing by the Japanese presidency, and thanks
Ms. Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, for very clearly presenting her report on the state
of the investigations and proceedings of her Office with
regard to the Darfur issue, pursuant to resolution 1593
(2005). Senegal once again pledges its full support for
Ms. Bensouda.
Committed to respect for the universality of human
rights and the fight against impunity for serious crimes
committed against victims throughout the world, in
particular in Africa, and aware of the role played by
the International Criminal Court in that fight, Senegal
continues to follow closely the work of the Court
with regard to allegations of human rights violations,
including sexual and gender-based violence committed
in conflict zones in the Sudan, especially in Darfur.
No peace can be built on the vestiges of impunity or
failure to hold perpetrators responsible. Accountability
should never be ignored as the thirst for justice for
victims demands unfailing commitment on the part
of every one of us. Accordingly, we encourage the
Sudanese Government to provide a rapid response to
allegations of human rights violations and ensure that
those responsible for alleged crimes are held accountable
for their actions. Subscribing to the principles of

S/PV. 8132

accountability and justice, my country — like the
African Union, which calls for re-establishing peace
and justice in Darfur — continues to believe that
dialogue and reconciliation are essential steps towards
bringing about comprehensive and definitive peace and
finding a lasting solution to the acute issue of refugees
and displaced persons in that area of Sudan.
Approximately one-third of Darfur’s population
are refugees. Senegal therefore once again calls on the
international community to support the peace initiative
under way, in particular the Doha peace process, whose
implementation remains slow. It is also important to
support the activities of the African Union High-level
Implementation Panel, which continues its tireless work
to restore peace in Darfur. Moreover, my delegation
welcomes the outstanding work being carried out not
only by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and its staff, as well
as the country team, but also partnering humanitarian
entities working towards achieving peace in Darfur.
We stress the need to strengthen the effectiveness
of UNAMID in its support for peacebuilding
and stabilization.
With regard to the crucial role played by the Court,
it is regrettable that the work of the Office of the
Prosecutor continues to be constrained by an extremely
limited budget, thereby limiting its investigative and
prosecutorial activities. The Prosecutor must have the
necessary means at her disposal to be able to fulfil her
mandate, which, we recall, includes providing justice
to victims of serious crimes throughout the world,
including in Darfur. The Assembly of States Parties to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court,
of which we are a member, must continue to consider
ways and means to provide the Office of the Prosecutor
the financial support that it requires.
In the Senegalese delegation’s view, equally
regrettable is the passivity of the Security Council
in addressing the repeated calls of the Office of the
Prosecutor, as it has been 13 years since the Office began
providing biannual reports to Council — amounting to
26 reports as of today. However, thus far the Council has
not provided it with a single strategic recommendation.
Fortunately, the Office of the Prosecutor benefits from
the cooperation and support of a number of States and
organizations, but we encourage all interested parties to
demonstrate the same spirit of openness by cooperating
fully with the Office in the purview of its activities.

17-437439/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I reiterate that, firmly committed as it is to the
principles of accountability and justice, my country
continues to believe that establishing the security and
political conditions conducive to dialogue will allow all
stakeholders to find a solution that meets requirements
to bring about peace and justice for Darfur. Achieving
lasting peace in that destabilized part of the Sudan,
which is a large country, most certainly involves a
challenging but necessary endeavour.
In conclusion, in Senegal’s view, the compromise
proposal introduced by New Zealand — given the
reduction in the level of violence observed in Darfur,
as well as the lifting of certain unilateral sanctions
imposed on the Sudan — provides the Security Council
with an opportunity to improve the situation that
prevailed when we adopted resolution 1593 (2005) 12
years ago.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): Our delegation thanks
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
Ms. Bensouda, for her briefing.
We took note of the twenty-sixth report of the
Office of the Prosecutor on the Court’s recent work
in implementing resolution 1593 (2005) on Darfur.
Kazakhstan is pleased with the continued progress
made with regard to the security and humanitarian
situation in the Darfur area. We welcome the efforts of
the Government of the Sudan to ensure humanitarian
access to all areas in Darfur, as well as its close
cooperation with the United Nations and the African
Union. The trend of decreasing incidents involving
intercommunal clashes is commendable, and the
Government of the Sudan should continue its work in
that area so as to further avoid all tensions. Khartoum’s
commitment to stability in Darfur has resulted in the
lifting of economic sanctions imposed by the United
States in 1997.
We encourage the Government of the Sudan to
make all necessary efforts to maintain that positive
momentum and to strengthen its cooperation with the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and the United Nations country
team so as to achieve peace and prosperity for the entire
Sudanese population. We also call on the Government
to ensure dignified and durable solutions for the more
than 2 million internally displaced persons in Darfur,
a number that has remained unchanged since the
previous report of the International Criminal Court (see
S/PV.7963).
10/19

12/12/2017

Kazakhstan is confident that inclusive dialogue,
in accordance with the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur, is the only way to establish peace and stability
in Darfur. We also commend the efforts of the African
Union High-level Implementation Panel and UNAMID
to accommodate non-signatories to the Doha Document
in the political process. At the same time, it is necessary
to respect the Government’s ownership of the political
process, as well as the sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan, which are all crucial elements for long-term
peace and reconciliation in Darfur. The international
community should therefore avoid any measures that
could affect the achievement of these objectives. We
should rather support the Sudan’s capacity to restore
and promote the rule of law, address impunity,
protect human rights and abide by the principles of
international law.
Finally, we underscore the significant role of the
African Union and other regional organizations, as well
as neighbouring countries, in resolving the crisis in
Darfur. We therefore recommend that the united position
of the African Union be taken into consideration and
that we work to lay the foundation for a stable Sudan.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have familiarized ourselves with the
twenty-sixth report of the Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) on the situation in Darfur and
would like to begin by addressing some of the facts and
figures in the report. In particular, it notes a continued
reduction in armed clashes between the Government of
the Sudan and rebel forces. In actual fact, it appears
that if there were any clashes at all, they took place only
at the very beginning of the reporting period, during
the first half of June. As the August report (S/2017/746)
of the Secretary-General on the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID)
underscores, they were residual. We therefore believe
that it might behoove the Prosecutor to reflect that
trend more accurately.
Regrettably, there is no mention in the report of the
measures taken by Khartoum to implement the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, to which there is still
no alternative, or of the beginning steps to implement
the decisions of the National Dialogue Conference
of October 2016. Another positive was the recent
extension by the Government and the movements that
are non-signatories to the Doha Document of their
obligations under the ceasefire.
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With regard to cooperation between Khartoum and
the international community, we should note the progress
in the Government’s efforts to solve the obstacles
that have been hindering UNAMID, including the
granting of visas and customs clearance for contingentowned equipment, while flight authorizations are now
also in good shape. The Sudanese forces have been
working constructively with the mission to protect its
equipment and personnel. There is also clear progress
in the provision of humanitarian access, where the
new directives and procedures for humanitarian
assistance and the transfer of humanitarian personnel
are proving effective. We welcome the measures taken
by the Government of the Sudan to facilitate access for
humanitarian assistance to South Sudan. The authors
of the report clearly thought these facts were not worth
mentioning, despite the fact that the report is stuffed
with selective references to resolution 2363 (2017), on
the extension of the UNAMID mandate.
I would now like to consider the Prosecutor’s
activities in the context of criminal justice procedure.
Going on the report, there have been no developments
in the Sudanese dossier for the past six months. As in
other cases, the Court has nothing to brag about as far as
making progress in the genuine fight against impunity
is concerned, an objective that our delegation shares,
needless to say. Instead of conducting an objective,
independent investigation of the crimes allegedly
committed by all parties to the conflict, the Prosecutor
continues to exaggerate the issue of immunity for senior
Sudanese officials. It would appear that the main aim is
to attempt to justify the absence of immunity for the
President of the Sudan. As the report emphasizes, the
States that he has visited, including those that are party
to the Rome Statute, have no intention of going along
with the ICC’s thinking and interpretation with regard
to questions of immunity. The African Union’s position
on the issue is also well known.
For our part, we reiterate that resolution 1593 (2005)
does not render invalid the norms of international law
on immunity for senior officials of States that are not
party to the Rome Statute. They still apply, and no
decisions by the ICC can change that. Any reference
in the Prosecutor’s report to the recent visit of the
President of the Sudan to our country is completely
inappropriate. The issue does not come within her
purview. We have no intention of accounting for our
bilateral contacts with the Government of the Sudan to
anyone, especially since resolution 1593 (2005) does

S/PV. 8132

not apply that obligation to States that are not party to
the Rome Statute, as is clearly reflected in its text.
In conclusion, I want to draw the Council’s
attention to the fact that the current report, like those
on the situation in Libya, once again brings up the issue
of the provision of resources to the ICC from the United
Nations budget and follow-up action by the Security
Council. Our position on those issues is well known
and we will not reiterate it. We hope that such passages
will stop migrating from one report of the International
Criminal Court to the next.
Mr. Cardi (Italy): First of all, I too would like to
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for the twenty-sixth
report on the International Criminal Court (ICC) on the
situation in Darfur, as well as for her briefing today.
Above all, I would like to acknowledge her tireless and
admirable efforts to maintain a focus on the situation
in Darfur and on other situations around the world. The
report shows not only that the Office of the Prosecutor
is continuing to work on the investigations and the
proceedings already under way but also that it has to
follow up on the continuing alarming reports indicating
that crimes continue to be committed in Darfur.
In that regard, the recent visit to the Sudan of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict from
26 to 29 November showed that intercommunal conflict,
human rights violations, including sexual and genderbased violence, impunity, a lack of accountability
and attacks on internally displaced persons in Darfur
still persist, despite some progress. Where the Court’s
investigation of this is concerned, the Council is still
faced with a situation of prolonged stalemate, which
is unsatisfactory and is intrinsically linked to the lack
of cooperation.
I would also like to recall here, in line with the
statements of the European Union, that cooperation
with the Court is a crucial element of resolution 1593
(2005). It is part and parcel of full implementation of the
resolution and is an obligation under the Rome Statute of
the International Criminal Court. Cooperation with the
Court is required in order for proceedings to take place.
Resolution 1593 (2005) clearly indicates the general
framework and some specific obligations. The ICC
Statute further complements the resolution. Inaction in
such a situation cannot be attributed to the Court. It
is up to States to do more, including collectively. Of
course, the Court remains a complementary mechanism.
However, there must be a stronger indication of
genuine willingness to engage in national prosecutions.

17-4374311/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The priorities for investigation and prosecution are,
naturally, up to the State in question, but, at the same
time, the entire international community is called to
action when such crimes are committed.
Since Italy is leaving the Council at the end of
this year, I would like to reaffirm the position that we
have outlined on previous occasions. We should do
more work, and on more robust processes, to address
and discuss the issues underpinning this and other
situations where accountability is at stake. Clearly,
the Council can ultimately decide not to decide. The
absence of action by the Security Council is also a
form of decision. However, we think that is detrimental
to the Council’s authority, and it does not make us
particularly proud. But it is the result of the procedures
envisaged in the Charter of the United Nations.
However, we also believe that the Council should
adopt a structured mechanism that would enable more
in-depth discussions prior to reaching any conclusion,
including the conclusion that the Council is unwilling
or unable to take any decision or suggest any measure
that would enable some progress to be made. Perhaps
processes and procedures cannot solve cooperation
issues in themselves, but we think that they can create
opportunities, including for more engagement and
more dialogue with all interested States, and that
they could potentially enable creative solutions to
be devised. Repeating the same arguments every six
months, unfortunately, does not advance things in any
way. At the same time, of course, it is a necessary and
appropriate reminder that the victims of crimes in
Darfur still need to see justice done.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): We have
listened carefully to today’s briefing of the Council by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), on her twenty-sixth report on
the situation in Darfur, in accordance with Security
Council resolution 1593 (2005). The report reviews a
number of challenges and observations regarding the
Court’s performance in dealing the situation in Darfur
and States’ cooperation with the Court so as to enable it
to implement its mandate. The report makes two main
points, the first being a request for facilitating financial
support through the United Nations to launch relevant
investigations in Darfur, and the second regarding
States’ cooperation with the ICC to ensure that justice
is rendered. As we thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda for her
briefing before the Council today, I would like to make
the following comments.
12/19

12/12/2017

First, there is a unified African position on the way
the ICC deals with some African issues. That position
has been emphasized in successive resolutions adopted
at African Union Summits, including resolution 547 of
the twenty-fourth Summit, resolution 586 of the twentyfifth, resolution 590 of the twenty-sixth, resolution 616
of the twenty-seventh and, more recently, resolution
622 of the twenty-eighth. Those resolutions stress that
Africa is committed to fighting impunity. They call
on African States to maintain their commitment to the
African Union’s relevant resolutions, in accordance
with article 23 of its Constitutive Act.
Secondly, those resolutions stress that the
International Criminal Court should respect the
provisions of international law on the immunity granted
to presidents and other high-level officials during
their mandate.
Thirdly, our position on the ICC has not changed.
We hope no steps that could thwart the security, stability
and sovereignty of African States will be taken. We
stress the importance of ensuring that no sanctions
are imposed on any African State on the pretext that it
did not take the necessary measures to execute an ICC
arrest warrant, especially given that some States have
reservations about the ICC and are not even party to the
Rome Statute of the Court.
Ms. Sison (United States of America): I would
like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing. We
agree with her that the victims in Darfur need justice.
Since the beginning of the conflict in Darfur more than
300,000 people have been killed and 4.7 million others
affected, including more than 2 million who have
been and remain internally displaced. In the past, both
Sudanese Government forces and their allied militias
have engaged in the widespread and systematic killing,
raping and torturing of civilians. Perpetrators have
burned villages and blocked humanitarian aid from
reaching populations in desperate need. Some rebel
groups have conducted similar brutal attacks. More
than 12 years ago, alarmed by the atrocities taking
place in Darfur, the Council referred the situation to
the International Criminal Court in order to bring to
justice those responsible for such atrocities and to end
the climate of impunity in the Sudan.
The United States has continued its efforts to help to
end the conflict and improve conditions for the people
of Darfur. That focus on the safety and the security of
Darfuri citizens was a key component of the five-track
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

engagement plan, the framework launched in June
2016 whereby the United Stated Government offered
to revoke certain economic sanctions on the Sudan
if the Sudan made progress in a number of areas. We
asked the Sudan to maintain a cessation of hostilities
in areas of internal conflict such as Darfur, and to
improve humanitarian access. We note that in 2017 the
Government of the Sudan has refrained from military
offensives, halted aerial bombardments in Darfur and
taken meaningful steps to expand humanitarian access.
With the exception of one party, the armed
opposition in Darfur also reciprocated by announcing
its own unilateral cessation of hostilities. However,
much more progress is needed. While Darfur has not
experienced the same levels of violence in 2017 as in
years past, lasting peace remains elusive. The human
rights situation continues to be volatile. Humanitarian
needs remain high and accountability non-existent.
Those responsible for human rights violations and abuses
and attacks on civilians should be held accountable,
including security forces using excessive force against
civilians, such as in Kalma camp in September, and the
members of armed militias who perpetrate atrocities
against civilians in Darfur. In November, we noted the
Sudanese Government’s arrest of the former Janjaweed
commander Musa Hilal, who is subject to United
Nations sanctions for his commission of atrocities in
Darfur following clashes between Sudanese security
forces and armed militias loyal to Hilal.
We are concerned about the reports of civilian
fatalities, including the killing of women and children,
occurring during those clashes. We call on the Sudanese
Government to allow the United Nations, humanitarian
organizations and the media to access the area where
the clashes took place so that they can investigate the
reports and assist those in need. We also call on the
Government to investigate promptly and credibly any
allegations against Hilal, in accordance with the Sudan’s
human rights commitments and obligations, and to
hold Hilal to account if he is found to have committed
atrocities. We note that the International Criminal Court
has investigated allegations of atrocities committed
by all sides, and has charged Sudanese Government
officials, militia leaders and certain armed-opposition
members with crimes, including genocide; crimes
against humanity, including torture, murder and rape;
and war crimes, including pillaging and deliberate
attacks on peacekeepers.

S/PV. 8132

We have pointed out for many years that it is
unacceptable that the suspects in the Darfur situation
remain at large and have not been brought to justice.
In particular, we have expressed disappointment that
Sudanese President Omar Al-Bashir continues to travel
to countries around the world. Receiving President
Al-Bashir on those visits has served only to burnish
his image, diminish the seriousness of the charges
against him and dismiss the tremendous suffering of
the victims. We must stand with the victims, no matter
how powerful those who inflict abuses on them may
be. Other leaders who have targeted their own citizens,
including the former President of Côte d’Ivoire Laurent
Gbagbo, the former Liberian President Charles Taylor
and the former Khmer Rouge leaders Nuon Chea and
Khieu Samphan, have been called to answer for their
alleged crimes.
We will continue to use the tools at our disposal to
press the Sudan to improve its human rights practices
and to promote justice for the people of Darfur. A Sudan
that adheres to the rule of law, respects human rights
and breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will enjoy
sustainable peace and prosperity. We look forward to
the day when the Sudan is a valuable contributor to
regional security and stability.
Finally, I would be remiss if I did not reiterate
the United States position with respect to recent
developments related to the situation in Afghanistan,
which is different from this situation in a number of
respects. As we said in the Council in November and as
we reiterated at the Assembly of States Parties meeting
last week, we continue to have serious concerns
about and a long-standing principled objection to any
International Criminal Court investigation or other
activity concerning United States personnel.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): We are grateful to the
Prosecutor for her twenty-sixth report regarding the
Darfur situation. At the outset, let me reiterate our full
support for the International Criminal Court (ICC) and
underscore its central role in the fight against impunity
and the promotion of international justice.
As Chair of the Security Council Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1591 (2005),
concerning the Sudan, I am pleased to note that
the overall security situation in Darfur remains
stable. Consequently, civilians suffer much less from
violence. At the same time, we remain concerned
about the fragility of the situation and the continued

17-4374313/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

violations and abuses of human rights, which mostly
remain underreported.
We note, at the same time, the report’s references
to extrajudicial killings, rape and sexual violence,
arbitrary arrests, illegal detentions, pressure on
political opponents and human rights activists, as well
as unlawful restrictions on the freedom of expression,
association and assembly, which continue to take place.
All parties responsible for those acts should be brought
to account.
Another point of concern is the fate of internally
displaced persons in Darfur, who must be treated in
full compliance with international human rights law
and standards. Without the cooperation of States all
suspects in the Darfur situation will remain at large
and their status will be used as an excuse to evade
the responsibility of States to fulfil their international
obligations. The same goes for the Council, which is
still not ready to take measures to give effect to the
Court’s decisions on non-cooperation. We express
readiness to continue work in that regard and call
on Council members to reconcile different, or even
opposite, views.
We are convinced that every unimplemented
decision of the Court only widens the gap between
crime and accountability, thereby rewarding impunity
and provoking further violations. In that regard, we
call upon all States Members of the United Nations to
strictly abide by and fully implement resolution 1593
(2005). That should not be regarded as a manifestation
of goodwill, but as a matter of legal obligation.

12/12/2017

Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to thank the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her thorough presentation of the twenty-sixth report on
the activities of her Office with regard to the situation
in Darfur. We believe that this type of transparent and
frank report provides added value to the analysis of the
issues under the Security Council’s mandate.
At the outset, Uruguay wishes to express its
thanks for the opportunity to reiterate its full support
for the role of the International Criminal Court as an
institution established to strengthen the rule of law at
the international level by prosecuting those who are
responsible for the most serious violations of the rights
that affect humankind as a whole. In that that regard, we
renew our call on States Members of the United Nations
that are not yet parties to the Rome Statute to accede
to the Statute, which will help make this instrument
universal in the fight against impunity and defend the
victims of heinous crimes that constitute a serious
threat to the peace and the security of all humankind.
We regret that the situation with regard to this
issue remains virtually unchanged since June, when we
discussed it the last time (see S/PV.7963). Having just
listened to Prosecutor Bensouda, we wish to express
our consternation at the lack of cooperation by States
parties to the International Criminal Court and the
lack of compliance with, and implementation of, the
Rome Statute.

We would like to emphasize once again that
non-compliance with ICC decisions and requests
undermines the foundations of the international
criminal justice system. The consolidation of efforts to
fight against impunity should prevail over any concerns
that impede decisive steps towards the arrest and
surrender of ICC suspects.

As a State party to the Rome Statute, Uruguay is
concerned by all the cases of non-cooperation with
the International Criminal Court. In this particular
case, it is worth recalling that resolution 1593 (2005)
states, in paragraph 2, that the Government of the
Sudan and all other parties to the conflict in Darfur
must fully cooperate with the Court and the Prosecutor,
but also urges all States and regional organizations
and other relevant international organizations to also
cooperate fully.

Finally, since this is our last statement on this
subject during Ukraine’s current Security Council
membership, I would like to thank Prosecutor Bensouda
for her dedicated efforts and express hope that her work,
despite the existing challenges and limited resources,
will always bring about concrete results, thereby
contributing to the maintenance of international peace
and security.

There is a shared responsibility among the States
that do not cooperate and the Council, which lacks
effectiveness and action, in contravention with what is
provided by the Rome Statute in its article 87.7. Uruguay
is supportive and willing to work to ensure that the
Council can play a more active role in considereng
cases of non-cooperation with the International
Criminal Court and to ensure that arrest warrants are

14/19

17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

implemented — a necessary condition for the Court to
be able to carry out its mandate.
With regard to issues on the Council’s agenda,
accountability is probably the word we hear the
most. However, regrettably, calls for the perpetrators
to be held accountable are not accompanied by real
actions. In that connection, we reiterate our view that
the proposals for action that were submitted by New
Zealand a year ago, and which were also well received
by the Office of the Prosecutor in her recent reports,
would make it easier for the Security Council to take
action in cases of non-cooperation with the Court.
Specifically, the proposals are, first, that the Council
adopt a more structured approach when addressing
cases of non-cooperation, with the aim of determining
which of the tools that the Council has at its disposal
provides the most appropriate response and, secondly,
to overcome the current stagnation in the relations
between the Council and the Government of the Sudan
in this area by making the most of the improvement in
that relationship with regard to the political process in
Darfur and cooperation with the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
In conclusion, I would like to send a message of
encouragement and congratulations to the Prosecutor
for the investigative work on the crimes committed in
Darfur. This undoubtedly promotes the strengthening
of the rule of law and the building of a society in
which there is accountability and where the rights and
guarantees of all its inhabitants are fully respected.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): Bolivia thanks the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for presenting the informative twenty-sixth report, in
accordance with resolution 1593 (2005).
We have taken note of the progress in the
investigations, as well as the difficulties that the Office
of the Prosecutor has faced during the course of the
investigations and in its judicial activity, which are both
linked to situations that hinder the work entrusted to it
by the Security Council. Bolivia believes that those who
have committed alleged war crimes and crimes against
humanity must be brought to justice. We cannot deny
that this is an important element in the achievement of
stable and lasting peace.
As we express our support for the work of the
International Criminal Court, we recall that, when the
Security Council referred the situation in Darfur to the

S/PV. 8132

International Criminal Court through resolution 1593
(2005), it not only agreed to activate its jurisdiction for
the prosecution of persons, but also urged the Court
to support international cooperation in the promotion
of the rule of law, the protection of human rights
and the fight against impunity, while emphasizing
non-jurisdictional activities such as the promotion of
peace, reconciliation and institutional strengthening.
We encourage the Court to join the efforts of
regional organizations and of the international
community to strengthen the political processes in the
Sudan, in particular as pertains to the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. In that regard, we believe that
cooperation with the African Union is essential. We
recognize its indisputable commitment to the fight
against impunity, as expressed in its Constitutive
Act. In addition, we recall that the African Union has
established a ministerial council to address the issues
related to the case in question. In that regard, we call
for the establishment of constructive dialogue that
facilitates the work at hand and engenders trust between
both institutions.
We see positive developments in the Sudan over
the past year. For example, there were no clashes
between the Government and rebel groups during
the period covered by the Secretary-General’s latest
report on Darfur. Also worthy of note were the
developments in the operational environment, the
decrease in obstructions to the movement of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and
the increased cooperation between the Government and
United Nations. The recent reports of the SecretaryGeneral and the report of the Prosecutor have reflected
such progress. Bolivia believes that this point has been
reached mainly because of the joint work of the African
Union, the Government and the United Nations, and
we hope that all efforts will continue to focus on the
consolidation of peace in Darfur.
It is important to emphasize that the development
and future of international criminal justice are
closely tied to the issues of State cooperation and
complementarity. The International Criminal Court is
a complementary court to the primary and sovereign
capacities of each State in the administration of justice
in its territory. Therefore, in addition to reaching
effective and timely judgements, local capacities must
be restored. In that regard, the case of Darfur should be
especially analysed given that there has been more than
a decade of conflict.

17-4374315/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Bolivia upholds its obligations as a State party to
the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court
and supports efforts to seek justice and fight impunity.
We therefore call upon all States that have not yet done
so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to guarantee
its universal jurisdiction. We believe that the value
of the principle of the universality of international
criminal justice is fundamental at this point. The
debate on the impunity of many who are responsible for
committing war crimes and crimes against humanity
is diluted in the face of the relative effectiveness of the
capacities of the International Criminal Court owing
to the non-ratification of the Rome Statute by some
countries, which also weakens the overall effectiveness
of its work. We insist that we cannot sustain sincere
dialogue as long as there are countries that demand
all the rigour of justice, but do not fulfil their own
international obligations.
Mr. Li Yongsheng (China) (spoke in Chinese):
China takes note of the briefing provided by
Prosecutor Bensouda.
The overall situation in the Darfur region of
the Sudan has been stable this year. The Sudanese
Government has been actively dedicated to promoting
the political process in Darfur and established a
Government of National Reconciliation. It also enhanced
the capacity-building of security and governance, as
well as achieved some progress in the maintenance
of stability and the advancement of reconstruction in
Darfur. China welcomes such developments.
Meanwhile, Darfur is still facing various challenges
in its quest for long-term security and stability, including
those posed by armed groups. In lending support to the
Sudanese Government to resolve the existing problems,
the international community should fully respect the
leadership of the Government, adopt an objective and
impartial position and enhance communication and
coordination with the Government.
China hopes that parties in Darfur will continue
to resolve their differences through peaceful means,
including through dialogue and consultations. China
urges the relevant opposition parties and armed groups
in the Sudan to join the political dialogue process at
the earliest date. China supports the African Union
and other regional and subregional organizations in
continuing their mediation efforts.
China’s position on the handling of the situation in
the Sudan by the International Criminal Court remains
16/19

12/12/2017

unchanged. China believes that the international
community should fully respect the judicial
sovereignty of the Sudan and give sufficient attention
to the legitimate concerns of the African Union and the
Sudanese Government on the handling of the situation
in the Sudan.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing and
the presentation of her twenty-sixth report on Darfur,
as well as for her dedication and leadership. Japan
is committed to the fight against impunity and to
supporting the International Criminal Court (ICC).
I would like to assure the Prosecutor of Japan’s full
support for the work of the Office of the Prosecutor.
In 2005, Japan, as a Security Council member,
supported resolution 1593 (2005) in the light of the
serious violations of human rights committed in
Darfur. Japan believed that there was a role for the ICC
to bring those perpetrators to justice. Cooperation with
the Court is vital for the ICC to function effectively and
produce successful outcomes. Japan once again calls
for the full implementation of resolution 1593 (2005),
which requires the full cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan and all other parties. The continued failure
to implement resolution 1593 (2005) will undermine
the credibility and legitimacy of the Council. Followup on non-compliance is seriously needed.
While huge challenges remain in Darfur, such as
the political process and the humanitarian and human
rights situation, we have seen encouraging changes in
both the situation in Darfur and the behaviour of the
Government of the Sudan. There have been no open
confrontations recently and the cooperation of the
Government of the Sudan has significantly improved.
We commend the efforts made by the Government of
the Sudan, the African Union and the United Nations
in that regard.
Those efforts must continue. However, regrettably,
not much progress has been achieved on the work of the
ICC concerning Darfur due to the lack of cooperation.
Japan emphasizes that the Government’s obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005) with regard to cooperation
with the Prosecutor and the ICC remain unchanged.
I would like to conclude by reiterating Japan’s
continued support for the activities of the ICC. Japan
will be leaving the Council at the end of this month, but
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

we will continue to look forward to concrete progress
on the issue.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): We
would like to congratulate Japan on its assumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We also commend Italy on presiding over the Council
last month.
I would like to comment on a point raised by a
number of representatives with regard to the collection
of weapons. As the Security Council knows, the
existence of small arms and light weapons in conflict
zones contributes to insecurity and instability. The
collection of arms and weapons in Darfur is therefore
a challenge for the Government. In that connection,
I would like to point to the recent meeting between
the Vice-President of the Republic the Sudan and
the Joint African Union-United Nations Special
Representative for Darfur. The Vice-President stressed
that the Government of the Sudan will not be part of
the processing of collected weapons if the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) is to be responsible for that task. That is
our degree of cooperation in this matter, an important
one that represents one of three challenges that we
face in our endeavour to ensure security and stability
in Darfur.
The Sudan is not party to the International Criminal
Court (ICC), whose Prosecutor and her Office have
been blinded by political motives and are unable to
see the clear and explicit position of international law,
namely, that any international convention or agreement
is binding only on its parties. It is strange that resolution
1593 (2005), which referred the situation in Darfur, in
the Western part of our country, to the ICC, refers to
the fact that the jurisdiction of the Court does not apply
to countries that are not party to the ICC. That obvious
contradiction with the explicit and binding rules of
international law is the result of the inconsistencies
inherent in the Statute of the ICC — notably, the broad,
unlimited powers granted to the Prosecutor of the ICC.
The shocking reports about corruption in the Court and
of its Prosecutor only show the inconsistencies in the
Statute of the Court.

S/PV. 8132

We did not find this current report to be any
different from previous reports. It has gone beyond all
norms by attacking sovereign States and Heads of State.
Our position is known by the Council, it is related to a
number of reasons. We believe that there is an attempt
to cover up for the Court, and we ask the Council to
examine the situation in a specific meeting to see how
far it affects the implementation of resolution 1593
(2005).
The Prosecutor’s report and briefing make no
reference to the armed groups and their responsibility
for the violations. We would like to recall that we invoke
an international law that bans any recourse to violence
to achieve any political objective.
This is the twenty-sixth report of the Prosecutor
of the ICC and her Office. During the short time we
had to study and comment on the report, as was the
case with previous reports, since the third report, we
have time and again concluded that the Prosecutor and
her Office are but tools for one single predetermined
purpose — to use the ICC as a political tool to achieve
a specific political objective.
To prove my point, I would like to refer the Council
to paragraph 39 of the present report:
(spoke in English)
“The Office welcomes the adoption of Security
Council resolution 2363 (2017), which extends the
mandate of UNAMID until 30 June 2018.”
(spoke in Arabic)
The welcoming of resolution 2363 comes because the
resolution does not end the Hybrid Mission in Darfur.
The ICC would not like to see an end to the war in Darfur,
as it is linked to specific political objectives. The ICC
is trying to achieve this by applying its jurisdiction on
the Sudan, without consideration for the actual reality
in the region nor caring that the protraction of the war
would lead to more bloodshed in Darfur. That is why
are we convinced that attempts by the Court to exercise
its jurisdiction over the Sudan and its leadership is one
of several obstacles that we should all work to remove
in order to achieve peace in the Sudan so it can turn
its attention to its development — the main task of any
Government — and achieve peace in Africa.
Resolution 2363 (2017) draws a clear line between
war and peace in Darfur. The resolution decided to
start a gradual scaling down of the peacekeeping

17-4374317/19

S/PV.8132

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

force towards a final exit, pursuant to paragraph 24
of resolution 1769 (2007), which created UNAMID.
Regrettably, the Prosecutor and her Office lacked the
courage and honesty to admit the reality to which
resolution 2363 refers.
Based upon the Security Council referral resolution
and the shameful political application in which the
Pre-Trial Chamber and the previous and current
prosecutors participated in, the Court has practiced
politically based discrimination with regard to the
cases it considers — the Sudan included — of which
all are in Africa alone, among all continents and
regions of the world. Such discrimination runs counter
to pre-emptory norms of international law, as well as
article 21 of the Rome Statute of the same Court, which
in its sub-paragraph 3 clearly bans any discrimination
on political basis.
As mentioned before, it is not surprising that the
mere establishment of the Court, on the basis of its
Statute, contravenes principles of international law,
including sovereignty, sovereign equality among
states, and the principle that international agreements
and convention are binding only on their parties. In
that respect, in paragraphs 7 and 8 of the report, the
Pre-Trial Chamber rejects a recognized principle of
international law relative to immunity and subjects it to
Article 27 (2) of the Rome Statute.
Having followed the failures of the Court over
the years, we are not surprised by such a position. It
is rather consistent with previous positions, especially
one particular position, where the Pre-Trial Chamber
of theCourt supported the destruction of evidence
submitted by the previous Prosecutor, Mr. Luis
Moreno Ocampo. It endorsed his decision to dismiss
a senior officer in the Prosecutor’s Office because that
senior officer had filed a complaint against the conduct
of the Prosecutor. The Council is undoubtedly aware
that the Administrative Tribunal of the International
Labour Organization ruled that dismissal null and void.
We view all those negative positions in a
comprehensive context. The Court has not left even a
remote chance for anyone with a good conscience to
cherish the hope that it can achieve the objective it claims
that it was created to serve — combating impunity.
The countries that have bilaterally and regionally
welcomed and received the President of the Republic
of the Sudan have therefore upheld the major principles
that govern relations among States — those of peace,
18/19

12/12/2017

sovereign equality and the exchange of mutual benefits
and interests. We view the targeting of the President
of the Sudan with baseless charges that are refuted by
all evidence as an assault on the political security and
stability of my country. That constitutes an attempt to
dismember the Sudan by pushing it into an endless and
disastrous war.
South Africa, to which the report before the
Council devotes several paragraphs, would not have
attained peace or moved towards an apartheid-free
future without applying the principle of amnesty and
creating truth, justice and reconciliation commissions,
which is the aim of the Doha Document for Peace in
Darfur. The International Criminal Court, where the
trial of one person costs more than €1.3 billion, has
totally failed to contribute to the realization of justice
and peace. To offer a simple comparison, the trial of
one person in 1994 by the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons Responsible for
Genocide and Other Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of
Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens Responsible for
Genocide and Other Such Violations Committed in the
Territory of Neighbouring States between 1 January
and 31 December 1994 cost $43.5 million, which
compelled the Government of Rwanda to resort to its
national courts, the Gacaca courts, where the trial of
one person cost no more than $540.
All of that places a heavy responsibility upon
the Security Council to respond to the resolutions of
successive African summits, which emphasize the need
for a dialogue that leads to an acceptable solution to the
continent and achieves the Security Council messages
of peacemaking, peacebuilding and sustainability.
I take this opportunity to commend the decision of
Burundi to withdraw from the ICC, which we consider
to be an African decision that promotes peace and
stability in Burundi.
As has been said by the Representative of the
Russian Federation before the Council during the
consideration of the reports on the Sudan and on Libya,
the Court has turned itself into a monitoring body.
The report before us includes fabricated information
concerning the current situation in Darfur, the number
of displaced persons and the violations committed, all
of which are outside the competence of the Prosecutor.
Moreover, the report contains exaggerated figures
that do not match the reports of the Department of
Peacekeeping Operations. Such inconsistency requires
17-43743

12/12/2017

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

S/PV. 8132

a serious investigation into and verification of the
Prosecutor’s information sources.

therefore undermined all norms related to the work of
the International Criminal Court.

The Sudan is a country that is deeply rooted in
history and has a rich share in human civilization,
which was born on our continent. We therefore pay
no attention to the contradictions and indecorous
utterings and phrases of a Court that was born dead,
as was stated by the former Chair of the United States
Senate Committee on Foreign Relations. I call on the
Council, to which resolution 1593 (2005) obliges the
Prosecutor of the Court to submit two reports every
year, to firmly reprimand the Prosecutor for recently
referring to it as impotent. The previous and current
Prosecutors have always attacked the Sudan, and have

In conclusion, it is my pleasure and privilege to
reaffirm that the Sudan, by virtue of its continued
cooperation with the international community and
the Council, will pursue the course of lasting and
comprehensive peace in Darfur and the implementation
of resolution 2363 (2017), adopted by the Council
in June. In doing so, we are protecting the people
in a dear part of our country from falling victim to
conflict — the same people who the Prosecutor and her
Office are exploiting.
The meeting rose at 12.55 p.m.

17-4374319/19
