__

UNlTED

NATlONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-SIXTH

YEAR

2263’”

MEETING:

30 JANUARY

1981

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2263) . . . . . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Statement by the President in connection with the release of the American hostages.......................~.......,..,.......~..,.................

1

Adoptionoftheagenda

1

.,.,,....,,...I,........,................I...I..

The situation in Namibia:
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of
Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the
question of Namibia (S/14333):
Letter dated 29 January 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14347)

..,..............,...,........,...............,.......‘..

I

SIPV .2263

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ , . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~rpple~r~e~~tsof the OJficitrl Rccwrc/s c$//~ Sectrri/,v C’orrrrcil. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rcwh/iom
trrd
Dwisious
of t/n) Sccurit.v C’orrrrcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2263rd MEETING
Held in New York on Friday, 30 January 1981, at 11 a.m.
Pwsident;

Mr. LING Qing (China).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/22631
1, Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978)
concerning the question of Namibia (S/14333)
Letter dated 29 January 1981 from the Permanent Representative of Tunisia to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/14347)

Statement by the President In connection with the
release of the American hostages
1. The PRESIDENT (itrterpretcctiotr
from Chitrese):
I should like at the very outset of this meeting to make
a few remarks in connection with the release of the
American hostages. With the release of the American
hostages, Security Council resolutions 457 (1979) and
461 (i979) have llow been fully implemenied. i am
sure that I speak fur the Council in expressing deep
satisfaction and relief that the case is finally concluded.
2. 1 think I shall also be speaking on behalf of all
present if 1 express to the Secretary-General and all
parties concerned our highest appreciation and gratitude for their outstanding and untiring efforts to
resolve that problem.
Adoption of the agenda
The situation iu Namibia:
Further report of the Secretary-General concerning
the inipIemcntatlon of Security Council resoiutions 435 (1 Y’78)aud 43Y (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/14333);

Letter dated 29 January 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Tunisia to the United Nations
addrersed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14347)
3. The PRESIDENT (itrterpretatiorr
fi+otrt C/these):
The Security Council is meeting in response to a request contained in the letter dated 29 January 1981
from the representative of Tunisia to the President of
the Security Council.
4. Members of the Council have before them the
further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia and the text of a letter dated 28 January 1981
from the representative of South Africa to the Secretary-General contained in document [S//4346].
5. I now call on the Secretary-General.
6. The SECRETARY-GENERAL:
Before dealing
with the subject on the agenda I wish to associate
myself with your remarks, Mr. President, concerning
the release of the American hostages and also to
express my deep satisfaction and relief about their
release and happy return to their families.
7. Let me also thank you, Sir, for your kind words in
regard to my efforts. I wish aIs0 to express here my
deep gratitude to all the members of the Security Council for the great efforts they made to contribute to the
solution of this tragic Groblem.
8. The Council has before it my report of 19 January
concerning the implementation- of ‘Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) on the question of
Namibia. That report deals with the meeting that
was held in Geneva from 7 to 14 January 1981 and with
the outcome of that meeting. As far as the substance of
the matter is concerned, 1 do not at the pre;cut time
have very much to add to what I stated in my report,
and especially in its concluding observations. I wish,
however, to take this opportunity to express again my
particular appreciation to the Organization of African
Unity (OAU). represented in Geneva by its SecretaryGeneral and by the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Sierra Leone, to the front-line States, to
Nigeria and to the contact group of five Western countries. Their presence in Geneva was of the utmost help
to me personally and to my represzntatives in the

conduct of the meeting and the consultations
thai
attendedit.

uary. Tunisiaisgladto seepresidingoverthe Council
the representative
of a greatcountry, which shares
with all countriesof thethird worldthesameconcerns
9.
On 22JanuaryI addressed
a letter to the Minis- andpreoccupations
andwith whichmycountryemjoys
terof ForeinnAffairsof SouthAfrica, Mr. R,F, Botha. excellent relationsof friendshipand co-operation.
in whichI drew attentionto my reportto the Se&
My delegation
which,duringthismonth,hashadthe
rity Councilandrepeatedthat in my view a greatop- opportunity to expressfurther appreciationof the
portunity had beenmissedon this occasion.I also distinguished
qualitieswhichareyours,is particularly
expressedthe hope that the Governmentof South pleased,Mr. President,to assureyou of our full coAfrica wouldgive serious
attentionto my appealfor a operation.
reconsideration
of its position.I addedthat I was
deeplyconcerned
over the effectof the presentstale- 16. We shouldalsolike to expressequallysincere
matenot only on the situationin Namibiaitself, but and warm congratulationsto your predecessor,
alsoon the prospectsof a peacefuland prosperous Mr. DonaldMcHenry, on the exemplaryfashionin
futurefor theregionasa whole.
whichhe directedour work durinathe monthof Decemberlast year. I wouldrequestthe delegationof
IO. On 28JanuaryI receiveda letter from the Min- theUnitedStatesto bekindenoughto transmitto him
isterof ForeignAffairs of SouthAfrica relatingto the bothour congratulations
andour best
- wishes.
~~
_~
Genevameetingand my report on it [seeS/14346].
-Thisletter hasbeencirculatedto the members
of the 17. In this monthof January1981,the Councilhas
SecurityCouncilat the requestof theGovernmentof alsowitnessed
the departureof five of its non-perSouthAfrica. I do not wishto commenthereon the utanentmembers,
the representatives
of Bangladesh,
substance
of that letteror, indeed,of the attachments. Jamaica,Norway, PortugalandZambia,who, during
I believethat the UnitedNationspositionwasmade’ their term of office, madean invaluablecontribution
very clearby meandby myrepresentatives
at Geneva to our work anddisplayedexemplarydevotionto the
andis wellknownto the members
of the Council.
principlesof the Charterof the UnitedNations.My
delegation
wouldliketo expressto thembothitsesteem
1I. As members
of the Councilareaware,it became andits consideration,
aswell asits gratitudefor the
clear in the courseof the Genevameetingthat the f;zzl co-operationwe have enjoyedwith eachof
SouthAfrican Governmentwasnot yet preparedto
signa cease-fireagreement
andto proceedwith the
implementation
of resolution435(1978).It wouldnot 18. My delegatlon
wishes
to expressalsoitsgratificabeproperfor meto speculate
on the reasons
for this tion at the particularly constructive co-operation
position.
which immediatelyand spontaneously
hasgrownup
betweenus and the new memberswho joined the
12. Theproblemnowis to evolvethe bestcourseof Councilat the beginningof this month.It augurswell
action to achieveour objective,namely,the attaln- for even greatereffectivenessin the action of the
ment of independence
for Namibiaat the earliest Councilwhichwill makeIt possiblefor this body to
possible
timethroughthe implementation
of Security measure
up to its onerousresponsibilities
in the preCouncilresolution435(1978).That conthmesto be servationof internationalpeaceand securitywhich,
our goal,andI very muchhopethat efforts will not unfortunately,arebeingmoreandmorethreatened.
berelaxedto ensureits early achievement,
19. I hopeMr. Noel Dorr of Ireland,Mr. Masahiro
13. The PRESIDENT(interpretation
from Chinese):
Nisiboriof Japan,Mr. Jaimede Pink%of Spainand
The first speakerinscribedon mylist isthe represen- Mr. OlaraOtunnuof Ugandawill acceptour words
tative of Tunisiawho will speakalsoasChairmanof of welcome.
Thesegoalsoto thedelegation
of Panama,
theGroupof Africau Statesat theUnitedNationsfor which1 wouldrequestto bekind enoughto conveyto
the monthof January.
Mr. JorgeIlluecaour hearty congratulations
on the
responsible
functionswith which he hasjust been
14. Mr. SLIM (Tunisia)(inlerprc~rrrrionfrorN
Fr~rrclt): entrusted.
First, mydelegation
wouldlike to associate
itselfwith
thegeneralsatisfactionwhichhasbeenexpressed
asa 20. Will Namibiafind peaceandindependence
this
resultof the liberationof the Americanhustages
and year,aswassoearnestlyhopedbythe UnitedNations?
to convey its congratulations
both to the hostages Will theNamibianpeoplehavepowertransferredto it,
themselves
andtheirfamiliesandto all thosewhohave as advocatedin the variouspertinentresolutions
of
contributedin oneway or anotherto helpingto solve the Organization?Did the plan, which wasso labothis problemaridto satisfyingthe partiesconcerned. riouslydrawnupby the UnitedNationsin accordance
with resolution
435(19781,
haveanychanceof success
15. Mr. “resident,I shouldnowlike to discharge
a and hasit any now?Thoseare the questions
which
very agreeable
duty: that of congratulating
you very WCaskourselvesat the beginning
of 1981-questions
sincerelyandwarmlyon your accession
to the pres- whichhavein themboth scepticism
andhope,against
idencyof the SecurityCouncilfor the monthof Jan- a background
of anxiety.

21. Hope because, inspired by the principles of
freedom and justice, having faith in the virtues of
negotiationand dialogueand advocating, as we always
have, the peaceful settlement of disputes, we were
venturing to hope that reason would finally prevail,
even amongthose who have stood out by virtue of their
contemnt for the human person and the elementary
principles of internationallaw: hopealso, andaboveali,
because we were assured that the plan of the United
Nations enjoyed the support of and-was indeed upheld
by the entire international community and because we
were convinced that, deprived of support and seriously
threatened with isolation, South Africa could no!
persist in its attitude of arrogance and defiance.
22. Our scepticism, by contrast, sprang from the very
nature of the Pretoria regime, which is based essentially on repression, oppression and aggression and
which could not of its own free will accede to the
languageof negotiationor entertain the ideas of democracy and elections.

this new challengeposedto the internationalcommunity.
28. The matter is too importantfor the Security
Councilto holda substantive
discussion
on it without
havinggivenitselfthe necessary
timefor an in-depth
analysisof the situationwhichwouldtakeaccountof
all the newlocal, regionalandinternationaldevelopments.Only after suchan analysiscould it, in due
course,takedecisions
commensurate
with theseriousnessof thesituation.I shouldmerelyliketo statethat,
if any positiveresultcan beattributedto the Geneva
meeting,it is that onceand for all it madeclear the
responsibilities
borneby all partiecto the Namibian
question,
29. After Geneva we can no longer harbourany
doubtsabout the intentionsof the Pretoriaregime,
nor canwe give anycredit to its promises
or commitments.In additionto its usualarrogantbehaviour,it
usedthe Genevaconferenceto Indulgein a “vast
publicrelationsexercise”, asit wasdescribed
by one
of theheads
of delegations
present.Thatexercisecould
deceiveno one,sounsubtlea manoeuvre
asit was.

23. What could we expect from a regime which on the
external front maintains a policy of continued, flagrant
aggression against neighbouring African countries
and domestically is famous for its inhuman apartheid 30. Thedelegations
presentat Geneva-particularly
practices and for the persecution and violence prac- thoseof WesternStates,which in the matterof Natised against innocent populations, as well as for death mibiabearthe nrlmarvresnonslbillty-mustundoubtsentenceshandeddown, in a travestyofjustlce, against edly have lea&tedan importantlessonfrom that
young people whose only fault is to believe in the irresponsible
and defiantattitudeimportantboth for
existence of freedom and the possibility of one day themselvesand for the internationalcommunityat
recovering their human dignity? These sentence8 large,Canthe attitudeof theinternationalcommunity
should, in their turn, be vigorously condemned and to the SouthAfrican r6glmebe the samebeforeand
denounced by the entire international community, after the Genevaconference?
and first and foremost by those who have devoted
themselves to defendingthe concept of freedom, lest 31. SinceGeneva,we cannolonaerhaveanydoubts
their own credibility be seriously called into question. aboutthelegitimacyof theSouthWestAfrica People’s
Ornanization(SWAPOI. its reuresentative
character,
24. A meetingwhose purpose was to prepare for the or its keensenseof its~histo&alresponsibilities;
we
implementationof resolution 435 (1978) was held in can no longerhave any doubtsregardingits responGeneva from 7 to 14 January 1981. We have just sibleattitudeor its credibility, bothdomestically
and
listenedvery closelyto the reportmadeby the Secre- internationally;nor can we have anydoubtaboutits
tary-General;we have also studiedthe Secretary- determinationto continueitb struggleuntil the indeGeneral’swritten report beforeus with all the care pendence
of Namibiaisattained.TheGenevameeting
demanded
by the seriousness
of the subject.
providedtheproofof thisto thosewhostilldoubtedit.
25. Thosereports,on whichI shouldlike warmlyto 32. The unanimity demonstratedat Geneva by
congratulate
theSecretary-General,
who,in thismatter SWAP0andtheso-called
front-lineStatesisundoubtasin others,hasconstantlydisplayeddetermination edly sharedby all Africans.Weshouldnot, however,
andcouragein tacklingthe problemswith the dedica- bemisled:thisdisciplineconceals
agreatdealof anger,
tionandobjectivityfor whichheiswell known,arein quite properlyfelt by all Africanswho daily witness
themselves
sufficientlyinformative;theyprovideclear or experiencefreshaffronts.Thissituationmustend.
andunambiguous
repliesto the questions
whicheach Namibiamustbe independent.We mustall make
of ushasbeenaskinghimself.
concertedeffortsto achievethis.
26. Thusit doesnot appearlikely that Namibiawill, 33. Mr. MUNOZ LED0 (Mexico) (i/rrer’~~,‘c~/rtric,rr
accordingto procedures
laid downin resolution435 from Spattish): After the adjustments
andthe uncer(1978),regainindependence
andpeacethis year.
tainty that characterizedthe beginnirpL’; tke year.
the Security Councilhasbeguntoday :o cr,isider a
27. Ourpurposetodayis not to considerin detailthe questionof crucialimportance.We wis!: +ublicly 10
implicationsof this new situationor to advocate expressour appreciation
to Mr. LingQingof Chinafor
measures
which will have to be takenin the face of
the patience,wisdomandconvictionwith whichhehas

conducted our work, qualities which exemplify the
admirable virtues of his people. We also wish to
convey a cordial greeting to Mr. Donald McHenry
of the United States for his guidance of the Council
during the month of December and for the exceptional
work he did among us.
34. My delegation reiterates the satisfaction expressed by our President at the recent release of the American hostages and is particularly pleased at the resolution of this delicate problem by means of negotiation.
The Security Council and the Secretary-General,
acting on its behalf, contributed to the negotiating
process through decisions and proposals which
eliminatedthe risk of confrontation and eased the way
to dialogue.
35. We have received written and oral reports by the
Secretary-General on the implementation-of Security
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia, in which he informed
us of the most recent events in the long process by
which we have so far been unable to make the will of
the international community prevail. In the next few
days this document will be carefully analysed by the
Council and that analysis, together with the determination of States Members of the Organization expressed
in this and other forums, should lead us to clear decisions and vigorous action towards the attainment of
the objectives we have set ourselves,
36. This meeting represents the beginning of a new
and, we hope, the last stage in dealing with the question of Namibia. In the course of the debatemy delegation will make statements of broader scope and put
forward more concrete proposals. For the moment we
wish simply to state our unhappiness over what has
occurred and our well-founded doubts concerning the
viability of the process we have embarked upon,
37. The failure of the Geneva meeting not only
implies that the illegal occupation of Namibia is likely
lo continue indefinitely, but also suggests that the
South African r8gime perhaps does not consider that
the Member States have made a true political commitment to comply with the decisions of the United
Nations.
38. It is my delegation’s view that the facts confronting us should be openly and carefully considered, while we also reaffirm our commitments a-.;l
search for more effective meansofaction to bring about
the independenceof Namibia, as well as to suppress
the rCgime of ccptrr//wit/
and to limit the excesses of
South Africa by making the arms embargoeffective and
reducing the Pretoria rCgime’s capacity to maintain
its defiance.
39. I should like to take this opportunity warmly
to welcome the representatives of Ireland, Japan,
Panama, Spain and Uganda, who in only a few days
have already contributed to strengthening the Council

through their intelligentand constructive participation.
We would also wish every success to Mr. Jorge
Enrique Illueca of Panama in the sensitive duties to
which he has been summoned, a trust he undoubtedly
deserves.
40. 1 should like too to express the hope that the
immediate future will find us united so that we can
avoid any possibility of regression concerning the principles whose universal recognition has cost the United
N&ions so many years of effort and that, instead, we
may achieve considerable progress in their implementation.
41. Mrs. PANIZA de BELLAVITA (Panama)(b/w.fratn StxmisL):
The fortunate coincidence
whereby Panama‘hasbecomea member of the Security
Council during the Presidency of the People’s Republic of China ii a source of particular graiification for
my country. May I be permitted, therefore, Mr. Ling
Qing, to convey heartiest congratulations to you on
your assumption of the presidency ofthe Council and to
offer to you the full co-operation of the Panamanian
dele.cation.It is also a pleasure for me to exuress the
appreciation of Pan&a for the work done by the
rearesentative of the United States of America, Donald
M’cHenry, who presided over the Council this past
December.

~rctatim

42. My delegation wishes, in accordance with its
duty, to do justice to the exceptional work done in
the Council, during the Carter Administration, by
Mr, Andrew Young, who recently received from the
President of the United States the Medal of Freedom
for his numerous accomplishments. There is no doubt
that Mr. Young contributed to giving the United States
a new international Image through his remarkable
efforts for peace and universal understanding. That
new image was further enhanced by the sophisticated
professionalism of his successor, Mr. Donald McHenry
and by the lofty humanistic beliefs of his deputy,
Mr. William J. vanden Heuvel. To all of them I express
our sincere appreciation.
43. The delegation of Panama is extremely pleased
to see that its term of office representing Latin America
on the Council begins in the company of the delegations of Ireland, Japan, Spain and Uganda, countries
which we are sure will make positive contributions in
discharging their important responsibilities in this
Organ of the IJnited Nations.
44. The new members of the Council will have to
make unprecedented efforts if they are to measure up
to the impeccable performance of the outgoing members: Bangladesh, Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and
Zambia. We recall with respect and admiration the
work done by Messrs. Khwaja Mohammed Kaiser,
Donald 0. ,Mills, Ole Algird, Vasco Futscher Pereira
and Paul John Firmino L.usaka, whose careers form a
fundamentalpart of the history of the United Nations,
thanks to their enormous efforts in the service of world
peace.

.I.. *

. .

45. 1 wish to make special mention of Mr. Mills of
Jamaicawho for the last two years occupied the Latin
American post, which is now filled by Panama. The
excentional humanity and hinh professional aualificationsof Mr. Mills are well l&o&n in United-Nations
circles. For us in the Latin American sphere he is a
model worthy of being followed but impossible to
equal,

51. Once again my country wishes to reaffirm its
solidarity with and support for the peoples and nations
of Africa and to identify with the cause of Namibia.
The longer the Government of South Africa takes to
comply-with the decisions contained in Security
Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978), the
worse the situation will become between~ southern
Africa and South Africa.

46, The absenceof the Jamaican representative will,
however, be largely compensated for in the Council
as far as Latin American representation is concerned
by the Mexican delegation.Mexico, with its exemplary
internationalpolicy, its tradition of love of freedom and
justicb, its dedication to peace and its uninterrupted
defence of the principle of non-interference and the
right of self-determination of peoples, represents in the
Council at the highest levels the values of Latin American culture and the idealsof peacewhich are cherished
by mankind. The Panamanian delegation will be
extremely pleased to work on these important tasks
with Mr. Porfirio Muiioz Ledo, who has always
excelledin the highestpostsin hiscountry andwho,
with his talent, culture and extraordinarypolitical
acumen,enhances
the imageof hiscountry andof the
greatfamily of Latin Americannations.

52. My country wishesto statethat it will spareno
effortsto seethat the peopleof Namibiarealizetheir
right to self.determination
andindependence.
53. In conclusion,my delegationreservesits right
to speakon this matterwhenit is discussed
by the
Council.
54. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics)
(intorpraratiott
from Russian):
May I congratulateyou, Mr. President,on accedingto the post
of Presidentof the SecurityCouncilfor the current
month and expresssatisfactionat your successful
performanceof theselofty responsibilities.
1 should
like alsoto expressour gratitudeto your predecessor
in this post,Mr. McHenry.

55. Ourdelegation
wouldlikewarmlyto welcomethe
47. May I conveyto you,Mr. President,
theapprecia- new membersof the Security Council-the repretion of the Governmentandpeopleof Panama
for the sentativesof Ireland, Japan, Panama,Spain and
significantwordsof welcomewhich you expressed Uganda-andto wish them every successin their
at the 2262ndmeetingof the Council.Reasons
inde- activitiesin the Council,an organwhich bearsthe
pendentof ourwill havemademycountrytherecipient main responsibilityfor maintaininginternational
of the internationalcommunity’sconfidence.It has peaceand security. In performingthe important
bestowed
onusthehighhonourof electionto apostof functionsthat are entrustedby the Charterto the
like all others,
non-permanent
memberinthe SecurityCouncil,oneof Security Council,thosedelegations,
can be certain of constructiveco-operationon the
the postsreservedfor the Latin Americanregion.
part of thedelegationof theSoviet Union.
48. From the standpointof current international
events,this honourandtrust acquireoarticularsig- 56. May I alsoexpressour gratitudeto the reprenificanceand call forth my country’s-appreciation. sentativesof the outaointznon-permanent
members
The international
conflictsandproblems
of ourtimes, of the SecurityCot:ncil-the representatives
of Banggiven their nature and compiexity, require urgent ladesh,Jan&a, Norway, PortugalandZambia-for
attention ani rapid remedies.Consequently,the the usefulcontributionthey havemadeto the CounSecurityCounciltoday, morethanever, mustremain cil’swork over thelast two years.
continuallyalert and must not evade the effective
performanceof the duty incumbenton it to set in S7. Like other delegations,we can only express
motionthe machineryto preserveinternationalpeace satisfactionat the fact that the staff of the United
andsecuritywhichhasbeenestablished
by theChier
StatesEmbassywho weredetainedin Teheranhave
of theUnitedNationsinkeepingwithresolutions
of the finally beenliberated.The Soviet Unionhasalways
Councilandof the GeneralAssembly.
advocatedand continuesto advocatethe unswerving
obs.:rvanceof generallyacceptednormsof inter49. Throughyou, Mr. President,the delegationof nationallaw regardingthe immunity of diplomatic
Panamawishesto thank the Secretarv-General
fol personnel,
aslaiddownin the ViennaConventionon
I
his further report concerningthe impl&nentationof DiplomaticRelationsof 1961,
SecurityCouncilresolutions
435(1978)and439(1978)
relatingto the questionof Namibia.
58. At the sametime, we shouldlike to recallthat,
preciselyin connectionwith the fact that the Iranian
50. We deplorethe fact that the objectivesof the authoritieshad detainedAmerican personnel,the
meetings
heldat thePalaisdesNationsin Genevafrom United Statesproceededto concentratelarge-scale
7 to 14January1981,despitethe goodofficesof the navalforcesin theareaof the PersianGulf. If declaraSccrctary-General
antithe high-level~t~preFcnt;~tion
of tionshy the IJnitedStatesin this connectionwerenot
the pilrtic5.*crc not alt;~metl.
bllnply
il plcrsul
lOI
Cilll
yi11g
UUI
f;ll
lcdclllny
pl,1ns
,,I

that part of the world, then once the question of the
American personnel had been successfully resolved.
the American warships should, it seems, have left the
shores of Iran and returned from the area of the Persian
Gulf to their own shores.
59. Turning now to the item before us on the Security Council’s agenda, we should like to make the
following statement.
60. We listened closely to the statement made by the
Secretary-General when he presented to the Council
his report on the Geneva talks between !3WAPO
and South Africa held under the aegis of the United
Nations. We listened equally closely to the sttdement
made by the Chairman of the African Group for Jan.
uary, the representative of Tunisia, Mr. Slim, and also
those of the representatives of Mexico and Panama.

64. However, South Africa is now essentially proposing to the United Nations, Africa and, indeed, all
progressive mankind the idea that this position be
revised so that the United Nations may with regard to
the question of Namibia take what is called an unbiased position-unbiased, of course, in the eyes of
South Africa. The leadinglights of the policy of ccpcrrtheid had hitherto never reached this level of cynicism.
It is precisely for that reason that a firm rebuttal must
be given to the claims of Pretoria that the position of
the United Nations should be changed.

65. Secondly, the United Nations, the African
countries and other peace-loving States were prepared to display a reasonable degree of patience and
restraint and to proceed by means of negotiation, It
is true that the particular advantagesof that procedure
were described only by a few well-known States.
However, I should like to recall in this connection that
61. The Soviet delegation shares the concern over eight years ago, in February 1972, at the series of
the provocative refusal of South Africa to proceed to meetings held by the Security Council during its visit
meetings],
those Powers
the implementation of a Namibian settlement. We to Africa [1627th-1639th
understand the desire of the African countries to assured us that, in order to reach a turning-point in
study the situation that has arisen in order to deter- the solution to the Namibian problem by means of
mine what specific steps would be most effective. negotiation, they neededonly six months. At that time
At the same time, the main conclusions which should they also stated-and to verify this we needonly glance
at the records of those Council meetings-that, were
be drawn from this situation are clear even today.
South Africa to continue in its stubbornness, they
would draw the necessary weighty conclusions. But
62. First, the position of the United Nations with
respect to the Namibian question, a position that has six months, a year, 18 months elapsed and the talks
been reflected in numerous Security Council and with Pretoria, as the Soviet delegation had warned
General Assembly resolutions, is completely unam- from the very outset, led to nothing, and South Africa
biguous: Namibia is a Territory illegally occupied by was simply given the opportunity for further delay.
the South African racists; SWAP0 is the sole legitimate It was later proposed by the same source that another
representative of the struggling people of Namibia. variant of these talks be utilized. This was agreedto so
Incidentally, those who today are hastening to attach that at least by 1981-the present year-Namibia
the label df “international t&orists” to & national might finally achieve independence. In November
liberation movements not to their IBing, including I978, the Security Council in resolution 439 (1978)
SWAPO, could usefully be reminded of that decision of warned South Africa that, were it to refuse to implement the resolutions of the Council on Namibia, the
the United Nations relating to the status of SWAP0
Council would meet to take the relevant steps against
~Cenrrul
Assembly
deci&
35/442 of 16 December
/9801. If we go further into this dub&s ohIlosoDhy South Africa under Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations.
accoiding to which some should be called terrorisis
simply because they are struggling for their freedom 66. Today, after the complete breakdown of the
from the colonial and racist yoke, then most of the Geneva talks. it is clear that South Africa has once
representatives of the non-aligned countries who are and for all refused to observe the time-table laid down.
proudly representing their independent States in the Furthermore, South Africa has now quite openly
United Nations today could also quite recently have put off a decision on this question siw t/k. We can
been described by some in similar terms. The Soviet either look squarely at these facts or sitnply hide OUI
people have a different approach and a different phi- heads in the sand; but that second course of action
losophy. The Soviet Union has been and continues to would only be playing into the hands of the South
be on the side of those peoples who are struggling for
African racists, which would be damaging to the
their freedom and independenceand we are proud of fundamental interests of the peopleof Namibia.
that.
67. It is the profound conviction of the Soviet dele63. The right of the people of Namibia to freedom, gation that in the present circumstances, the United
independence and self-ditermination is, once again Nations must take the most decisive steps. In this
according to United Nations decisions. their inalien, connection, the resumed thirty-fifth session of the
able right. Consequently, the actions ok South Africa
General Assembly should have its own word to say.
aimed at ntaintaining its occupation of Namibia rep. In its turn, the Security Council should take decisive
resent R serious threat to international peace and action under Chapter VII of the Charter to ensure that
~~ulit)-.
the peopleof Namibia achieve genuineindependence.

68. The United Nations is entitled to expect that
those who eight years ago promised to initiate serious
steos. and those who two and a half years ago once
ag&.made the same promise, will, nbw, thti South
Africa has once and for all lowered its mask, fulfil their
promises and not impedethe initiation of such action.
69, Mr. NISIBORI (Japan): Mr. President, first of all
1 should like to convey to you the sincere congratulations of my delegation on your assumption of the
oresidencv for the month of January. I am happy to
see you, kr. Ling, the representaiive of a cbi&ry
with which Japan enjoys very close and friendly
relations, assuming tl&- high &ice at the momerit
when Japanbeginsits new term of office in the Security
Council. I am sure that under your able guidanceour
meetings will produce fruitful results. I should llke to
assure you that my delegation will co-operate to the
fullest extent of its abilities as you carry o$ the duties
of your high office.
70. I should also like to pay a high tribute to
Mr. McHenry of the delegation of the United States
of America for his guidance of the work of the Security
Council last month. Although Japan was not a member at that time, my delegation closely followed the
Council’s deliberations on the important issues presented to it and could appreciate the skill and dedication which Mr. McHeh,y brought to his task. I would
like to ask the United States delegationto convey our
sentiments to Mr. Donald &Henry.

deadly, there is a heighteneddangerthat local or
reglonaltensioncould sparka majorconflict. Thus
I believethat the time aheadwill presentus with
preciousopportunitiesfor co-operation,as well as
grave challenges.
I am confident,however,that the
SecurityCou&il canbeeffectivein responding
to the
constantlychangingandcomplexworld situation.As
a member
of theCouncil,I canassuretheCouncilthat
Japanwill continuewith reneweddeterminationto
workfor worldpeaceandsecurityin accordance
with
the principlesof the Charter.
73. In accordancewith the understanding
reached
yesterdayat the informal meetingof the Security
Council,my statementon the problemof Namibia
today will be limitedto an observationof a general
natureon the report of the Secretary-General
concerningthe implementation
of resolutions435(1978)
and439(1978),containedin documentS/14333.When
the Councilresumes
its consideration
at a later stage,
my delegationwould like to make a detailedand
substantial
statement
onthis very importantquestion.
74. ThismorningI havelistenedto the statementof
the Secretary-General
attentively. I have alsoread
with greatinteresthis report dated19January1981.
I closely watched developmentsthroughout the
entirecourseof the pre-implementation
meetingheld
In Geneva,in the expectationthat independence
of
Namibiawouldbe achievedby the endof this year in
accordancewith Security Counci! resolution435
(1978).

71. In addition, on behalf of my Government I should
like to address my special word of thanks to you and 75. First of all I shouldlike to expressour deep
to other representatives who have expressed cordial appreciationof the efforts exertedby the Secretarywords of welcome to my country and myself. My coun. Generalandthe teamled by Mr. Brian Urquhartfor
try is pleased to commence this term in the company thepreparation
andconductof themeeting.I amfully
of Ireland, Panama, Spain and Uganda, countries to awarethat the front.llne States,Nigerla,OAU and
which Japan is bound by special ties of friendship and the contact BTOIJP
of Westerncountriesalso made
co-operatlon. I should also like to pay a well-desorvod
commondablZ
efforts with a view to achievingthe
tribute to the delegatlons of those countries whose objectivesof the moetine-i.e., the settingof the date
Council membershlp expired at the end of 1980.I refer for tho cease&e and implementation
of the settleto Bangladesh. Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and Zam
mentproposal.
bia, which,in their joint work r&d co-operationwith
all othermembers
of the Council,provideda valuable 76, The meetingprovidedall the partiesconcerned
and inspiringmodelfor thoseof is who arejust be- with thefirst opporiunityin thelonghistoryof struggle
ginningour termof membership
in the Council.
for the independence
of Namibiato makecontacts
andto exchangeviewsat a variety of levels.Regard72. My Governmenthasalwaysrecognizedthat the lessof the resultof the meeting,we cannotoverlook
SecurityCouncilis the singlemostimportantorgan its positiveaspectsin creatinggoodfaith, a spirit of
for themaintenance
of worldpeaceandsecurity.Thus co-operation
andunderstanding.
we regardour membership
in the Councilasa great
honour,butalsoasonewhichcarriesawesome
respon- 77. However,it is deplorablethat. becauseof the
sibilities.This is the fifth time that Japanhasbeen intransigent
attitudetakenby SouthAfrica, themeeting
privilegedto serveon the Counciland, althoughthe had to be adjournedwithout an agreementbeing
role of the Councilhasalwaysbeenimportant,I be- reachedon the datefor implementation.
lieve that it will becomeincreasinglycrucial in the
comingmonthsand years. For, while the world is 78. As the Secretary-General
haspointedout in his
becomingever more interdependent,demanding report, the outcomeof the meetingin Genevamust
greaterco-operationbetweenall regions,there are give rise to the mostseriousinternationalconcern.
centrifugalforcesat work as well. As the world’s 1 wishto join the Secretary-General
in his appealto
resourcesbecomescarce, and armamentsmore the Governmentof SouthAfrica to review. with the

utmost care. the imnlications of the meeting and to
reconsider iis position with regard to the imp’icmentation nf resolution 435 (1978) at the earliest possible
time. “he task which lies before us in assisting Namibia
to achieve its independence at the earliest possible
date is by no meansan easy one. Nevertheless, I should
like to assure you, hIr. President, that my delegation
is fully determined to work together with the other
members of the Security Council in order to achieve
the goal set forth in resolutions 435 (1978) and 439
(1978).

regardingeventsin Genevaand the courseof the
struggleto liberate Namibiafrom South African
opp&ssion.
85, However, I shouldadd that the destructive
attitudeof SouthAfrica, whichled to the downfallof
the Genevatalks. wasnot particularlysurprisingto
us.In thelightof thepolicyoi’obstruction
anddelaying
tacticswhichhasbeenpursuedby SouthAfrica since
the Security Councilaboptedr&olution 435(19781,
therewasbutonesurprising
eleinentinGenevaandthat
wasthe undisguised
impudence
with whichthe representativesof the racist r6gimegave their negative
response
to theUnitedNationsandto theinternational
community.We have frequently had occasionhere
to refer to-thenegativeattiiudeof thePretoriardgime
andto thereasons
for it. Wedemanded,
andweshould
onceagainlike to repeatthis today, that the arms
embargobe strengthenedand that far-reachingenforcementstepsbe taken againstSouth Africa, in
accordancewith ChapterVII of the Charterof the
UnitedNations.

79. Before concluding my statement, I wish to say a
few words on the release of the 52 American hostages.
The Government and peopleof Japan are very pleased
that the problem has been settled peacefully through
efforts made by the parties concerned and, in particular, thanks to the persevering manner in which the
Government and peopleof the United States have dealt
with the problem for a longperiod of time. I should also
like to pay a high tribute to the Secretary-General, who
made tremendous efforts to discharge the duties
conferred on him by the Security Council,

86. In view of the defianceof the United Nations,
witnessed
onceagainat Geneva,andalsoin viewof the
fact that the racistrkgimesimultaneously
committed
cruelactsof aggression
againstthe People’s
Republic
of Angola, one may legitimatelywonderhow long
the UnitedNationsandhow longthe SecurityCouncil cantoleratesuchconduct.

80. Mr. FLORIN (German Democratic Republic)
(irrrerpretutiott
jiw
Russian):
Mr. President, I should
like to congratulate you on your accession to the post
of President of the Security Council for the monih of
January. I would request the delegationof the United
States io transmit td the President of the Council for
December, Mr. McHenry, our best wishes.

87. It shouldbe pointedout that the presencein
Genevaof representatives
of certain NATO States
did not have a very positiveeffect. The relationsof
certaininfluentialcirclesin thoseStateswith South
Africa leave no room for any possibleillusionthat
they mightever be preparedto obligeSouth Africa
to accept the decisionsof the UniTedNations,in
particularsincethoseStateshaveconstantlyresisted
the adoptionof any resoluteenforcementmeasures.
One wonderswhat is really the purposeof the presenceof NATO Statesat meetings
suchastheGeneva
meeting.

81, At the same time 1 should like to avail myself of
this opportunity to welcome warmly the new members
of the Council to our midst: the representatives of
Ireland, Japan, Panama, Spain and-Uganda. I can
assure all of them of the co-operation of the German
Democratic Republic in performing the tasks that are
incumbent on the Security Council.
82. I should like to state that for the delegationof the
German Democratic Republic it has been an honour to
co-operate with the representatives of Bangladesh,
Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and Zambia in the Council, and we should like to express our gratitude to them.

88. TheGenevameetinghasalsorevealedthe sense

83. The delegation of the German Democratic Republic would also like to express its satisfaction in
connection with the release of United States Embassy
personnel
in Teheranand its hopethat thiswill reduce
tensionin that part of the world.
84. The delegation

of the German

of responsibility

and the constructive

spirit with

whichSWAP0has supported efforts to reach a settlementof the NamibiaI;broblem. This has once again
confirmedSWAPO’srole asthe solelegitimaterepre-

sentative of the Namibian people, a role that has foi
years been repeatedly endorsed at successive sessions
of the General Assembly.

Democratic

Republicbelievesthat it isa matterof extremeimpor- 89. We are convinced that the time has now come
tance for the Security Council to continue to concern to draw conclusions from our many years of experience
itself with the problem of Namibia and with all steps with the policy of South Africa concerning Namibia
and,by means
of the effectiveenforcement
measures
that could be taken towards its settlement, primarily

in view of the responsibility borne by the United
laid down in the Charter, to force the Pretoria rCgime
to respect the decisions of the United Nations.
Nations for Namibia. We share the concern which
hasbeen expressed
in paragraph
21of the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We symgathize with the points that

8

‘I

97. Regrettably, that was not to be. In the long and
arduous process of negotiations on Namibia, we have
seen a series of manoeuvres and delaying moves on
the part of South Africa which proved to be the obstruction to reaching agreement.

and sense of gratification of the people and Government of the United States of America over the release
of the American hostages. We extend our best wishes
for the future to them and to their families.
91. And now, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate you on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of January. It is a
source of satisfaction to my delegationto see you, the
representative of a great Asian country with which my
own country enjoys warm and friendly ties of COoperation and mutual understanding, presiding over
the bushless of the Council. Our two countries and
peoples have deepenedtheir friendship and broadened
areas of mutually beneficial co-operation,

98. In the view of my delegation, that happened
againat the recent meeting in Geneva. The argument
set forth by South Africa at the Geneva meeting is,
to say the least, unconvincing to my delegation. My
delegationhad hoped that the Geneva meeting would
provide the necessary impetus to set in motion the
early implementation of Security Council resolutions
435 (1978) and 439 (1978) that would bring genuine
independenceto Namibia based on the exercise of the
right of the Namibian people to self-determination.
It was within this context that my delegationgave its
support to the postponement of the substantive consideration of the question of Namibia at the last session
of the General Assembly. -~-’
-

92. Given your diplomatic capabilities and vast
experience nurtured after years of active participation and involvement in the work of the Conference
on the Law of the Sea, we are confident that you will
be able to deal decisively and expeditiously with the
issues confronting the Security Council.

99. The discouraging outcome of the Geneva meeting
is regrettable. My delegation expresses its grave
concern over this development, which is a serious set
back to United Nations efforts.

93. My delegation commends the excellent manner
in which Mr. McHenry of the United States conducted
the affairs of the Council last month. His positive
contribution to the work of the Council will be long
remembered by us. We request the United States
delegationto convey to him our best wishes for success
in his future endeavours.

100. In conclusion, my delegation will have the opportunity to address itself in more detail to this point
once the Council begins anew its substantive consideration of the question of Namibia.

94, My delegation warmly welcomes the new members of the Security Council, the representatives of
Ireland, Japan, Panama, Spain and Uganda. We
assure them of our support and co-operation in the
discharge of the responsibilities of the Council, To our
colleagues who have left our midst, the representatives of Bangladesh, Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and
Zambia, my delegationexpresses its sincere appreciation for their invaluable assistance and co-operation.
Our close association with them widened our horizons
and yielded Gutuaiiy beneficial relationships.

101. Mr. OUMAROU (Niger) (irlrerprerutiun
from
Frc~rck): Mr. President, we are already on the eve of
the end of your mandate. This is therefore an appropriate occasion to pay tribute to the great qualities you
have shown throughout this month of January, which
for the Council marks the beginningof a new year of
reflexion, vigilance and responsibilities.
102. In this connection, my delegationfeels relieved
and comforted by the final release of the American
hostages. May that happy event herald a new era of
understandingand agreementin internationalrelations.

95. In this connection, my delegation wishes to
reciprocate the cordial remarks made by Mr. Khwda
Mohammed Kaiser of Dangiadesh last December
during his lucid representation of the report of the
Security Council Committee established by resoiution 421 (iY77) concerning the question of South
Africa. My delegationwishes to congratulate him fol
his sterling contribution to the work of that Committee.

103. My delegationcongratulates you, Mr. President,
on the tact, patience and moderation coupled with
authority which you displayed in guidhig our work.
It permitted the Security Council to act in the spirit of
its role and its mission. My delegation takes this
opportunity to reassure your great country, the People’s Republic of China, of the importance which
the Niger attaches to friendship with your people
and to co-operation with your leaders.

96. My delegationis grateful to the Secretary-General
for his oral report und for his written report, which is
before us, on the pre-implementation meeting 011
N tmibia recently held in Geneva, The intelnational
community wus hopeful that that pre-implementation
meeting would be the final step towards reaching a
settlement for the reaiizstion of the efforts undertaken
by the United Nations to resolve ihe question of
Namibia by pcaccful I~C;IIIS.

104. We have come together here for a meeting we
had thought for a moment we might be spared. However. 011 the eve of 7 Januarv 1981.the date of the oreimpl&iientation meeting ievoteh IO giving e+ect
to resolutions 435 (19781and 439 (1978) on the independence of Namibia, we had no iiiusidns. We must,
unforlunately. note. after having heard the SecretnryGeneral ;i nionient ago alld .d’Lcrhaving read his cou9

-

rageous. clear and objective report of 19 January, that
South Africa continues to raise more and more obstacles to the implementation of the settlement plan.
The Niger and ail Africa are deeply disappointed and
concerned over this, as is the entire international
community and, through it, the Security Council and
all parties of good will that had agreed to take on the
exalting task of decolonization imposed on the world
by the;Ilegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia
by the South African racists.
105. Among those parties of good will, my delegation
would like to make particular mention of the frontline States and Nigeria, OAU and the contact group
of five Western States, whose efforts in Geneva, we
have been told, were constructive and highly ap
preciated. And, of course, we cannot forget the Secretary-General, who perseveringly and methodically
prepared the gathering at Geneva, once again displaying his ability to concentrate actively on problems
which, if not settled, create discord and tension in the
world. He will no doubt permit me to express the
appreciation of my delegation also to his many effective and discreet colleagues, in particular Mr. Brian
Urquhart, whose commitment to the cause of Namibia
gives rise to the highest hopes.
106. With regard to SWAPO, its leaders, its fighters
and its militants, whose just and legitimate struggle
we support, they may simply rest assured that the
Niger will always continue to make its contribution
of solidarity and action, until the complete liberation
of Namibia.
107. This meeting is unfortunately not devoted to a
substantive consideration of this important question,
which has acquired a more disquieting and new dimension by reason of the failure of the Geneva meeting,
My delegationtherefore reserves its right to return to
this question to state the importance and the urgency
which the Niger attaches to the democratic independence of Namibia.
108. Bui I did not wish to conclude without bidding
a warm welcome to our friends from Ireland, Japan,
Panama, Spain and Uganda, fve countries which
are severally dear to us and to which I express here
assurances of our full and friendly co-operation.
109. That leads me also to recall the extent to which
my delegation has been honoured by the relations of
friendship, undersianding and open co-operation
which it enjoyed in the course of a year with the representatives of Bangladesh, Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and Zambia. Those delegationshave left us after
having acquitted themselves with great competence
in the Security Council and their ever apt and clearsighted contribution will certainly not be forgotten.
I IO. My thought’: also go IO Mr. McHenry, who has
just concluded his term LSrepresentative of the United
States after a productive presidency of the Council,

which was quite in keeping with his great talents as
a diplomat and with the enormous prestige of his great
country. My delegation will always appreciate his
constant support for African causes.
111. Mr. OTUNNU (Uganda): I wish, on behalf of my
delegation, to convey warm congratulations to you,
Mr. President, on your assumption of the presidency
of the Council for the month of January, I am confident
that your wisdom and statesmanship will strengthen
and enrich the work of the Council. 1 wish also to
express the gratitude of my delegation to you and to
the other members of the Council for their kind words
of welcome. Your guidance and encouragement,
Mr. President, as well as those of long-standing members of the Council have been of immense help in
getting us settled and acquainted with the business
and procedures of the Council.
112. I should like too to express our gratitude to
Mr. McHenry for the very able leadership he provided
the Council during the month of December.
113. May I also take this opportunity to pay a warm
tribute to the delegations of Bangladesh, Jamaica,
Norway, Portugal and Zambia, the outgoing members
of the Security Council, for their outstanding contribution to the work of the Council during the last two
years.
114. My delegationassociates itself with the remarks
you have made, Mr. President, on the release of the
American hostages. Uganda has been following with
anxiety the developments concerning this crisis.
We therefore share the joy and relief of the hostages,
of their families and of the American people at seeing
this problem endedpeacefully and to the satisfaction of
ail the parties concerned. It is clear from the statements
of various delegations,as well as from the events of the
last few days, that this sense of relief and satisfaction
is shared by the whole international community.
I should like to commend the Security Council and
the Secretary-General for the important part they
played in creating a positive climate for negotiations
during this very unfortunate episode. I wish also to pay
a special tribute to the Government and people of
Algeria for the crucial and indispensable role that
they played in resolving the hostage crisis.
115. As this is the.firs! intervention by my delegation
in the formal proceedings of the Council, 1wish to take
this opportunity to express the gratitude and appreciation of the Govermnent and people of Uganda to al1
Members of the United Nations, and especially to the
Group of African States, for the trust and confidence
in my country they have expressed by electing us
to serve for the next two years on the Security Council. We fully appreciate the magnitude of this responsibility and we shall endeavour to play our part to the
full.
116. We are conscious of the fact that the main
responsibility of the Council is the maintenance of

international peace and security. But my delegation
is equally aware that the goal of maintaining international peace and security cannot be achieved either
in a vacuum or by the application of some mechanical
formula. Our obiectives can be achieved only by the
strengthening of certain agreed principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations.
117. Each passing week we witness manifold events
which explain why the Security Council was entrusted
with the role of reducing tension and thus maintaining
peace and security in the world. The causes of world
tension and the ensuing conflicts are many and varied.
In the view of my delegation, the situation of racism
and oppression in southern Africa poses one of the
most sirmiticant threats to international ueace and
security-today. The question of Palestine is’ a powder
ken. which. thouah nhvsicallv located in the Middle
Ea%, is in reality-a Constant ihreat to the peace and
security of the whole world. Colonialism and other
attempts to dominate or interfere in the affairs of other
countries constitute other major sources of international tension, My delegation will play its part constructively in attempting to End solutions to those
problems in particular and to other forms of tension
threatening international peace and security.
118. I have indicated that the situation in southern
Africa is a maior source of threats to international
peace and security. The Security Council has long
recognized this fact in the case of the occupation of
Namibia and the Council consequently decided on the
accession to independence of Namibia in accordance
with its resolutions 43.5 (1978) and 439 (1978). It was
with a view to implementing those resolutions that
the Secretary-General convened a pre-implementation meeting in Geneva.
119. We have studied carefully the report of the
Secretary-General on the meeting in Geneva and we
listened attentively to his comments on that report
this morning. My delegation will not at this stage enter
into a debate on the substance of the report, but we
reserve our right to discuss the report comprehensively at a later date. However, let me note the deep
disappointment which my delegation feels at the fact
that it was not possible to set dates for a cease-fire and
the implementation of the United Nations independence plan for Namibia. We also note, and this with
deep satisfaction, that SWAP0 was willing to proceed
at the meeting in Geneva to sign a cease-fire agreement
and to agree on a target date for the arrival of the United
Nations Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG)
in Namibia. It is clear to all delegations that South
Africa’s intransigence made that impossible,
120. I wish to pay tribute to SWAP0 for the courage
and statesmanship it showed in accepting the United
Nations plan and demonstrating its willingness to
cot. :st free and fair elections supervised by the United
Nations. SWAP0 has demonstrated a remarkable
degree of palience in the face of uncalled-for provoca-

tion by South Africa and the internal parties. Our
gratitude goes also to those who were involved in preparing and executing the meeting, especially the
Secretary-General and his representatives, OAU,
the front-line States and Nigeria, and members of the
contact group of Western countries.
121. I wish to remind the Council that 12 years ago
the Heads of State of OAU adopted an important
document called the Lusaka Manifesto,’ which was
later presented to the United Nations General Assembly by President Ahidjo of Cameroon. That document spelled out Africa’s commitment to the liberation
struggle, as well as the alternative means of bringing
about the total liberation of Africa. Africa indicated in
the document that it preferred the liberation of Africa
through negotiations. But, as all peaceful avenues were
closed, it had no alternative but to carry out an armed
struggle.
122. The events in Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau,
Angola and Zimbabwe have shown that the African
nations and OAU will rise to the challenges of armed
struggle as well as to the challenges of negotiated
settlements. We are ready to rise to similar challenges
this time in the case of Namibia.
123. Mr. DORR (Ireland): This is the first time that
I have had an opportunity to speak in the Security
Council since Ireland took its place in the Council
on I January. At the outset, with the Council’s permission, I shall make three general points.
124. First, I want to refer to the President’s assumption of his office in the Council. If I had been sneaking
earlier in the month, I would have expressed my good
wishes to you, Mr. President, personally and to your
country for your future handling of the presidency
and my thanks to your predecessor in December,
Mr. McHenry. As it is, I speak at the end rather than
at the beginning of January. I will therefore rather
congratulate and thank you for the way in which you
have carried out the heavy responsibilities of the
presidency during this month and for the efforts you
have made in our various informal consultations to
facilitate our work.
125. Secondly, I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and other representatives in the Council for the
way in which you have received us in our informal
discussions and for the good wishes which they and
you have expressed to my delegation in this month
when we take our place as a new member of the Council. My country was deeply honoured to be elected to
the Council, along with Japan, Panama, Spain and
Uganda. We are aware that membership is a heavy
responsibility, especially at this time when, as the
representatives of Japan and Uganda have pointed
out, the international climate is growing more difficult.
We hope that we can carry out this responsibility in a
way that will justify the trust that has been placed in us
by all Members of the United Nations in electing us a
member of the Council for this two-year period.

126. I should also like to express our appreciation
and good wishes to those who preceded us on the
Council over the past two years. We offer good wishes
and thanks to those non-permanent members who
have vacated seats to make way for new members:
Bangladesh, Jamaica, Norway, Portugal and Zambia.
We also offer good wishes to certain members of
individual delegations who are no longer among us on
the Council this year. I would mention in particular
Mr. McHenry and Mr. vanden Heuvel of the United
States delegation. We are fully conscious of the contributions which they and our immediate predecessors
on the Council have made to its work and the high
standard they have set for us who are new members.
We will try for our part to carry out to the very best of
our ability the responsibilities which they have handed
over to us.

continuing and uatient efforts of the front-line States
and Nigeaa, the contact group of Western countries,
SWAP0 and others in trying over the past two years
to bring about the implementation of these proposals.
131. We had very much hoped that these efforts,
which culminated in the meeting earlier this month in
Geneva, would have been successful, so that the
people of Namibia could have at last achieved selfdetermination and independence through a peaceful
process under United Nations supervision and control,
Such an outcome, achieved through peaceful means,
would indeed have been a hopeful and welcome
development.
132. It is a matter of very great disappointment to us
that this aim has not been achieved. It was not achieved
despite the fact that, as the report of the SecretaryGeneral before us makes clear, a wide area of agreement, including basic agreement on the proposals and
on the demilitarized zone, had already been achieved
over two vears of consultations since 1978. Our disappointment is all the greater because we are aware of
the skilful handlinR of the meetinn by the Chairman.
Mr. Urquhart, and-also of the patience shown and the
very great effort made by many of those who attended
in order to reach agreement on a peaceful transition to
independence by Namibia.

127. Thirdlv, I should like briefly to express our satisfaction at the release of the Amkrican hostages held
in Iran. The Prime Minister of Ireland, Mr. Haughey,
met the hostages during the short stopover in Ireland
on their return flight to the United States from Wiesbaden. He has already expressed very fully the pleasure and satisfaction of the Government and people
of Ireland at their release. I do not need, therefore, to
repeat that here. I would, however, like to express the
admiration of my delegation for the patient efforts,
both public and private, undertaken by many in the
international community, through the United Nations
and otherwise, over a long period to negotiate the
release of the hostages. If I may say so, we particularly
admire the special role played by the Government of
Algeria. Its mediation deserves the special appreciation of the international community. I want also to
emphasize our very great appreciation of the work of
the Secretary-General over a long period, both in public
and in private, in seeking to resolve the crisis.

133. The delegation of Ireland is in full agreement
with the view of the Secretary-General as expressed in
paragraph 21 of his report, where he says that I’. . . the
outcome of the meeting. . . must give rise to the most
serious international concern.” Now that we have his
report on the meeting and have heard his presentation
here of that report, it is clear that all the members of
the Council will wish to reflect further on the steps
which need to be taken.

128. I turn now to the particular issue before this
meeting-the situation in Namibia.

134. My delegation for its part will address itself to
the issue in greater detail at a later stage. For the
moment I would simply add to what I have said: the
fact that the delegation of Ireland is fully conscious
that a serious situation has now arisen, and we share
fullv the concern expressed by other delegations here.
So far as Ireland is cbncernedi we are ready to play OUI
oart in the further consideration by the Council in due
course of the issue with which the international community must now cope.

I?Y. For many years now Ireland has been concerned to see South Africa end its illegal occupation
of Namibia so that the people of Namibia would be free
IO exercise their right to self-determination and to
proceed to independence. We welcomed the adoption
by the Security Council in 1976 of resolution 38.5(lY76),
which provided for free and fair elections for the whole
of Namibia under United Nations supervision and
control. We also welcomed the adoption by the Council
in 1978 of resolution 435 (1978), which approved the
specific proposals by the Secretary-General for the
implementation of a settlement. and we are concerned
to see the people of Namibia achieve full self-determination within the framework set by these two basic
resolutions of the Council at the earliest possible
date.

135. Mr. de PINIBS (Spain) fi,lte,prc/rrrio,r
Jk~rr~
Mr. President, I should like first of all to
congratulate you on having assumed the presidency
of tlhe Securiiy Council d&ng the current month of
January. This is the first time that my country has
occupied a seat on the Security Council together with
the Peoole’s Republic of China. You are aware,
Mr. Pres’ident, ofihe close friendly relations that have
united our two countries ever since we, happily, established diplomatic relations, as a result of which Their
Maiesties the King and Queen of’ Spain nxxie an

Sptr/lishJ:

130. My delegation appreciates the continuing efforts
of the Secretary-General and members of his staff to
carry out these resolutions. We also appreciate the

ofli’ci:d

I’

visit

to your

gre;tl

cwnlr)

111 107X. “‘:c

shll

spare no effort in assisting you in discharging the very
important responsibilities you hold here.
136. On this occasion I also wish to greet my illustrious friend the Secretary-General, We wish him to
know that we shall always stand in solidarity with his
actions in the performance of his functions. One must
not give heedto those who confuse the discharge of the
responsibilities incumbent upon onein such a highpost,
in keeping with the instructions given him by the
Organization, with the wishes of certain quarters that
have not precisely distinguished themselves by their
defence of the Organization. We are familiar with his
rectitude and, even though we were not on the Council, we had the opportunity to observe his exemplary
conduct in the actions he undertook to resolve the
problem of the hostages, whose release we are joyfully
celebratingtoday at the end of such an unjust captivity.
Our congratulations extend to all those who have
participated in and made possible such a fortunate
outcome, especially the Government of Algeria,
137. I also wish to congratulate Ireland, Japan,
Panama-and I send greetings to that country’s new
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Illueca-and Uganda,
which, together with Spain, have been elected to
occupy places on the Security Council.
138. With regard to the other countries members of
the Council-some veterans by virtue of entering upon
the second year of their mandate and others permanent members under the terms of the CharterI wish to extend a special greeting to them and also
thank them for thei; congiatulati&s, recalling that
Spain comes to the Security Council, the principal
organ of the United Nations, with an open mind and
with the wish to contribute to the solution of conflicts
which may come before the Council for consideration.
139. Spain wishes to take this opportunity to renew
its trust, as the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Spain
stated in the generaldebate of the General Assembly,
in the capacity of the United Nations to mobilize and
bring together, in its noble ability to sound a call, to
inspire and rouse mankind. The United Nations fulfils
a function that is basic for our survival, and Spain
intends to work in so far as it is able towards strengthening the Organization and will always be ready to
answer its call.
140. The Organization, and the Security Council in
particular, were set up in order to save succeeding
generations from the scourge of war. Sad to say,
although world conflagrations have been avoided,
the number of military- conflicts that have occurred
since the Second World War. that is. since the creation
of the Organization, has reached m&e than 130.There
are conflicts which remain on the list of items before
the Council, apparently without any solution having
been found; their very existence reflects the fact that
at times the Organization has been unable to put an
end to them or resolve them, with all the danger that
entails of their spreading within or outside their areas.

141. The Charter contains the necessary machinery
for action, but the abusive use of specific privileges
has on various occasions meant that this organ has not
been able to resolve those conflicts, However, if we
take into account the fact that, to ensure quick and
effective action by the United Nations, Members
conferred upon the Council the main responsibility
for maintaining international peace and security and
recognized that the Council acts on their behalf in
carrying out the tasks required by that responsibility,
it would appear that the Council should be able to
find formulas and solutions.
142. It is true that since this is a political body par
excellence, at times the individual interests of States
come first, with notorious disregard for the conditions
set forth in the ChartaTfor the carrying out of functions
entrusted to the Security Council, and it is true that at
times the purposes and principles of the United Nations according to which the Council must operate are
neglected.
143. Hence, let us bear in mind Articles 1 and 2 of
the Charter and let us not lose sight of them for these
Articles contain precisely those purposes and principles. So far as my delegation is concerned, we shall
endeavour to comply with them for the better performance of the tasks we have been entrusted with
as a member of this important body.
144. Spainis a member of the Security Council for the
second time, and we hope that, on the day we leave
the Council at the end of our mandate, it will be rti
membered that Spain has fulfilled its responsibilities.
145. After that introduction I now wish to refer to
the question of Namibia. We are not going to enter into
a substantive discussion of the matter at this time, but
I wanted to take this opportunity to thank the Secretary-General for the clarity and objectivity with which,
as on previous occasions, he has reported to the Coup
cil on recent developments in negotiations on the
question of Namibia.
146. 1would alsojoin in the concern expressed by the
Secretary-General over the fact that in the talks held in
Geneva this month the objective was not attained
-that is, the setting of a date for a cease-fire and the
ilnplellietitatioll of Security Council resolution 435
(1975) early this year. We must mention the remarkable efforts and spirit of understanding and co-operation of various parties which have worked continuously towards the attainment of a solution to the
problem, among them the various African countries
that have participated in the negotiations and the
Secretary-Generai of OAU, which has once again
shown that it follows theline of co-operation andfriendship with the Organization, as well-as the efforts made
by the contact group of Western countries.
147. Spain’s attitude with regard to the problem of
Namibia has been unequivocally expressed in the

Council and in other forums of the Organization. The
delegationof Spain reserves its right to restate its longstanding attitude when the right time comes. In the
meantime, I wish to join in the appeal made by the
Secretary-General and several members of the Council
IO those who have not yet been able to accept the
proposals on a peacefulsolution backed by the Council
to reconsider their position at the earliest poss:ble
lime.

151. My delegationwould like to extend this tribute to
all members of the international community who have
directly or indirectly contributed to the happy outcome
of the sore trial that was for too long suffered by the
American diplomats. We should particularly like to
commend the essential role played by Algerian diplomacy and the tireless efforts, both in private and in
public, that were made from the very outset by the
Secretary-General of the Organization.

148. Mr. LEPRETTE (France) (interprctcttion
frottl
This meeting gives us an opportunity officially to welcome the new members of the Security
Council electedat the thirty-fifth session of the General
Assembly. I note that the five countries which the
General Assembly votes of October last have permitted to participate in our deliberations in 1981and
19X have’ previbusly been members of the Council.
Each of them represents a specific and original approach to international life. That diversity in itself
canno! but enhance the authority and representative
nature of the Council. France is pleased that it enjoys
with each of its five new partners, which have often
been close to us for reasons of geography or shared
history, links of friendship and co-operation, and
sometimes even of association. Finally, it is a particular pleasure for me to recognize at the head of the
tive delegationsrepresenting Ireland, Japan, Panama,
Spain and Uganda distinguished diplomats who have
already-some of them for a long time-rendered
yeoman service to the cause of the United Nations;
most of them are persons with whom I have personal
ties of friendship.

152. I now come to the subject of this meeting.

Frrtwk):

149. A former colleague from one of these new
membercountries, Mr. I-llueca,hasjust beenpromoted
to the very high ofice of Minister for Foreign Affairs
of his country, and I would request his delegationto
transmit to him our warm congratulations and best
wishes.
150. While welcoming the five new non-permanent
members of the Security Council, I should once again
like to send a greeting to those thev have reolaced.
The representatives ofBangladesh, J&aica, kmvdy,
Portugal and Zambia and their colleagues have all
made a very valuable contribution to the work of the
Council and their talent, level-headednessand dedication have undoubtedly heightenedthe importance of
our deliberations and the causes they have defended,
We owe them this tribute, and in it I cannot fail to
associate my colleagueMr. McHenry, who headedthe
United States delegation to the Security Council for
the last two years. New York is holding a special
celebration today for the return of the 52 American
diplomats detainedfor 14months in defiance of international law. In working to bring about their return and
in attempting to ensure respect for human rights and
juxtice. Mr. McHenry devoted energy and determination to his tasks in a fashion that redounds to his
credit.

153. I listened closely to the statement made bp the
Secretary-General, describing the pre-implementation
meeting on the settlement plan, which was held in
Geneva from 7 to 14January. Those comments have in
a very interesting anduseful way confirmed the impression of the meetlngthat could be gainedfrom the report
drawn up by the Secretary-General,~and.&mitted
to the Council on 19January.
154. It is not our intention to discuss the substance
of the issue now. Nevertheless, I would like to thank
the Secretary-General for the clarity and precision of
the report before u3 and for the care he has obviously
taken to reflect all the views expressed in the course
of the work.
155. At Geneva, the French representatives were
in a position to appreciate the hard work and the skill
employedby the Secretary-General and his colleagues.
particularly Mr, Urquhart, to ensure that the meeting
proceededsmoothly. We are well aware that the organization of the conference was not the easiest of tasks.
It involved bringing together for the first time the
parties concerned in the settlement of this problem.
That is a fact the importance of which all will have
grasped. It is all the more a pity that an opportunity
to make decisive progress in the negotiations has not
been seized.
156. 1 should like to reaffirm the support that my
country has given, and will continue to give, to the
efforts of the United Nations to implement the plan
for settlement adopted in resolution 435 (1978).
157. I should also like to reaffirm our confidence in
the Secretary-General and his colleagues. We are
certain that, together with the parties concerned in the
settlement, and relying on the co-operation of those
countries that desire a successful outcome, they will
continue with determiriation their efforts to hring
about an internationally recognized peaceful solution
in Namibia.
1%. Finally, Mr. President, on this penultimateday
of your term of office, I should like to express to you
my profound gratitude for the wisdom, patience and
sense of compromise with which you have guided out
discussions and conducted difficult negotiations
during the month of January.

159. Sir Anthony PARSONS (United Kingdom): At
our final meeting last year, just before Christmas,
-1 expressed the warmth and regret of our farewell to
our outgoing colleagues on the Council from Bangladesh,Jamaica,Norway. Portugaland Zambiaand our
similar feelings at the departure from our midst of our
very good friend and colleague Donald McHenry. It
remainsfor us to congratulate you, Mr. President, very
sincerely on your admirableconduct of-and successful survival of-the presidency of the Security Council during the month of January,
160. I also wish to extend a very warm welcome to
those members of the Council who have been elected
for the years 1981 and 1982: our good friends from
Ireland, Japan, Panama, Spain and Uganda, all of
‘whom are well known to us already and all of whom
have already been actively engaged in our deliberations.161. Finally, before turning to the item on our agenda,
I wish to express the unalloyed and unreserved joy
and relief of my delegation, of my Government and
of all the people of my country at the release of the
American hostagesfrom Iran after their long and bitter
ordeal.
162. The Secretary-General, in introducing his report
on the recent Geneva meeting on Namibia, has repeatedhis call that efforts not be relaxed to bring about
independence in Namibia, in accordance with the
plan on which so many of us, in and out of the Council,
have worked so hard, Let me make it clear that my
delegation has the warmest admiration for the enormous efforts made by the Secretary-General and his
staff. They gave us at Geneva yet another demonstration of their devotion to the cause of Namtbian independence, their great diplomatic expertise and their
willingness to deal constructively with the problems
of all concerned.
163, I have taken note of the mention made by our
African colleaguesof the role of the contact group of
Western countries and I pay a similar tribute to the
front-line States, to Nigeria and to OAU.
164. So far as my delegationis concerned, I can do no
better at this stage than to quote from the statement
madeby Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of my country, Lord Carrington, in the
House of Lords following the Geneva meeting on
19January:
“Her Maiesty’s Government are deeply disappointed by the failure to achieve agreement on a
date for a cease-fire in March leading to independence for Namibia by the end of 1981. It proved
impossible to reach agreement . , . in view of the
statement of the delegationled by the South African
Administrator-General that it was ‘premature’
to agree on an implementation date, This is an
especially regrettable setback after the great efforts

of the United Nations, the Western Five and the
front-line States to meet the reasonable concerns of
South Africa and the internal parties. We support
the Chairman’s closing appeal to those concerned
to reconsider their position. The Five will review
the position with the other participants in the negotiations and we shall discuss the problem with the
new American Administration. Meanwhile, the
progress made so far in preparing the ground for
a settlement should not be thrown away,”
165, In his statement today, the representative of
Tunisia rightly suggested that we all neededmore time
to analyse the situation following the Geneva meeting
and that it would be premature to go deeply into the
substance of the question at this stage. I agree with
him, and I reserve the right of my delegationto intervene further at a later meeting when all concerned
have had sufficient time to reflect and to consult
together.
166. The PRESIDENT ~intwpwtation
jkm
ChiI shall now make a statement in my capacity as
the representative of CHINA.

nose):

167. Since the independenceof Zimbabwe, Namibia
has now become the most salient issue in the decolonization struggle. The people of Africa and the world
as a whole are closely following the Namibian people’s
fight for national independence. They vigorously
demand that the South African colonial authorities
immediately terminate their illegal occupation of
Namibia and implement the relevant United Nations
resolutions and plan regarding Namibia.
168. Since the adoption of Security Council resoiution 435 (19781 in Seatember 1978. SWAPO. the
African front-line State;, other States’ concerned and
the United Nations have madetremendous andpositive
efforts to realize the United Nations plan for Namibia.
All this has been acclaimed and supported by public
opinion and people throughout the world. The South
African racist authorities, however, have gone back
on their word on all sorts of preposterous pretexts
and created one obstacle after another to the implementation of the United Nations plan. In the meantime, they have stepped up the suppression of the
Namibian people’s struggle and gone ahead with the
“internal settlement”. They have, moreover, continued their armed provocations against the African
front-line States.
169. Recently, a conference on Namibia was held in
Geneva under the auspices of the United Nations.
SWAP0 adopted a most reasonable and positive
attitude in Geneva. One would have expected the
South African authorities to come to their sense.. and
make a new beginning by agreeing to start implementing the United Nations plan. But the course and
result of the conference have revealed a total lack of
sincerity on the part of the South Africac authorities
for a peaceful settlement of the Namib;nn question.

They declared that it was premature to discuss the
setting of a date for the implementationof the resolutions and peremptorily refused to implement the
United Nations plan. As a result, no agreement was
reached at the conference. This is another setback
for the Namibian people and the international community in their endeavour to achieve the independence of Namibia.
170. It is crystal clear that the South African authorities were strenuously obstructing and sabotaging the
Geneva conference in order to delay a cease-fire, so
that they could continue their repression campaigns
to weaken SWAP02 armed forces and gain time to
build up the “internal parties” and to push through
“internal settlement” in order to prevent Namibia
from achieving genuine independence.They calculate
that once the opportunity presents itself, they can
put their puppets in power and stage a sham independence for Namibia, thereby perpetuating their illegal
occupation of the Territory.
171. But this is only wishful thinking on the part of
the South African authorities. Their scheme will never
succeed. The obstinacy once again displayed by the
South African authorities at the Geneva conference
aroused strong resentment and stern condemnation
from SWAPO, the African front-line States, OAU and
world oublic ooinion. The auest for independence
by oppressed nations is a gEneraI trend df history
desired bv all the people. The Namibian people’s
struggle is a just cauie r&d naturally enjoys ibuidant
support. By clinging to their obstinate policy, the
South African authorities will only land themselves
in still greater isolation and hasten their defeat.
172. The turn of events shows that bitter struggles
are yet to be waged before the United Nations plan
can be implemented. It is up to SWAPO, supported
by the people of the world and uniting with various
ethnic groups in Namibia, to persevere in and intensify
its struggle on all fronts. The international community
and the United Nations, on their part, must adhere to
principles and continue to fight and to strengthen their
eflixtive support for the just struggle of the Namibian
people.

other members of the Council in extending my delegatlon’s congratulations to you on your assumption of
duties this month as Preddent of the Council. We have
been pleasedto participate in the active programme of
informal work which has engagedus under your very
able leadership,
176. I also would like to acknowledge the many warm
words addressed to Mr. McHenry and other members
of my Mission who have now departed, eliding their
term of service at the United Nations. I undertake to
convey those sentiments to Mr. McHenry.
177. I should like to say just a word about our regret
that we had to say farewell to five members of the
Council at the turn of the year. The intimate and
intensive association that the work of the Council
creates amongst all of us meant for us in dealing with
those delegations a deepened respect and friendship
as we observed and enjoyed their contributions to the
work of the Council. Their place, of course, is taken
by five new members that have joined us this month.
I extend my delegation’s warmest welcome to them.
We look forward with great confidence to the contributions that they all, individually, will make to the
work of the Co\t,ncil during the months and years
ahead.
178. I would like also to say a brief word about the
release of the hostages. I wish to express the deepest
gratitude felt by my delegation, by my Government
andby the peopieofihe Udted Stat& atihe outpouring
of friendship, sympathy and understanding which is
reflected in the many statements by the members of the
Councfl this morning. The feelings of the American
people, 1 think, are-obvious to an who have lived
through these last days. It is our very, very strong
feelingthat the solid support given and the positions of
principle and actions taken by the Council and, above
all, the intense and unremitting efforts ofthe SecretaryGeneral and so many of his staff throughout this long
and painful period have been absolutely fundamental
in the achievement of the peaceful solution to this
problem which was the objective of my Government
from the outset.

174. I now resume my functions as PRESIDENT.

179. We are grateful, of course, that we have finally,
at long last, achieved success, and we offer thanks to
the Secretary-General and his staff, to all the members
of the Council and to other Governments. I join with
those who in particular have singled out the Government of Algeria for the skilful and persistent effort
which yielded such great success a few days ago. In
this connection, I should like to draw the attention of
members of the Council to and read into the formal
records of the Council’s proceedings a relevant portion
of a personal message which was transmitted this
week by Secretary of State Haig to the SecretaryGeneral:

17.5. Mr. PETREE (United States of America):
Mr. President. 1 first would like 10join with all the

“I am distressed, as I know you are, at the unfortunate attacks on your role in the efforts which led

173. The Chinese Government and people have
always firmly supported the just struggle of the Namibian people for national independence and liberation. We strongly condemn the South African authorities for their continued illegal occupation of Namibia
mJ
for their obstinate obstructioli and sabotage of
the United Nations plan. The Chinese delegation will
firmly support all tile correct proposals a& reasonable demandsput forward by the African States in their
future effort!) IO settle the Namibian question.

up to the freeing of our hostages. You arc aware of
the remarks
of President Carter and other mcmbcrs
of his Administration
rejecting
the criticisms
of
your negotiations
in ‘fchrnn a year igo. The United
States Government
is deeply grateful to you for yotn
efforts on behalf of the hostages throughout
the past
14 months.”
180. We welcome
md
strongly
endorse the expression of views contained
in the President’s
statement
today
and once again reiterate
our expression
of
appreciation
to the Secretary-General
and to all who
were instrumental
in the peaceful
resolution
of the
hostage crisis.
181. With regard to the question
of Namibia,
which
is on our agenda today, my Government
joins with all
in expressing
regret
that the pre-implementation
meeting did not achieve the results that we all desired.
I wish to express our appreciation,
with all others, to
the Secretary-General
and his staff, most especially
Mr. Urquhart.
Mr. Ahtisaari
and others
who have
been principally
engaged
in this endeavour
for so
long for their strenuous
efforts to make the meeting a
success against all odds and to bring these long negotiations
to a successful
conclusion.
We support
the
continuing
efforts of the Secretary-General
and believe

that efforts
scccptablc

to achieve 11 peaceful
solution
must continue.

and internationally

182. My Government
has launched a thorough
review
of the situation
in which we find ourselves
now in the
wake of the Geneva meeting. Aftera study ofthis situation, WC would expect to be sharing our assessments
of it and of where we go next with our colleagues
in
the contact group, the front-line
States, Nigeria, OAU
and the other parties interested
in this question
and,
in due course. at a later stage of this present debate,
we expect to have an opportunity
to set forth fully our
views about this present situation
and we hope, with
everyone
working
together,
to find that key to the next
steps and the ones after those which will lead us to
success in this long and painful effort,
