S/PV.8189

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8189th meeting

Monday, 26 February 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Alotaibi. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kuwait)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Zhang Dianbin
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Clay
Ms. Eckels-Currie

Agenda
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi (S/2018/89)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-05187 (E)
*1805187*

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

The meeting was called to order at 10.20 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Burundi
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Burundi (S/2018/89)
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of Burundi to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, and His Excellency Mr. Jürg Lauber,
Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the United
Nations, in his capacity as Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/89, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the situation in Burundi.
I now give the floor to Mr. Kafando.
Mr. Kafando (spoke in French): I welcome the
opportunity to brief the Council on the occasion of the
consideration of the report of the Secretary-General
on Burundi (S/2018/89). Before I begin, allow me, Mr
President, to congratulate you on your accession to
presidency of the Council for this month and to greet
all members of the Council.
We had hoped to have among us President
Benjamin Mkapa, facilitator of the inter-Burundian
dialogue, whose contribution would undoubtedly have
not only deepened the understanding of the political
stakes in Burundi, but also identified prospects for
the continuation of the process. Unfortunately, he
was not able to make the trip due to his participation
in the summit of the Heads of State of the East
African Community.
As announced, my briefing concerns the
Secretary-General’s report on the situation at Burundi,
of 25 January 2018. The first observation of the report
2/13

26/02/2018

focuses on the political situation in Burundi, which
remains tense and characterized by measures that
restrict freedom. Indeed, I note that only the majority
party and some other political formations allied to it are
able to carry out political activities without hindrance.
The economic situation is far from improving
owing to the ongoing political situation. Such an
environment cannot be conducive to the organization
of credible elections.
The security situation is improving significantly
across the country, although human rights violations
and other abuses continue to be reported, especially
since the launch on 12 December 2017 of the campaign
to raise awareness of the constitutional referendum.
As far as the humanitarian situation is concerned,
the report emphasizes that it remains a matter of
concern. The irrevocable decision of the Burundian
Government to go ahead with the constitutional
amendment will be decided by the referendum that, in
principle, is planned for May. To that end, it should be
noted that the concern raised by the Secretary-General
in his report cannot be interpreted as interference in
Burundi’s internal affairs by denying the country its
sovereign right to amend its own Constitution. On the
contrary, it must be understood as his desire to seek
consensus around an issue of such importance to the
future or even the fate of Burundi.
History make it clear that the stability and
development of Burundi over the past 15 years are
essentially the result of the broad consensus that
prevailed in the negotiation and adoption of the Arusha
Agreement. Moreover, this recommendation on the part
of the Secretary-General merely explains article 299 of
the 2005 Burundian Constitution, which is still in force
and which states that “[n]o revision procedure may be
used if it undermines national unity [or] the cohesion of
the Burundian people”.
The United Nations, the African Union, the East
African Community and the European Union are the
guarantors of the Arusha Agreement, the quintessence
of which is not limited to ethnic and gender balance,
which is retained in the new Constitution. Powersharing, good political governance, pluralist democracy
based on the principle of broad consensus, and the
protection of minority rights remain at the heart of the
Arusha Agreement which, as we know, was the basis of
the Burundian Constitution of 2005, which is currently
under revision.
18-05187

The situation in Burundi

26/02/2018

All this could have been possible if political will
had prevailed in the inter-Burundian dialogue, under
the auspices of the East African region. That having
been said, I take this opportunity to congratulate the
mediator and facilitator of the Burundian dialogue
on his efforts to find a just solution to the crisis. Now
that, following its most recent summit, the region has
decided to pursue the dialogue, it is up to the African
Union, alongside the other partners, including the
United Nations, to remain strongly committed to the
outcome of mediation. For the United Nations, whose
support for the process is intended above all to help
bring the Burundians together in the hope of reaching a
dynamic compromise, dialogue remains indispensable.
I have just summarized very briefly the report
of the Secretary-General on Burundi, submitted for
the Council’s consideration. Everything indicates
that the country remains a subject of concern to the
international community. I note that in its communiqué
on the report, dated 14 February, the Government of
Burundi declares itself ready to spare no effort to
cooperate with the United Nations in the context of
respect of its sovereignty. In that regard, as Special
Envoy I can attest to the fact that this good cooperation
already exists between the Burundian authorities and
the United Nations mission in Burundi. I thank them
for their welcome and their full availability, although
I would add that, contrary to certain statements, the
Special Envoy’s contribution to the Secretary-General’s
report has hardly exceeded his obligations, let alone
guided by any partiality. The sole objective guiding his
actions was to sound the alarm bell so that the emerging
future of the Burundian people can be enjoyed by all
Burundians and thereby to avoid the endless reversals
of which that country has suffered so much.
The President (spoke
Mr. Kafando for his briefing.

in

Arabic):

I

thank

I now give the floor to Mr. Lauber.
Mr. Lauber: On behalf of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), I would like
to thank you, Sir, for inviting me to brief the Security
Council today and for the excellent cooperation between
the Council and the configuration. As per established
practice, the following statement has been approved
by the members of the configuration, including the
country concerned, Burundi.
Since my previous briefing to the Council
(see S/PV.8109), the Burundi configuration of the

S/PV. 8189

PBC convened on two occasions, on 8 November
2017 and 29 January 2018, with a focus on humanitarian,
socioeconomic
and
political
questions.
The
configuration heard briefings from Mr. Garry Conille,
United Nations Resident Coordinator in Burundi, and
from representatives of the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR) and the Peacebuilding Support Office.
At the briefing on 29 January, Ms. Ursula Müller,
Assistant Secretary-General of OCHA, reported that
in the past three years, the number of people in need
of humanitarian assistance in Burundi had tripled,
increasing from 1 million people to 3.6 million people.
She noted that 25 per cent of the population was estimated
to be food insecure. That is an increase of 7 per cent
as compared to 2016. In 2017, 500,000 people received
food and nutrition assistance. Currently, at least 60,000
children suffer from severe acute malnutrition. On a
more positive note, a malaria epidemic, which resulted
in approximately 9,400 deaths between 2015 and 2017,
has successfully been contained.
On 19 February, OCHA presented its report on the
humanitarian response plan for 2018 in Bujumbura.
On 21 February, the Government reported in a press
release that it rejected the content of the report as a
whole owing to a lack of cooperation, calling OCHA’s
numbers exaggerated and referring to positive
developments regarding food security. The Government
invited OCHA to discuss cooperation on humanitarian
responses with the responsible ministries in order to
produce a consensual plan for both parties.
At the configuration meeting of 29 January,
Ms. Ninette Kelley, Director of the New York Office of
UNHCR, informed the configuration of the challenges
related to the return of refugees from Tanzania to
Burundi. On the basis of an agreement reached by
Burundi, Tanzania and UNHCR at the Tripartite
Commission meeting last August, 13,000 refugees
returned in 2017. The repatriation of another 60,000
persons is planned for 2018. The return of refugees
will increase pressure on the receiving communities,
requiring additional reintegration support to those who
return, as well as to those who did not leave the area.
UNHCR also reports an influx of more than 8,000
refugees from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
into Burundi since the beginning of 2018.

18-051873/13

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

The displaced persons inside Burundi are being
supported under the humanitarian response plan.
Besides that, a regional refugee response plan is in
place to support the 434,000 Burundian refugees living
in Tanzania, Rwanda, the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Uganda. On 29 January, the Permanent
Representative of Tanzania informed the configuration
that Tanzania had decided to withdraw from the
comprehensive refugee response framework.
In various interactions with the configuration,
Resident Coordinator Conille pointed to the challenging
socioeconomic situation. A negative trade balance,
inflation, which rose from 5.6 per cent in December
2016 to 18 per cent in December 2017, unemployment
and a shortage of foreign currency reserves are among
the most worrisome economic trends. The Resident
Coordinator outlined multidimensional challenges for
the United Nations. The United Nations country team is
trying to address the chronic vulnerability and a series
of shocks simultaneously. At the moment, strengthening
the resilience of the population is a priority of the
country team engagement in Burundi.
According to the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), the
negotiations on a revised memorandum of understanding
between OHCHR and the Government of Burundi
have yet to be finalized, and the cooperation that was
suspended on 11 October 2016 has not yet resumed. I
encourage both parties to move forward and to finalize
the memorandum of understanding. Meanwhile, the
preparations for the deployment of three human rights
experts to Bujumbura, in line with Human Rights
Council resolution 36/2, of 28 September 2017, are
being finalized.
As mentioned in earlier briefings to the Council,
it is obvious that the activities of the configuration
must be complementary to the efforts to advance
the political reconciliation in Burundi undertaken
at the subregional, regional and international levels.
To that end, I have maintained regular contacts with
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the United
Republic of Tanzania, East African Community (EAC)
Facilitator for Burundi; Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African
Union (AU) Commissioner for Peace and Security;
Mr. Basile Ikouebe, AU Special Representative for the
Great Lakes Region; and, of course, Michel Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
all of whom I had an opportunity to meet recently in
Addis Ababa or Geneva.
4/13

26/02/2018

In both recent meetings of the PBC Burundi
configuration, Member States expressed overwhelming
support for the EAC-led dialogue process and gratitude
to President Mkapa for his personal engagement.
While the Government recognizes that progress
was made during the fourth session of the dialogue,
some delegations regretted the lack of progress in
the process. Some members of the configuration
expressed concern that the upcoming referendum on a
revised Constitution could reverse some of the gains
achieved through the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. Other delegations expressed
the view that constitutional amendments came under
the sovereignty of the country and that the situation
was generally improving.
In the field of security, since my most recent visit
to Burundi and the region, I have received reports that
the security situation in the country has been generally
calm. I encourage all national stakeholders to contribute
to peace and stability in Burundi.
I am currently preparing my next trip to Burundi,
which is planned to take place from 27 to 30 March. In
view of the recent developments and after consultations
with the configuration, I intend to focus on the following
five topics during my visit.
First is the mediation efforts of the EAC. In my
contacts in Burundi, I will insist that the remaining
political divergences be addressed in the framework of
the EAC-led dialogue and in an inclusive manner.
Secondly, related to that, I plan to discuss the path
leading towards the 2020 elections. I will encourage my
interlocutors to reflect on how free, fair and democratic
elections in a pluralistic and peaceful environment
can be ensured in Burundi and how the international
community can support Burundi on that path.
Thirdly, I also plan to continue the socioeconomic
dialogue with the Government and its international
partners. That dialogue should seek both to address
the needs of the population and to overcome existing
obstacles to cooperation. I plan to involve additional
partners, such as regional actors, the private sector,
civil society and academia, in that conversation.
Fourthly, I will continue to focus on the humanitarian
situation and to engage with the humanitarian actors on
the ground in cooperation with the Government.
Fifthly, national reconciliation and dealing with the
past will remain high on my agenda. That is a subject to
18-05187

26/02/2018

The situation in Burundi

which the President of the Republic of Burundi attaches
great importance.
The priorities are very similar to those defined
by the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) for its current
engagement. Since my briefing in November, the
Peacebuilding Fund has approved three new projects
in Burundi, worth a total of $6.5 million. The sum of
$3 million was approved for a project involving the
four communities in Burundi with the highest number
of expected returnees. The project seeks to increase
the protection of displaced persons in border areas,
specifically with regard to social and economic rights,
including access to basic services and livelihoods for
returnees and members of host communities, as well as
gender-based violence. The second new PBF initiative,
at about $1.75 million, supports capacity-building
among the youth wings of political parties. The third
project, in the same amount, supports intergenerational
networks of women leaders in their ability to launch
local peacebuilding initiatives.
Based on my recent contacts with Burundian
stakeholders and regional and international actors, I
wish to draw the following conclusions. The EAC-led
dialogue process remains an indispensable instrument
to address the current situation in Burundi. National,
regional and international interlocutors should continue
to lend their support to the efforts undertaken by
President Museveni and President Mkapa.
Secondly, the upcoming 2020 elections require
increased international attention. It would be a great
achievement if national, regional and international
actors could agree on some kind of road map so as to
create the necessary conditions for democratic, peaceful
and inclusive elections in 2020.
Thirdly, humanitarian needs must be addressed. I
call on Burundi’s international partners to strengthen
the resilience of the population by addressing the current
humanitarian challenges on the ground in cooperation
with the Government. At the same time, I call on
the Government of Burundi to continue to cooperate
closely and constructively with its international
humanitarian partners to address the most urgent needs
of Burundi’s population.
Fourthly, mid- and long-term socioeconomic
development must not be ignored. I invite the
Government of Burundi and its partners to engage in
dialogue on mutually beneficial, people-centred and
innovative forms of engagement.

S/PV. 8189

Fifthly, I remain convinced that a swift signing
of the memorandums of understanding between the
Government and OHCHR, as well as between the
Government and the African Union, and the deployment
of the respective human rights observers will provide a
more comprehensive and accurate picture of the human
rights situation and help safeguard the space for civil
society in Burundi.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Lauber
for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke
in Spanish): First of all, on behalf of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea, let me express my gratitude to
the President of the Security Council for organizing
this meeting on Burundi and for the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2018/89) on the situation in the
country, presented by His Excellency Mr. Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
to whom Equatorial Guinea conveys its sincere
thanks for the outstanding work that he is doing there.
Likewise, Equatorial Guinea expresses its confidence
in the mediator of the inter-Burundian dialogue, His
Excellency Mr. Yoweri Kaguta Museveni, President
of Uganda, and in its facilitator, His Excellency
Mr. William Benjamin Mkapa, former President of the
Republic of Tanzania, for the work being carried out
to find common ground for an agreement among the
members of the political class in Burundi. Accordingly,
the joint communiqué issued by the latest Summit
of Heads of State of the East African Community
expressed appreciation for, and acknowledged the
work being carried out by, both statesmen within the
framework of seeing through the inter-Burundian
dialogue. The briefing by Mr. Jürg Lauber, Permanent
Representative of Switzerland to the United Nations, in
his capacity as the Chair of the Burundi configuration
of the Peacebuilding Commission, also afforded us a
clear picture of the
​​ situation in Burundi, for which we
are extremely grateful.
As always, Equatorial Guinea understands that
a situation such as the one in Burundi, which is an
internal matter, must be resolved internally through
a genuine and inclusive political negotiation process
among Burundians. In that regard, Equatorial
Guinea commends the positive initiatives adopted
by the Government of Burundi and its President, His

18-051875/13

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

Excellency Mr. Pierre Nkurunziza, so as to maintain
national stability and promote internal reconciliation,
and urges all parties in Burundi to participate actively
in the political dialogue and resolve their differences
peacefully through dialogue and negotiations.
The mediation efforts of regional and subregional
organizations, such as the African Union and the East
African Community, and the constructive role that the
United Nations can play must make up the bulwark of
mechanisms for finding a lasting political solution to
the situation.
Equatorial Guinea believes that political dialogue
is the only way out of the situation in Burundi, and, for
that reason, it very positively views the initiatives of the
East African Community-led inter-Burundian dialogue
held in Arusha, the outcome of which will undoubtedly
help normalize the situation. The return to normalcy
implies that the dialogue — as the Government has
suggested — can already take place within Burundian
territory — the home of all children of Burundi — since
the security situation has significantly improved, as the
report of the Secretary-General notes.
The gradual voluntary return of refugees to
their homes is another sign of the normalization of
the situation, and the challenge must now lie in their
relocation and return to normalcy. We believe that the
United Nations, together with local entities, should
help in that process, which must comply with the
principles enshrined in the Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees of 1951. We wish to acknowledge
the generosity of neighbouring countries that have
welcomed refugees.
As a sovereign country, Burundi enjoys the right to
adopt any legislative initiative that it deems appropriate
for itself. In that regard, we believe that the constitutional
referendum scheduled to be held next May falls within
powers of the country as a sovereign State. Many other
countries have gone through similar processes. They
have been considered internal affairs, and in Burundi
the case should not be different. The sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Burundi must
be fully respected. Any negotiation process must lead
to the holding of fair elections in 2020. It is therefore
essential that all parties commit to the East African
Community-led process and unwaveringly show their
good will for the benefit of the Burundian people.
Only in that way will we witness the full and complete
recovery of the people of Burundi so that they can enjoy
their innumerable economic possibilities and get on
6/13

26/02/2018

board the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development
and Agenda 2063 of the African Union to participate
fully in the sustainable development of that beautiful
African country and brotherly nation of Central Africa.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We thank Mr. Kafando,
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
and Ambassador Lauber, in his capacity as Chair
of the Burundi configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission, for their insightful briefings. We express
our deep appreciation for the tireless work of the
Special Envoy in leading a series of important meetings
with Government officials, high-level representatives
of international and regional organizations and other
stakeholders to seek ways to advance the negotiation
process in close cooperation with the facilitator.
Despite progress made in inter-Burundian dialogue,
we remain concerned that direct and constructive talks
between the Government and the opposition have yet
to be established. In that regard, we urge all sides to
engage in dialogue to end the crisis according to the
spirit and letter of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi. We also call on the leadership
of the subregion and guarantors of the Arusha
Agreement to redouble their efforts with regard to
the revitalization of the East African Community-led
mediation. We commend the East African Community
mediator, President Museveni, and the facilitator,
former President Mkapa, for their steadfast commitment
to uniting the region and finding a peaceful solution
to the crisis. Although constitutional amendments are
the sovereign right of Burundi, we strongly believe that
that national process should be held in an environment
of confidence and broad consensus and include all key
political stakeholders to ensure lasting peace.
The worsening social and economic situation
in Burundi warrants the immediate attention of the
international community and development partners to
provide food security, health care, education and energy.
There have been noteworthy results in containing the
spread of malaria, with the support of UNICEF, and
in training community health workers. That positive
dynamic should continue.
The low level of humanitarian aid is still very
worrying. With more than 3 million people in need of
assistance across the country, it will be important to
ensure that the international community supports the
humanitarian response plan for Burundi for 2018. The
United Nations Refugee Agency appeal for funding to
18-05187

26/02/2018

The situation in Burundi

support Burundian refugees in 2018 continues to be
the lowest-funded refugee response plan in the world.
We commend Burundi’s neighbours for hosting large
numbers of its refugees, and would like to remind States
that their repatriation must be voluntary and conducted
in accordance with the principles of respect and dignity
outlined in the 1951 Convention Relating to the Status
of Refugees.
Sustainable security and stability in Burundi should
be the main considerations, and international support to
that process is vital. We commend the active engagement
of the team from the Office of the Special Envoy in
assisting the facilitator of the fourth dialogue session,
encouraging the participants to engage in an inclusive
dialogue. The expedited finalization of the status-ofmission agreement will promote the commitment of the
United Nations and enhance cooperation with Burundi.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of a
regional approach in addressing the underlying causes
of Burundi’s issues, linking security and development,
and we also call for a more coordinated conduct of
operations on the ground by the United Nations in
this part of Africa. Full implementation of the Arusha
Agreement is vital to preventing a further escalation of
violence and maintaining peace and security in Burundi.
Mr. Tanoh-Boutchoue (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in
French): My delegation would like to thank Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
for the quality of his briefing on the situation in
Burundi, and we commend his very hard work in that
country. We would also like to thank Ambassador
Jürg Lauber, Chair of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission, for his briefing on the
evolving sociopolitical situation in Burundi.
Côte d’Ivoire has taken note of the efforts that the
Burundian authorities and the international community
have made to stabilize the country in the past few
years. However, we are still concerned about the state
of progress in the political process, human rights issues
and the humanitarian situation. With regard to the
political process, we are concerned about the impasse
in the political dialogue, despite the international
community’s mediation efforts. We regret the fact that
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue conducted under the
auspices of the East African Community, whose fourth
session was held in Uganda between 27 November and
8 December 2017, has made no significant progress at a
time when important deadlines such as the draft review

S/PV. 8189

of the Constitution, scheduled for May of this year, and
the 2020 presidential election, are approaching.
However, we hope that the changes envisaged in
the area of constitutional reform will not undermine
the achievements of the historic Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement for Burundi, which has
enabled the country to enjoy 10 years of peace and
stability and which, regardless of differences of
interpretation, remains central to reconciliation between
Burundi’s political stakeholders. In that regard, we urge
the parties in Burundi to begin an inclusive political
dialogue and encourage the Government to work to
establish a peaceful sociopolitical atmosphere that will
enable all stakeholders to participate in the country’s
peace and reconciliation process, on the basis of the
Arusha Agreement.
Côte d’Ivoire is concerned about the persistent
allegations of human rights violations in Burundi. We
urge the Burundian authorities to make every effort to
investigate them and, if they are confirmed, to take all
steps necessary to put an end to them and to identify
the perpetrators and bring them to justice. We are also
concerned about the massive displacement of people that
has been adding to the number of Burundian refugees in
neighbouring countries. We encourage the Government
of Burundi and the Office of the High Commissioner
for Human Rights to resume negotiations with a view
to signing a memorandum of understanding on the
legal framework for their cooperation and its practical
aspects. We urge the Burundian authorities to engage
in a constructive dialogue with the Human Rights
Council-mandated Commission of Inquiry on Burundi
in order to shed light on the allegations of extrajudicial
executions, arrests and arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearance, torture and inhuman, cruel and
degrading treatment.
We remain concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation in Burundi. The fact is that
despite the possibility of voluntary returns, the number
of Burundian refugees living in neighbouring countries
is still significant, and the country’s socioeconomic
situation does not seem conducive to their rapid return
and sustainable reintegration into Burundi’s social
fabric. This is an opportunity, however, to welcome the
signing on 30 August 2017 of the tripartite agreement
between the Government of Burundi, the Government
of Tanzania and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, which has enabled
nearly 13,000 Burundian refugees to return. In that

18-051877/13

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

regard, we encourage the Burundian authorities to
create conditions conducive to these refugees’ return
and urge the United Nations and the country’s bilateral
and humanitarian partners to provide support and
assistance. My delegation welcomes the launch by the
United Nations of a 2018 emergency plan for Burundi,
aimed at providing protection and lifesaving assistance
to those in need throughout the country.
In conclusion, we appeal to the international
community in general, and the United Nations in
particular, to further support the efforts of the East
African Community and the mediator and facilitator of
the Inter-Burundian Dialogue to restore stability and
national reconciliation in Burundi. Lastly, we urge the
Council to maintain its unity on the subject and give
sustained attention to the situation in Burundi.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia would like to
thank Mr. Michel Kafando, Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General, and the Permanent Representative
of Switzerland, Ambassador Jürg Lauber, in his
capacity as Chair of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for their briefings.
Bolivia values and supports the Special Envoy’s
efforts to continue the Inter-Burundian Dialogue
in an inclusive environment. In that regard, we see
positive developments in his work during his visits
to Burundi and Tanzania with national stakeholders,
including the Government authorities in Bujumbura,
and his consultations with the facilitator of the
Dialogue appointed by the East African Community.
We encourage all the parties to support the
facilitation efforts led by Tanzania’s former President,
Mr. Benjamin Mkapa, and President Yoweri Museveni
of Uganda, in accordance with the Arusha Peace and
Reconciliation Agreement, which should continue
to be the cornerstone of this process. We also call on
the parties to implement the road map proposed by
Mr. Mkapa in order to reach consensus and create
appropriate conditions for a peaceful environment
during the upcoming elections, which will take place
in 2020. In that regard, we appreciate the efforts made
during the fourth dialogue meeting, held in Arusha
from 27 November to 8 December last year, which
resulted in a summary of 19 points of convergence.
We highlight that progress and we call on the
parties to continue with the inclusive dialogue and
work on the points of divergence in order to reach a
8/13

26/02/2018

negotiated political agreement and to promote national
reconciliation. Similarly, we praise the work the Office
of the Special Envoy carried out during the meeting in
providing technical assistance to the facilitator.
We acknowledge the work of the EAC, the Special
Envoy of the African Union, the Chair of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission and
the United Nations country team. We encourage them
to continue their work and to coordinate their efforts
in order to achieve better cooperation and continue to
support the EAC-led mediation.
We also welcome the joint statement of the nineteenth
summit of the Heads of State of the Community of East
African States, issued on 23 February, which expressed
gratitude for the work of the facilitator and the mediator
of the inter-Burundian dialogue. We also commend
the EAC for its commitment through this statement to
finance, within its possibilities, the dialogue process.
We agree that the EAC should continue to lead
this process.
We note the efforts of the Government of Burundi
to restore peace following the 2015 crisis and we
highlight the fact that the security situation remains
stable. We encourage it to continue to build a peaceful
environment that contributes to the development of
Burund and we commend its decision to host the
twentieth summit of the Common Market for Eastern
and Southern African in April, which also testifies to
the calm currently being enjoyed in the country.
We welcome the voluntary return of refugees.
We call on host countries to continue facilitating
their return in cooperation with the Government and
the High Commissioner for Refugees and to continue
supporting the return programme, since it is hoped
that 60,000 refugees will return over the course of this
year. We believe that conditions ensuring a voluntary,
informed, dignified, safe and permanent return to their
places of origin must be guaranteed. To that end, we
call on host countries to relocate refugees far from the
borders in cases in which they do not want to return,
in accordance with the 1951 Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees.
We encourage the international community
to continue financing the humanitarian response
programme in Burundi and we call on the countries
that imposed sanctions to consider lifting them, since
unilateral sanctions run counter to the Charter of the
United Nations, constitute a violation of international
18-05187

26/02/2018

The situation in Burundi

law and have been shown to have negative consequences
on the lives of vulnerable groups, such as women
and children, as well as a negative impact on the
implementation of the Sustainable Development Goals.
In conclusion, we believe that the full and
committed involvement of the international community
and of all the parties is of utmost importance. In this
vein, it is essential to continue strengthening the bases
to cooperate on the permanent stabilization of Burundi
in the framework of the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and with
strict respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of Burundi with a process led by
and for Burundians.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We wish to express our
thanks to the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Burundi, former President Kafando, for his briefing
on the current political situation in Burundi. We also
thank Ambassador Lauber, Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC), for his briefing. We applaud the excellent work
he has been doing and we endorse the agenda he has
set as he moves forward with a view to discharging
his responsibilities.
We take note of the improvements in the overall
security situation in Burundi, which, as the Special
Envoy says, have been remarkable. However, we
recognize the need to sustain the existing level of
stability and transform it into durable peace. That is
indeed important and a consensus needs to be created
among the Burundians around this noble objective.
The need for broad consensus, as the Special Envoy
says, is very critical. This can be peacefully resolved
only through an inclusive dialogue on the basis of the
Arusha Agreement and the Constitution of Burundi.
It is imperative to ensure that the ongoing efforts at
constitutional reform are conducted through a broad
consensus of all stakeholders so as to preserve the
country’s security and stability. We are convinced
that the Special Envoy has the necessary goodwill and
commitment to helping Burundi achieve this. We have
full confidence in him.
We reiterate our support to the eastern Africanled inter-Burundian dialogue and the efforts of the
facilitator, former President Benjamin Mkapa of
Tanzania, under the leadership of the mediator of the
Community of East African States (EAC), President
Yoweri Museveni of Uganda.

S/PV. 8189

As witnessed in the inter-Burundian talks held in
Arusha on 27 November to 8 December 2017, the peace
process remains deadlocked in spite of the efforts by
the facilitator. No doubt it would have been good to
hear directly from him on the challenges encountered
and the way forward, but we understand he could
not make it. In any case, the need to reinvigorate the
peace process is clear and we take note of the decision
by the East African Community summit, which was
held this past weekend in Uganda, calling upon all
the Burundian parties to expeditiously conclude the
dialogue under the facilitator and mediator. The annual
summit also expressed its readiness to deploy the highlevel committee of Heads of State on Burundi.
The support of the Council to the EAC-led peace
process remains very important to create the necessary
conditions for peaceful and democratic elections
in 2020. We believe that, as the Special Envoy has
stressed, that coordination and coherence between the
East African Community, the African Union and the
United Nations are also key to making progress in the
peace process.
We appreciate the important discussions held by
the Secretary-General and his Envoy with regional
and subregional partners in this spirit. We note that
Burundi is facing enormous socioeconomic challenges,
and that, coupled with reduced international financial
assistance, has made the situation more difficult.
While the voluntary return of Burundian refugees
from Tanzania is welcome, its impact in further
compounding the socioeconomic challenges of the
country cannot be overlooked. That is why Burundi
needs international support to provide assistance to
the returning Burundian refugees and to implement
its socioeconomic development programmes. In this
context, we commend the Chairman of the Burundi
configuration of the PBC for his various engagements
focused on the socioeconomic cooperation between the
international partners in the Government of Burundi.
We believe that these efforts have to be seen as an
integral part of the search for peace in Burundi to
support its strong institutions in creating a conducive
climate in which political differences can be addressed
without backsliding into the violence of the past.
It should be stressed that though it might seem
counterintuitive, Burundi indeed has strong institutions,
which we in the Horn of Africa are very much aware of.
How could Burundi otherwise be able to contribute to
the fight against Al-Shabaab in Somalia? We deeply

18-051879/13

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

appreciate what Burundi is doing in that regard, but we
look forward to those institutions being strengthened
and made operational by promoting further inclusivity,
which is so critical.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like to thank the Special Envoy of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Burundi,
Mr. Michel Kafando, for his important work. We also
thank the Permanent Representative of Switzerland to
the United Nations, Ambassador Jürg Lauber, in his
capacity as Chairman of the Burundi configuration of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
We share the concerns expressed by the SecretaryGeneral in his report on the situation in Burundi
(S/2018/89), in particular on the need to reactivate the
inter-Burundian dialogue under the auspices of the East
African Community and other regional organizations.
Similarly, in the light of reports of the deterioration of the
human rights situation, we encourage the Government
to strive for real progress in its relations with the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
Finally, we share the opinion that the proposed
revision of the Constitution is a matter that falls within
Burundi’s domestic sovereignty, but at the same time we
believe that the initiative should be conducted through
an inclusive process that ensures the broad participation
of the population. Furthermore, taking into the content
and spirit of the Arusha Peace and Reconciliation
Agreement for Burundi, which put an end to a tragic
period of violence that must never recur, we support
the work of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General,
other United Nations agencies and friendly countries in
the framework of preventive diploacy, in full respect
for Burundi’s sovereignty.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burundi.
Mr. Shingiro (Burundi) (spoke in French): As
this is the first time that my delegation has taken the
floor under your presidency, Sir, I wish first of all to
offer you my warm congratulations on your deserved
assuption of the presidency of the Council for the
month of February, which you have exercised with brio.
We bore witness this past weekend to your efforts with
respect to a State Member of the United Nations.
Let me also thank the Security Council as a
whole for its constructive contribution to the Burundi
peace process, and especially for its commitment to
10/13

26/02/2018

the national sovereignty, political independence and
territorial integrity of my country, Burundi.
I welcome the presence among us of Mr. Michel
Kafando, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for
Burundi. I take note of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the situation in Burundi (S/2018/89), which
Mr. Kafando introduced, although my delegation does
not agree with all its contents, to which I will revert
later in my statement.
My thanks also go to my colleague Mr. Jürg
Lauber, President of the Burundi configuration of the
Peacebuilding Commission, for his contribution to the
peacebuilding process in Burundi. We again pledge
him our long-standing cooperation.
The purpose of my statement is to share with the
Council the new developments in Burundi since its
previous meeting on this item in November last year
(see S/PV.8109).
At the political level, Burundi is already preparing
for the constitutional referendum of 2018 and the general
elections of 2020. The priority of the Government in
all this is to bring these two major electoral events to
fruition by creating a priori an environment conducive
to the organization of democratic, free, transparent and,
above all, peaceful elections. The registration operation
for both elections was conducted in excellent conditions
from 8 to 17 February throughout the country and in the
diaspora. Provisional figures show that, in total, more
than 5 million Burundians registered on the electoral
roll, with a slightly larger number of women than men,
which we welcome. This morning, the Independent
National Electoral Commission organized a guided tour
open to all — political parties, civil society, partners
and Government — through the data-processing centre
for the establishment of the electoral roll. All of this
highlights the transparency of the process.
The inter-Burundi dialogue, led with the facilitation
of the East African Community, is proceeding normally.
At the fourth session held in Arusha, Tanzania, from
27 November to 8 December 2017, participants were
able to make progress because there were more points
of convergence than of divergence. That is what we call
progress. Contrary to what is said in paragraphs 9 and
14 of the Secretary-General’s report, as well as in the
section on observations and comments, the dialogue is
not at a standstill.
18-05187

26/02/2018

The situation in Burundi

While the Secretary-General’s report speaks of a
dialogue process that has died, the final communiqué
of the Summit of Heads of State of the East African
Community, held in Kampala on Friday, 23 February,
expressed appreciation for the excellent work
already done by the mediation and facilitation of the
inter-Burundian dialogue, led respectively by President
Yoweri Kaguta Museveni of Uganda and former
President of the United Republic of Tanzania, Benjamin
William Mkapa. This deep gap between the appreciation
of the region, which is close to Burundi geographically,
politically and culturally, and the pessimistic position
expressed in the report and by certain actors outside the
framework of the inter-Burundian dialogue, constitutes
an anomaly that should draw the Council’s attention.
The nineteenth Summit of Heads of State of the
East African Community also reaffirmed the continued
regional ownership of the inter-Burundi dialogue
process by the East African Community and reiterated
the commitment to financing and rapidly concluding
the process under the exclusive leadership of the region.
As regards the revision of the Constitution, it should
be recalled that the ongoing constitutional reform is the
result of extensive consultations conducted over more
than a year with the Burundian population in all its
diversity. It is an exercise that is undertaken exclusively
in the framework of Burundi’s national sovereignty
and that aims — contrarily to the concerns expressed
by some — at ensuring the long-term stability of the
country by the end of the transitional period under the
present Constitution.
It is clear that the United Nations and its Member
States are in no way empowered to discuss the
constitutional affairs of sovereign States. In assuming
the right to comment on the draft constitutional
referendum in Burundi, in paragraph 35 of the report,
the Organization is flagrantly violating the principle of
respect for the sovereign equality of States enshrined
in in Article 2.7 of the Charter of the United Nations,
which states
“Nothing contained in the present Charter
shall authorize the United Nations to intervene in
matters which are essentially within the domestic
jurisdiction of any state or shall require the
Members to submit such matters to settlement
under the present Charter”.
The reference in the report to the review of the
Constitution in Burundi in paragraphs 4 and 8 is a bold

S/PV. 8189

step that interferes in Burundi’s domestic affairs. The
Council should take note, since it is at variance with
the Charter of the United Nations and is critical of the
sovereign right of the Burundian people to amend their
Constitution, but, in the past, the United Nations has
not voiced its concerns in similar cases of constitutional
amendments in the region or elsewhere in the world.
The same report breaches Article 2 of the Charter of the
United Nations, which stipulates that
“The Organization and its Members, in pursuit
of the Purposes stated in Article 1, shall act in
accordance with ... the principle of the sovereign
equality of all its Members”.
Such double standards in addressing the various
situations within Member States must be discouraged
so as not to set a dangerous precedent. In addition, in
accordance with article 297 of the current Constitution
of Burundi, the initiative to amend the Constitution
lies with the President of the Republic, following
consultations with the Government, the National
Assembly and the Senate and on an absolute majority
vote of their members. Article 298 of the Constitution
states that “[t]he President of the Republic can submit to
referendum a bill of amendment of the Constitution”. In
the light of those articles, it is clear that any request or
comment that is above and beyond those two provisions
violates the Constitution.
Contrary to paragraph 4 of the report, the new draft
Constitution guarantees peace and stability, protection
for the opposition, the protection of human rights and
minorities, the protection of our national sovereignty,
as well as ethnic and gender quotas, as stipulated in
the 2000 Arusha Accords. All substantive articles of
the Arusha Accords have been retained in the draft
amendment. The security situation is generally good
throughout the entire territory, with the exception
of some isolated instances of crime, not exclusive to
Burundi, as underscored by the Special Envoy and
other speakers. This is the real situation on the ground
in Burundi.
The country has taken an irreversible step
forward on the path to peace, stability and national
reconciliation. It must also be underscored that the
mass return of refugees to the country and the fact that
the Government of Burundi will be organizing and
hosting the twentieth summit of the Common Market
for Eastern and Southern Africa, following several

18-0518711/13

S/PV.8189

The situation in Burundi

field assessment missions, demonstrates that normalcy
has returned to our country.
In addition to those positive developments, a large
delegation of elected members of the East African
Legislative Assembly (EALA) visited Burundi.
According to them,
“We have seen and can confirm that the
country is peaceful and calm. We call upon all
elected members of the EALA to spread the word
about Burundi’s peaceful security environment.
We also call upon investors, not only within the
East African community, but also throughout the
entire world, to invest in Burundi in an effort to
boost its economy”.
That statement was made by the elected members of the
region with regard to the security situation in Burundi.
In addition, my delegation rejects paragraphs
20 and 41 of the report, which seek to single out the
youth wing of the ruling party — Imbonerakure — as
being responsible for instances of insecurity, instead
of directly calling for restraint among all young people
affiliated to political parties — ruling and opposition
parties alike because security in Burundi, like
elsewhere, affects us all.
The paragraphs are similar to other parts of the
report that underscore its bias. I stress that there was
no mention of young people in opposition parties,
some of whom fled the country after killing and raping
several innocent people, destroying public goods and
preventing children from attending school during the
2015 elections. That part of the report, which singles
out some young people in Burundi and not others,
breaches the principle of neutrality recognized by the
Charter of the United Nations.
With regard to human rights, I thank my colleague
from Côte d’Ivoire, who drew my Government’s
attention to the human rights situation, of which we
took note. Paragraphs 24 to 28 of the report addresses
the human rights situation in the country. It must be
underscored that despite the challenges we face,
which are not exclusive to Burundi, the country has
made significant progress at standard-setting and
institutional levels.
With regard to standard-setting, various legal
texts have been adopted, such as rules governing
public meetings and demonstrations, the establishment
of a special court for land tenure and other goods,
12/13

26/02/2018

the suppression of human trafficking and protection
for victims of trafficking in persons, protection for
victims, witnesses and other people in at-risk situations,
preventing and reducing the incidences of genderbased violence, protecting the victims of gender-based
violence, the press and non-profit organizations.
At the institutional level, Burundi remains
very committed to protecting human rights through
several national mechanisms, including the National
Independent Human Rights Commission, which enjoys a
status compliant with the Paris principles; the Truth and
Reconciliation Commission; the National Observatory
for the Prevention and Eradication of Genocide, War
Crimes and Crimes against Humanity; the National
Council for Unity and Reconciliation, the legal arsenal
that abolished the death penalty in Burundi, as well
as the myriad international conventions that have
been ratified by the State of Burundi, including the
Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture.
In addition, Burundi has submitted its report to the
Universal Periodic Review, summarizing progress
made and the challenges pending in the area of human
rights. Burundi was on the agenda at the twenty-ninth
session of the Universal Periodic Review on 18 January.
During that meeting, Burundi welcomed constructive
recommendations from Member States and regretted
the fact that some were politicized, selective and
demonstrated double standards.
With regard to national reconciliation, during
his message to the nation on 31 December 2017, the
President of the Republic pardoned approximately 2,000
prisoners, many of whom have been released. Others are
about to join their families. Gestures of peace have also
been made following the coup d’état during the 2015
elections. Two private radio stations that were destroyed
within a few hours following the attempted coup d’état
on 13 May 2015 have been re-opened. Fifteen arrest
warrants issued against leaders of political parties and
of civil society have been cancelled. More than 2,000
prisoners have been released. Such gestures should be
supported and rewarded by the Council.
With regard to the return of refugees who fled the
country in 2015, highlighted in paragraph 23 of the
report, the Government of Burundi and subregional
organizations continue to request that refugees return
home to assist with the reconstruction of Burundi. It
is thanks to the return to normalcy in the country, the
pace of the voluntary repatriation of refugees has been
satisfactory with the return of thousands of citizens
18-05187

26/02/2018

The situation in Burundi

who sought refuge in Tanzania and the wider region.
From 2016 to today, more than 200,000 Burundians
have returned to the country on a voluntary basis,
including 13,000 between August and December 2017,
as my colleague Mr. Lauber noted. In 2018, Burundi
expects more than 60,000 returnees from the region.
In the humanitarian field, my delegation
appreciates any initiative of the international
community to assist those in need, especially those in
emergency situations, be it through the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) or any
other humanitarian organization. My delegation wishes
to note, however, OCHA’s lack of cooperation with the
sectoral ministries concerned with humanitarian issues
and the inflation of numbers in its preparation of its 2018
humanitarian response plan for Burundi. As a result of
this lack of cooperation, the Government of Burundi,
through its communiqué of 21 February, requested
OCHA officials to work closely with the Burundian
side to draw up a consensual report in keeping with the
realities of the situation. The Government is willing to
cooperate fully with OCHA in this regard.
With regard to cooperation with the United
Nations, as many speakers have noted and as referred
to in paragraphs 28, 42 and 43 of the report, Burundi
maintains its desire to strengthen and sustain its
relations with the United Nations and its branches on
the ground. The draft agreement with the Office of

S/PV. 8189

the High Commissioner for Human Rights is under
discussion between the two parties. In mid-January,
Burundi asked the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights in Geneva to propose to the Burundian
side new dates for the resumption of discussions.
Bujumbura awaits Geneva’s response in this regard.
For its part, the Government of Burundi reiterates its
willingness to cooperate fully with the United Nations
and other partners in a spirit of mutual respect and
mutually beneficial cooperation and in accordance with
the rules of the game enshrined in the Charter of the
United Nations.
In conclusion, allow me to ask the Council to
consider, to the extent possible, removing Burundi
from its agenda since the situation in the country is
generally calm and presents no threat to peace and
international security, which is the main mission of the
Council. I recall that there is no objective criterion that
justifies maintaining on the Council’s agenda the item
on the situation in Burundi, a country that — as my
colleague from Ethiopia noted — has more than 6,000
peacekeepers in United Nations and African Union
peacekeeping missions.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now invite
Council members to informal consultations to continue
our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.35 a.m.

18-0518713/13
