S/2019/903

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 November 2019
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2470 (2019)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2470
(2019), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on the progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 5 August 2019 (S/2019/660) and the briefing to the Security Council by my
Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 28 August 2019.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
The reporting period witnessed large-scale public protests in October that
rapidly spread and escalated. On 1 October, demonstrators gathered in Tahrir Square,
Baghdad, demanding economic reforms, employment opportunities, reliable public
services, effective and impartial governance, governmental accountability and an end
to corruption. The demonstration turned violent as protesters attempted to cross the
Jumhuriyah Bridge over the Tigris River towards the former International Zone, and
were met with a forceful response from Iraqi security forces, who used water cannons,
tear gas and live rounds. Protests continued in Baghdad on subsequent days and
spread to the southern governorates. A curfew was imposed in Baghdad from 5 a.m.
on 3 October until the morning of 5 October. Curfews were also imposed across the
south of Iraq. The curfew was accompanied by blanket restrictions on access to the
Internet, in particular social media sites. On 6 October, the Ministry of the Interior
announced that official casualty figures stood at 104 dead (of which eight were
members of the security forces) and 6,107 wounded (including 1,241 members of the
security forces). In addition, the Ministry reported that a total of 51 government and
private buildings, 8 political party offices and 52 military and civilian vehicles had
been set on fire across the protest areas. By 7 October, the situation had calmed down
in most areas.
3.
On 2 October, Prime Minister Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, President Barham Salih and
Speaker Mohammed al-Halbousi issued a statement in which they recognized the
right to peaceful protest, called for restraint and announced the launch of an

19-19498 (E)

261119

*1919498*

S/2019/903

investigation into the violence and loss of life. In a nationally televised speech early
on 4 October, the Prime Minister emphasized the need for unity, dialogue and
remedial action, and underlined that the protesters had been heard. A speech by the
Speaker was also broadcast later that day, in which he stated that he would deal with
the protesters’ demands in a genuine manner. In a sermon delivered on 4 October, the
representative of Grand Ayatollah, Ali al-Sistani, urged all parties to refrain from
violence, reminded the leadership and the political parties of Iraq of their
responsibilities to the people of Iraq and called on the Go vernment to take concrete
measures to improve the lives of all Iraqis. In statements, the leaders of political
parties and blocs condemned the violence against the protesters and called for
measures to be taken by the Government to address their demands.
4.
On 5 October, the Prime Minister chaired an extraordinary session of the
Council of Ministers in which an initial package of 17 measures were decided to
address the protesters’ demands, including steps to provide housing and employment
opportunities.
5.
On 7 October, the President also delivered a televised speech in which he called
for dialogue and restraint. He urged the security forces to identify and hold to account
those who had perpetrated violence during the protests and agreed with
demonstrators’ calls for social justice, freedom and security.
6.
On 8 October, the Council of Ministers announced a further package of 13
measures, which the Prime Minister then outlined in a televised speech on 9 October.
The package included the establishment of a high committee for the distribution of
residential lands that would be chaired by the Prime Minister, as well as measures to
encourage youth employment. In addition, on the same day, the Council of
Representatives approved recommendations made by a committee that had been
formed to consider the protesters’ demands.
7.
In a sermon delivered on 11 October, the representative of the Grand Ayatollah
held the Government and security forces responsible for the use of excessive force
against protesters, including “sniping” by “unlawful armed elements”, and demanded
a credible investigation into the events surrounding the protests, to be completed
within two weeks. In addition, the Marja’iya called on the Government to prioritize
reforms and the fight against corruption.
8.
On 12 October, the Prime Minister announced the formation of a High
Investigative Committee to identify and bring to justice perpetrators of violence
during the protests from 1 to 7 October. On 22 October, the Committee released its
report, stating that 149 civilians and 8 security personnel had been killed, and 4,207
civilians and 1,287 security personnel injured. The Committee ’s key findings
included excessive use of force by security forces, a lack of control over security
forces, a lack of riot units, as well as violent behaviour by some demonstrators and
attacks on government and public property conducted by infiltrators seeking to derail
the demonstrations. The Committee recommended that its findings be referred to the
judiciary and that several security personnel be dismissed. On 23 October, the
National Security Council affirmed the right to peaceful demonstrations and
instructed the Iraqi security forces to guarantee the protection of demonstrators and
public and private property.
9.
On 24 October, the Prime Minister delivered a national televised address in
which he pledged to undertake further reforms, including: the appointment of new
ministers based on competence, with a stronger presence of women and young people;
the reduction of senior officials’ salaries, including those of the Prime Minister,
President and Speaker; the establishment of a social insurance fund for unemployed
citizens; and the formation of a central court for combatting corruption.

2/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

10. On 25 October, a representative of the Grand Ayatollah expressed his support
for the demands of the protesters and called for peaceful demonstrations. He strongly
criticized the report of the High Investigative Committee and demanded that an
independent judicial committee be established to co nduct further investigations. The
Marja’iya stressed that the State should have sole control of the use of force and asked
the security forces to protect the demonstrators.
11. Large-scale demonstrations resumed on 25 October in Baghdad, as well as in
Babil, Basrah, Dhi Qar, Karbala’, Maysan, Muthanna, Najaf, Qadisiyah and Wasit
governorates. Protesters expanded their earlier demands to include political
accountability for the loss of life, the resignation of the Government and electoral and
constitutional reforms. According to figures released by the Iraqi Human Rights
Commission on 27 October, 74 people were killed and 3,654 were injured during the
first three days.
12. During a special session on 28 October, the Council of Representatives adopted
measures to address protestors’ demands, including the cancellation of State officials’
financial privileges. The Council dissolved all provincial, district and subdistrict
councils outside the Kurdistan Region and assumed the administrative and financial
supervision of the Governors until the provincial council elections. A special measure
was adopted for Kirkuk whereby the members of parliament from the Governorate
would supervise the Governor and his deputies. In addition, the Council of
Representatives voted to form a constitutional review committee of 18 members, from
all political blocs, tasked with providing recommendations for constitutional
amendments within four months.
13. On 31 October, in a televised address, President Salih stated that the Prime
Minister had agreed to submit his resignation provided that there was no
constitutional vacuum and that all political blocs agreed on an “acceptable
alternative”. He announced that the Presidency had initiated the drafting of a new
comprehensive electoral framework that would aim to increase the participation of
young people in political life and replace the current Independent High Electoral
Commission. Following the adoption of the new law, he would approve the holding
of early elections.
14. Prior to the outbreak of protests, political actors had been focusing on the
current round of government appointments, the implementation of the government
programme and enactment of key legislation. On 3 August, the Council of
Representatives concluded the second legislative term of its first parliamentary year
and entered recess until 14 September. The Government had yet to reach consensus
on several positions essential to State functions, including the Minister for Education,
the Central Bank Governor, the President of the Audit Commission, the Deputy
Minister for Oil and the Deputy Minister for Industry. Furthermore, citing corruption
and neglect of the health-care sector, the Minister for Health and the Environment,
Alaa al-Alwan, submitted his resignation to the Prime M inister on 12 September. The
Council of Ministers rejected his resignation, placing the Minister on extended leave
until such a time as the matter could be resolved.
15. Progress was made in the election of chairs, deputy chairs and rapporteurs of
parliamentary committees, though the chairs of 3 of the 23 parliamentary committees
remained vacant. To date, three chair positions were held by female members of
parliament, including the Committee for Higher Education, the Committee for
Women, the Family and Childhood and the Committee for Culture, Tourism and
Archaeology.
16. On 8 August, the parliamentary Committee for Monitoring the Implementation
of the Government Programme announced the completion of its evaluation for the
period up to April 2019. In its report, published on 1 July, the Committee disputed
19-19498

3/16

S/2019/903

aspects of the Government’s own reporting, claiming, inter alia, that the Government
had overstated the rate of project implementation and recommending the use of
stronger indicators to measure results.
17. On 17 September, as part of the Government’s efforts to address social,
reconstruction and economic needs, the Council of Ministers approved a draft law on
the establishment of a reconstruction council that was sent to the Council of
Representatives for endorsement. The draft law aimed to establish oversight of
infrastructure and other major projects throughout the country, to promote investment
and to tackle youth unemployment. Various experts called for the inclusion in the
draft law of financial accountability mechanisms for the Council board members.
18. Meanwhile, the Government maintained its focus on countering corruption. The
Supreme Council for Combating Corruption continued to meet on a monthly basis,
chaired by the Prime Minister. On 11 October, the Council referred to judicial
authorities the cases of nine senior officials – including former ministers, deputy
ministers and governors – for investigation into their alleged corruption.
19. The Council of Representatives reconvened on 14 September. During the
opening session, an agreement was reached to continue work on nine sets of
legislation, including amendments to the Commission of Integrity Law. The Council
called on the Government to submit further draft laws for its consideration, inc luding
the draft 2020 federal budget law and the long-stalled draft hydrocarbon law.
Members also voted to form temporary committees to monitor government efforts to
preserve the sovereignty of Iraq and to discuss the issue of missing persons and
enforced disappearances.
20. On 8 October, the Council of Representatives abolished the offices of
Inspectors-General by voting to annul the laws that had been used to establish them.
The work of the Inspectors-General would be transferred to existing oversight
institutions, including the Integrity Commission and the Federal Board of Supreme
Audit. In the same session, the Council voted to proceed with legislative measures
that would allow the immediate suspension of all provincial councils, all of which
had exceeded their legal term, rather than wait until March 2020, the period stipulated
in the existing Governorate Council Electoral Law of 2018.
21. On 10 October, the Council of Representatives voted to accept the resignation
of the Minister for Health and endorsed the Prime Minister’s proposed replacement,
Jaafar Allawi. In addition, the Prime Minister’s candidate for Minister for Education
and the Cabinet’s first female member, Suha Ali Bek, was endorsed and sworn in.
Both endorsements were prompted by the Prime Minister’s proposal to reshuffle his
cabinet in response to the popular unrest.
22. In response to a string of explosions at facilities used by popular mobilization
forces and an attack on a convoy of those forces close to the Syrian border in August,
the Prime Minister, President and Speaker conducted extensive consultations with the
forces’ leaders as well as senior politicians to seek a common response. All parties
publicly emphasized the need to await the results of official investigations, noting
that the State bore primary responsibility for protecting the Iraqi people.
23. Meanwhile, progress was made on completing government formation in the
Kurdistan Region. On 8 September, the President of the Kurdistan Region, Nechirvan
Barzani, issued a presidential decree appointing two Vice Presidents: Jafaar Mustafa
Ali, from the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan; and Mustafa Sayyid Qadir, from the
Movement for Change/Gorran. The positions of Minister for Natural Resources and
Kurdistan Region Security Chancellor, both assigned to the Kurdistan Democratic
Party, had yet to be filled.

4/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

24. Political parties in the Kurdistan Region had begun planning their national
congresses, to take place before the end of the year. On 14 September, Gorran held a
congress in Sulaymaniyah and re-elected Omar Said Ali as its General Coordinator.
On 5 October, the New Generation Movement held its first congress after its
formation in January 2018 and re-elected Shaswar Abdulwahid as President.
25. During the inaugural parliamentary session on 1 September, following
consultations with all major political parties, the Speaker of the Parliament of the
Kurdistan Region, Rewaz Faiq, set out a programme to help deliver the Kurdistan
Regional Government’s reform and services agenda. Discussions were ongoing on
the reform programme, budget arrangements, the drafting of a Kurdistan Region
constitution and relations between the federal Government and the Kurdistan
Regional Government.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
26. The federal Government and the Kurdistan Regional Government continued
their dialogue to resolve outstanding issues over oil, revenue -sharing and security
arrangements, through a series of bilateral ministerial-level visits to discuss and
clarify positions. In early September, the Council of Representatives leadership met
with members of the Kurdistan Regional Parliament to review diplomatic
representation, legal and administrative issues and ways to strengthen ties between
the federal Parliament and the Kurdistan Regional P arliament.
27. On 17 and 18 September, President Salih and the Finance Minister, Fuad
Hussein, met with the Prime Minister, President and Speaker of the Kurdistan Region
in Erbil to discuss the draft 2020 federal budget law, the implementation of article
140 of the Iraqi Constitution on disputed internal boundaries, as well as funding for
the Peshmerga forces and civil servants’ salaries. On 19 September, the Speaker of
the Kurdistan Regional Parliament and the Speaker of the Council of Representatives
discussed the draft law, the strengthening of relations between Baghdad and Erbil and
the need for regular consultations.
28. On 30 July, the Federal Supreme Court issued a ruling on article 140 of the
Constitution, which sets out a process for normalization, census and referendum in
the disputed areas of Iraq. The ruling proclaimed the continued validity of article 140.
On 7 August, the Council of Ministers of the Kurdistan Regional Government
announced that a committee would be formed to follow up on the impl ementation of
article 140 with the federal Government. In early September, representatives from the
Kurdistan Region Statistics Board and the Federal Directorate General of Statistics
began discussions on the implementation of the 2020 census in areas subj ect to article
140.

C.

Security situation
29. Remnants of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) continued to launch
frequent asymmetrical attacks against the Iraqi people and security forces,
particularly in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah al-Din
Governorates. In response, the Iraqi security forces continued to pursue ISIL cells
throughout the country. Between 5 and 7 August, the security forces conducted the
third phase of Operation Will of Victory, clearing areas in western Nin awa and
northern Diyala Governorates. Phase four of the operation took place between 24 and
27 August, during which the security forces cleared large parts of the Anbar desert.
Between 16 and 20 September, the Iraqi security forces conducted phase five, clearing
parts of the Anbar desert towards the border with Saudi Arabia. Phase six, launched

19-19498

5/16

S/2019/903

on 6 October, aimed to clear areas of northern Anbar, south -west Salah al-Din and
Ninawa Governorates while also reinforcing the border with the Syrian Arab Republic
against possible ISIL incursion.
30. On 12 August, a large explosion destroyed an ammunition depot of the popular
mobilization forces on the southern outskirts of Baghdad, with shrapnel from heavy
munitions damaging civilian housing in the vicinity. On 14 August, the National
Security Council decided to launch an investigation into the explosion, compensate
the victims and develop comprehensive plans for relocating ammunition depots and
military camps outside built-up areas. The Council also decided to cancel all existing
flight approvals and subject the future use of Iraqi airspace to the exclusive approval
of the Prime Minister or those duly authorized to act on his behalf.
31. On 20 August, explosions occurred at an ammunition depot of the popular
mobilization forces in Salah al-Din Governorate. The following day, the Deputy
Chairman of the Popular Mobilization Commission, Jamal al -Ibrahimi, issued a
statement accusing external actors of repeated attacks on its bases. A subsequent
statement by the National Security Adviser and Chairman of the Popular Mobilization
Commission, Faleh al-Fayyad, clarified that his deputy’s statement did not represent
the official position of the Commission or the Government. He did state, however,
that ongoing investigations suggested that the attacks had indeed been launched by
external actors.
32. On 25 August, an attack on a convoy of the popular mobilization forces in
western Anbar Governorate, close to the border with the Syrian Arab Republic,
resulted in the death of the convoy commander.
33. The Iraqi authorities continued to investigate the three incidents, as well as
earlier similar explosions at bases used by the popular mobilization forces. The Iraqi
Ministry of Foreign Affairs issued a statement on 26 August reje cting interference by
external actors in the internal affairs of Iraq, noting that Iraq would take the
diplomatic and legal measures necessary, including through the Security Council, to
address any action that violated its sovereignty.
34. On 23 September, three consecutive mortar rounds landed in the former
International Zone in Baghdad. During the night of 2 October, a rocket landed in the
vicinity of Jadriyah Bridge, south-west of the former International Zone, and on
3 October at approximately 3 a.m. local time, two Katyusha rockets landed within the
former International Zone, one in the vicinity of the Turkish embassy and the other
near the “crossed swords” monument.
35. According to the Ministry of National Defence of Turkey, the Turkis h air force
continued to launch airstrikes against the Kurdistan Workers ’ Party (PKK) positions
in Dahuk, Erbil and Sulaymaniyah Governorates. On 23 August, the Turkish armed
forces launched phase III of Operation Claw, a combination of ground operations a nd
airstrikes focused on the Sinat-Haftanin area of northern Dahuk Governorate. On
18 September, a spokesperson of the Turkish Ministry of National Defence stated that
a total of 417 PKK elements had been killed or captured since Operation Claw had
begun on 27 May 2019.

D.

Regional and international developments
36. Iraq continued its efforts to establish stronger relations with its neighbours and
to diversify its regional economic partnerships. During the reporting period, Iraq
consolidated and expanded its cooperation with Arab and Gulf partners in particular,
culminating in a number of bilateral political, security and economic agreements.

6/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

37. The impact of regional tensions on Iraq remained high on the domestic political
agenda. During the reporting period, the country’s leadership continued actively to
promote Iraq as a venue for promoting stability in the region, rather than for proxy
conflict, while calling for regional dialogue based on non-interference in domestic
affairs as well as respect for sovereignty.
38. On 2 September, during a visit to the Russian Federation, Mr. al -Fayyad held
meetings with the Secretary of the National Security Council of the Russian
Federation, Nikolai Patrushev, the Russian Deputy Foreign Minister and the Special
Presidential Envoy for the Middle East and African Countries, Mikhail Bogdanov. All
parties agreed on the need to consolidate efforts to promote security and stability in
the region.
39. On 6 September, according to a statement of the Prime Minister ’s office, the
Prime Minister received a telephone call from Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman
of Saudi Arabia, during which they discussed collaboration efforts between the two
countries and parties within and outside the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting
Countries. On 25 September, the Prime Minister visited Saudi Arabia and met with
King Salman bin Abdulaziz and Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman to discuss
regional political and security developments, including the 14 September attacks on
oil installations in Saudi Arabia. On 15 September, the office of the Prime Minister
released a statement denying reports that the attacks had been launched from Iraqi
territory.
40. On 10 September, Iraqi Foreign Minister Mohamed Ali Alhakim visited Cairo
to chair the 152nd Ordinary Session of the Arab League Council. In his opening
speech, he reiterated the commitment of Iraq to promoting peace and stability in the
region, with full respect for national sovereignty and territorial integrity. The
following day, Mr. Alhakim travelled to Tunis, where he co-chaired, with the Foreign
Minister of Tunisia, Khemais Jhinaoui, the 15th meeting of the Iraqi -Tunisian Joint
Committee. The Ministers signed memorandums of understanding on security
cooperation, tourism, transportation and visa facilitation.
41. From 18 to 24 September, the Prime Minister visited China with an
accompanying delegation of ministers and provincial governors. He attended the
Global Industrialization Conference and met with the President of China, Xi Jinping,
and the Premier of the State Council, Li Keqiang. During the visit, eight cooperation
agreements were signed between China and Iraq on finance, trade, security,
construction, communications, culture, education and foreign affairs.
42. On 25 September, the President participated in the seventy-fourth session of the
General Assembly, where he held a number of bilateral meetings with other
international representatives, including a conversation with Mr. Pompeo; a tripartite
meeting with the King of Jordan, Abdullah II, and the President of Egypt, Abdel
Fattah Al Sisi; and meetings with the President of the United States, Donald Trump,
the President of France, Emmanuel Macron, the Chancellor of Germany, Angela
Merkel, the President of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Has san Rouhani, and the Prime
Minister of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Boris Johnson.
43. On 12 October, the Foreign Minister chaired an emergency session of the
Council of Arab Ministers for Foreign Affairs at the headquarters of the League of
Arab States to discuss developments in the north-east region of the Syrian Arab
Republic.
44. During the reporting period, the Government of Iraq also welcomed several
high-level visitors, including the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France , Jean-Yves
Le Drian; the Minister of Defence of Germany, Annegret Kramp -Karrenbauer; the
Foreign Minister of Egypt, Sameh Shokry; the Foreign Minister of Jordan, Ayman
19-19498

7/16

S/2019/903

Safadi; the Foreign Minister of the Russian Federation, Sergey Lavrov; the Russian
Federation Special Presidential Envoy for the Middle East and African Countries,
Mikhail Bogdanov; and the Minister for Energy and Natural Resources of Turkey,
Fatih Donmez. The Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, Ahmed Aboul
Gheit, and the Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, Jens
Stoltenberg, also visited Iraq.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
45. Since the protests began on 1 October, my Special Representative continuously
engaged with interlocutors across the political spectrum, calling on the Government
to uphold its responsibility to protect the life of protestors and ensure accountability
for human rights violations, to safeguard the rights of freedom of expression and
peaceful assembly and to implement swift measures that address the legitimate
demands of the demonstrators, including through a national dialogue. She also held
meetings with various groups of demonstrators and facilitate d meetings between the
demonstrators and senior government authorities and political leaders to explore
options for defusing tensions and involving protesters in reform discussions.
46. Throughout the reporting period, my Special Representative met with
government officials, representatives of political parties, parliamentarians and civil
society and religious and community leaders to discuss a wide range of issues,
including national reconciliation, the upcoming April 2020 Provincial Council
elections and the fight against corruption. She also engaged with the senior leadership
of Iraq to discuss the domestic impact of increasing tensions in the region as well as
the return of Iraqi nationals, including alleged ISIL affiliates from the Syrian Arab
Republic to Iraq.
47. From 1 to 4 August, my Special Representative participated in events in
Baghdad and the Governorates of Ninawa and Dahuk to commemorate the fifth
anniversary of the ISIL atrocities against the Yazidi community in Sinjar. She met
with the newly-elected Yazidi Prince, spoke to survivors, visited a mass burial site
and participated in the distribution of home occupancy certificates to Yazidi returnees.
She also called on the governments in Baghdad and Erbil to bridge their differences
and set aside partisan interests, emphasizing the need not only for a unified
administration and stable security structures in Sinjar, but also for the unhindered
flow of humanitarian assistance to enable safe and dignified returns. The Yazidi
community requested support in bringing back their missing loved ones, many of
whom were believed to be held in captivity in the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as in
the exhumation of all identified mass graves.
48. On 9 September, at the invitation of President of the Kurdistan R egion,
Nechirvan Barzani, my Special Representative planted a tree in Erbil as part of a
greening initiative throughout Iraq. She also met with the Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Region, Masrour Barzani, to discuss Baghdad -Erbil relations, a topic
frequently raised in conversations with the federal Government throughout the
reporting period. She underlined the importance of translating good intentions
between the two governments into concrete results, including agreements on oil and
revenue-sharing.
49. The issue of internally displaced persons remained high on my Special
Representative’s agenda. On 15 September, she travelled with Speaker Mohammed
al-Halbousi to Anbar Governorate, where she visited a camp for internally displaced

8/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

persons, met with tribal leaders and assessed obstacles for the return of the displaced
to their areas of origin. On 30 September, she visited Arab and Kaka ’i villages in
Kirkuk with the acting Governor, Rakan al-Jabouri, and listened to the concerns of
local officials and community members about land rights and the destruction of their
homes. On 2 October, she met the Minister for Migration and Displacement, Nawfal
Moussa, to examine ways to foster reconstruction and social cohesion, underlining
that these were minimum requirements for safe, dignified and voluntary returns. The
two also discussed the need to put mechanisms in place to process the return of Iraqi
nationals, including alleged ISIL affiliates from the al -Hawl camp in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
50. In a meeting on 18 September, my Special Representative discussed with
Deputy Speaker Bashir Al-Haddad possible ways to facilitate voting for internally
displaced persons in the forthcoming Provincial Council elections. More generally,
my Special Representative reiterated the strong commitment of the United Nations to
continue to provide effective electoral assistance to the Government of Iraq, in
accordance with the Mission’s mandate.
51. On 19 September, in the presence of senior local government officials, my
Special Representative inaugurated the new UNAMI field office in Mosul, which will
enable the Mission to monitor closely the political and security situation in Ninawa
Governorate and engage with a wide range of stakeholders, such as local authorities
and minority communities, in support of post-conflict stabilization efforts in Iraq.
52. My Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance
continued to lead regional workshops with young people in Iraq, organized by
UNAMI in cooperation with the Committee for Coexistence and Societal Peace of the
Prime Minister’s Office and the al-Amal Association, an Iraqi non-governmental
organization. Bringing together youth representatives and senior local political actors
to discuss solutions, the workshops focused on the challenges faced by young people
in Iraq, including unemployment, security, limited access to local decision -making
and environmental concerns.
53. On 24 August, my Deputy Special Representative met with the General
Coordinator of Gorran, Omar Said Ali, to discuss the political situation in the country,
as well as the new Kurdistan Regional Government and its reform programme.

B.

Electoral assistance
54. The Independent High Electoral Commission commenced work on several areas
of electoral preparations, following the passage of the amendment to the Governorate
Council Electoral Law of 2018 and the setting of the election date for 1 April 2020.
The Commission opened the process for the registration of political parties intending
to participate in the elections. At the time of writing the present report, 219 political
parties had already registered. At its request, UNAMI provided legal advice on the
regulations governing the accreditation of coalitions and the registration of
candidates.
55. The Independent High Electoral Commission also resumed voter registration
updates in Ninawa and Kirkuk Governorates, and continued the biometric registration
process for internally displaced voters. As at 26 October, some 97,000 internally
displaced voters had opted for biometric registration, most of them currently located
in Dahuk and Erbil.
56. In a meeting with UNAMI on 12 September, members of the Kurdistan Regional
Parliament raised concerns regarding a provision in the amended electoral legislation
requiring internally displaced voters to return to their home governorate to vote. That

19-19498

9/16

S/2019/903

provision was subject to constitutional challenge, awaiting a decision by the Federal
Supreme Court. Pending further clarity on the matter, UNAMI was in discussion with
the Independent High Electoral Commission and several other entities regarding
measures that could be implemented during the elections to facilitate and safeguard
the voting rights of internally displaced persons.
57. Following discussions between my Special Representative and the Speaker of
the Council of Representatives, UNAMI provided advice on options for enhancing
parliamentary oversight of electoral processes.
58. UNAMI also advised the Independent High Electoral Commission on the
importance of undertaking an independent audit of the information technology
systems to be used for the elections, taking into consideration the letter dated 8 August
from the Council of Ministers asking the Commission to consult with UNAMI in
undertaking the audit process.
59. UNAMI continued to advise the Independent High Electoral Commission on
mainstreaming gender throughout its programmes and activities. From 3 to
5 September, the Mission’s Senior Gender Adviser and its Office of Electoral
Assistance helped to organize a workshop for Commission staff on gender-responsive
electoral processes.
60. At the request of the Kurdistan Region Independent High Electoral Commission,
UNAMI provided expert support to several institutional capacity -building activities
as prioritized in the Commission’s strategic plan, including staff training in
Sulaymaniyah, Erbil and Dahuk. The Commission requested further UNAMI support
in its information technology and management capacity.
61. In response to the demonstrators’ demands for the comprehensive reform of
Iraqi institutions, including the Independent High Electoral Commission, the
Government requested that UNAMI provide technical support to the Presidential
Electoral Reform Committee tasked with drafting a consolidated electoral law. The
draft law was expected to be considered by the Council of Representatives in
November 2019.

C.

Human rights and rule of law activities
62. On 22 October, the UNAMI Human Rights Office released a special report on
human rights in which it outlined key human rights concerns in the context of the
demonstrations that had occurred in Iraq from 1 to 9 October 2019. UNAMI continued
to monitor the resumption of demonstrations on 25 October. The Mission ’s findings
indicated that serious human rights violations and abuse had been committed during
the demonstrations.
63. During the reporting period, the UNAMI Human Rights Office documented 102
incidents that had resulted in 139 civilian casualties (49 deaths, including 3 children,
and 90 injuries, including 15 children and 1 woman). The casualties had been caused
mainly by improvised explosive devices and indirect attacks (mortars and rockets).
In total, 53 per cent of the casualties had been attributed to ISIL. The trend of an
overall decrease in civilian casualties had continued since the defeat of ISIL in
December 2017. The casualties of the October demonstrations were not captured in
this category.
64. UNAMI continued its engagement with the Government of Iraq on the issue of
enforced disappearances, including the preparation of a draft law on the protection of
persons from enforced disappearance. At an event organized on 29 August by the
Prime Minister’s Office and the International Committee for the Red Cross to mark
the International Day of the Disappeared, my Deputy Special Representative gave an

10/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

address that underlined the right of families to hear the truth about the fate and
whereabouts of victims of enforced disappearance. She recalled the provisions of
Security Council resolution 2474 (2019), which covers the issue of missing persons
in armed conflict, including the obligations incumbent on all parties to conflict in
handling disappearances, detentions and deaths of civilian and armed actors.
65. UNAMI observed 144 trials and investigative hearings of criminal courts, with
a focus on ISIL defendants. While the hearings were conducted in a professional
manner, UNAMI continued to note concerns about the appointment of defence
lawyers immediately prior to the hearing, resulting in a lack of preparation for the
defence, as well as the reliance on confessions allegedly obtained under duress with
limited judicial responses to these claims, and the prosecution of defendants for
association with terrorist groups, without sufficiently distinguishing between those
who had participated in acts of violence and those affiliated with ISIL for survival.
66. On 19 and 20 September, the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA),
UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
jointly facilitated a workshop to provide technical support to members of the State
Council, the body that ensures compliance of laws with the Constitution of Iraq, in
preparing draft anti-domestic violence legislation. The draft finalized by the State
Council included provisions that would protect survivors as well as those at risk of
domestic violence. Meanwhile, the Office of the President submitted a separate draft
of the same bill to the Speaker of Council of Representatives. Both versions were to
be referred to the parliamentary Legal Committee, for merging and alignment.
67. Between 28 July and 2 August, UNAMI organized 10 round -table discussions
in the Kurdistan Region with representatives of minority communities, g overnment
authorities, members of the Kurdistan Region Commission for Human Rights and
civil society, to identify human rights issues affecting minorities. Issues discussed
included inadequate political representation, laws and policies that did not recogn ize
the rights of religious minorities, the confiscation of property and security concerns
in the disputed territories. The discussions centred around technical support and
specific steps required to address these challenges, in accordance with the
Government’s obligations under the Convention on the Elimination of Racial
Discrimination. In addition, on 6 August, UNAMI established the first minority rights
working group as a coordination mechanism to support the implementation of
recommendations by the Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. At
its first meeting, the working group identified priority areas, including the enactment
of a law criminalizing racial discrimination, the preservation and promotion of
minority languages and efforts to remove discriminatory civil documentation for
minorities. The working group held two further meetings, on 28 August and
30 September, wherein it reviewed the anti-discrimination and protection of diversity
bill and provided comments that would be submitted to the Parliamentary Human
Rights Committee.
68. Regarding the right to freedom of expression, UNAMI documented a series of
restrictive measures that had been applied during the October demonstrations,
including attacks against media outlets, orders not to film or cover the
demonstrations, the confiscation of equipment, the deletion of video footage or
photographs and the blocking of the Internet and social media. UNAMI also received
multiple, consistent accounts of media workers from various parts of Iraq being
subjected to arbitrary arrest, threats, intimidation and harassment.
69. On 9 September, the Minister of Justice led the Iraq delegation at the forty second session of the Human Rights Council. On 11 September, the Minister for
Justice engaged with the Committee of Experts in Geneva to discuss the initial report
of Iraq on the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with
19-19498

11/16

S/2019/903

Disabilities. On 12 September, the Minister for Justice met with the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva.
70. From 25 to 27 August, Iraq hosted for the first time a forum on institutional
mechanisms for the advancement of women in the Arab Region. The forum took place
under the auspices of President Salih, in cooperation with the General Secre tariat of
the Council of Ministers and the High Council for Women’s Affairs of the Kurdistan
Regional Government. Participants included representatives from Bahrain, Egypt,
Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon, Tunisia, Yemen and the State of Palestine, as well as region al
and international organizations. My Deputy Special Representative addressed the
opening session.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
71. During the reporting period, humanitarian actors reached an additional 279,984
people with humanitarian assistance, bringing the total number of persons served in
2019 to 1,424,000 across more than 1,100 priority locations. Partners continued to
implement the 2019 Humanitarian Response Plan despite persistent funding
shortfalls. As at 15 September 2019, funding for the Plan remained at 42 per cent
($295 million of the $701 million sought) although certain clusters, notably Child
Protection and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene for All, had recently received financial
boosts. An additional $125 million in humanitarian funding provided bilaterally fell
outside the Humanitarian Response Plan. The Humanitarian Coordinator therefore
continued her engagement to underline the relevance of the Plan, instead of bilateral
contributions to agencies.
72. In August and September 2019, authorities in Anbar and Ninawa Governorates
undertook concrete actions to close and consolidate camps for internally displaced
persons at an intensified pace not anticipated by humanitarian partners. In some
instances, these actions were carried out without prior coordination with United
Nations agencies and relevant non-governmental organizations. In Ninawa
Governorate, with little advance preparation, several hundred internally displaced
families were transported to their home governorates, despite their concerns for their
personal safety upon return. Many of the returns were made at short notice and with
limited inter-governorate coordination, resulting in inadequate support on arrival,
including insufficient tents, water, food and health services available from
humanitarian partners. In addition, host communities had not been informed of the
imminent return of internally displaced persons and no preparation had been
undertaken to mitigate tensions between these two groups.
73. Information provided by United Nations agencies and non-governmental
organizations pointed towards humanitarian access constraints in 93 per cent of the
districts in the central and northern governorates, with the majority occurring in
Ninawa Governorate. Multiple governorates with severe humanitarian needs were
deemed inaccessible for humanitarian staff, due to insecurity, a multiplicity of
administrative requests and shifting compliance requirements.
74. Gender-based violence programming carried out by humanitarian partners in
Iraq to deliver essential services, case management and psychosocial support, was
underfunded. The gender-based violence subcluster reported that only 318,000 out of
739,000 targeted beneficiaries had been reached since the beginning of the year,
owing to a funding shortfall of more than $20 million. The lack of funding had
resulted in the closure of vital services for internally displaced persons, returnees and
host communities, and a complete absence of gender-based violence programming in
certain camps. Major gaps had been identified in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Erbil and

12/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

Sulaymaniyah Governorates. Serious gender-based violence incidents perpetrated by
armed actors were reported in both camps and informal settlements.
75. Meanwhile, the United Nations continued to support critical stabilization efforts
in Iraq. During the reporting period, the Funding Facility for Stabilization completed
38 projects in the five liberated governorates. With the support of the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), to date, 4.3 million internally displaced Iraqis had
returned home. Completed projects included the rehabilitation of two major
electricity substations in East Mosul, which would improve access to electricity for
some 450,000 people. Meanwhile, the rehabilitation of a large concrete bridge in
Fallujah had been completed, improving transport links for 350,000 people. The
Facility had completed a total of 2,191 projects. Since the signing of the Financing
Agreement with the Government of Iraq on 28 August 2019, under which the
Government of Iraq had committed $33 billion to stabilization activities across the
country, UNDP had received much-needed funding from several contributing
countries, decreasing the funding deficit to $265 million out of a total requirement of
$1.38 billion. The Facility continued to urgently require funds for the priority areas
of Mosul, Baiji, Hawija and the western parts of Anbar and Ninawa Governorates.
76. During the reporting period, the World Health Organization (WH O) procured
and distributed essential medicines sufficient for more than 465,000 people and
emergency health kits for 773,700 people for three months. WHO supported the
establishment of primary health-care facilities in Ninawa Governorate, providing
returnees with access to health services at any time during the day. It also supported
quality monitoring to ensure that drinking water supplies in Anbar, Kirkuk, Ninawa
and Sulaymaniyah Governorates met minimum standards.
77. In August, the World Food Programme (WFP) delivered food assistance to
400,782 people in nine governorates. In response to the relocation of internally
displaced persons in Ninawa Governorate, WFP moved family food rations for its
next distribution cycle to areas expected to receive the families. Over the course of
August and September, a retail expert supported WFP efforts to transition its entire
caseload to cash assistance by the end of the year.
78. The United Nations Mine Action Service (UNMAS) continued to partner with
the national mine action authorities with a view to fostering a nationally led and
managed gender-mainstreamed explosive hazard response. The Regional Mine Action
Centre North Mosul office was formally opened in August, providing a co -located
space for the Directorate of Mine Action and UNMAS, allowing for more efficient
collaboration in close proximity to operations and more closely tied to local
community needs.
79. The International Organization for Migration (IOM) continued to provide
essential humanitarian services in the sectors of camp coordination and management,
shelter and non-food items, emergency health and communications with communities
in camps and out of camp locations, targeting internally displaced persons and
returnees in Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala, Karbala’, Kirkuk, Najaf, Ninawa and Salah
al-Din Governorates. Over 3,000 families had benefitted from shelter services, over
4,450 families had benefited from non-food items and eight camps had received camp
coordination and management support.
80. On 16 September, the Central Statistical Organization and Kurdistan Regional
Statistical Organization signed an agreement with the International Labour
Organization (ILO) to establish a baseline of current labour market statistics to be
used for policy development. ILO also collaborated with the Central Bank of Iraq to
support small and medium-sized Iraqi enterprises under the “one trillion dinars”
initiative to allow commercial banks in Iraq to benefit from ILO grants for subsidized

19-19498

13/16

S/2019/903

loans for onward lending to internally displaced persons and host communities in
Dahuk and Ninawa Governorates.
81. On 8 August, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) completed primary school teacher training for 662 teachers
from east and west Mosul (342 women and 318 men). Since the start of the new school
year on 1 September, UNESCO had helped to enrol 10,823 out-of-school children
(6,771 boys and 4,052 girls) in formal schooling (10,492) and accelerated learning
programmes (331) in Baghdad, Dhi Qar, Ninawa and Salah al-Din Governorates
through enrolment promotion campaigns. UNESCO was also assisting the
Government of Iraq to develop its National Education Strategy for the period
2020 − 2030.
82. The Government of Iraq released $37 million from its 2019 budget to fund the
2020 population and housing census and had allocated $95.4 million in the 2020
budget. In addition, the Government of Iraq proposed to allocate $12 million from the
stabilization fund to support implementation of the 2020 census. It was agreed to
channel the funding through UNFPA as the lead of the census inter-agency working
group.
83. The United Nations Environmental Programme was supporting the Ministry of
the Environment in the preparation of the second national communications and the
first biennial update report under the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change. The project supported assessments in the areas of national
greenhouse gas inventories and mitigation, as well as vulnerability and adaptation to
climate impacts. This was expected to lead to the development of relevant policy
instruments that would inform and guide the formulation of cost -effective project
proposals in the areas of greenhouse gas mitigation and climate change adaptation.
84. On 1 August, the Ministry of Planning signed a memorandum of understanding
with the United Nations to establish the Iraq reconstruction and recovery trust fund,
which supported both parties’ engagement in the management of resources to support
the Government’s recovery and development framework. The fund also supported the
implementation of policies and programmes in furtherance of the Government ’s
Sustainable Development Goal targets and its Vision 2030, as defined by th e United
Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation Framework.

E.

Security and operational issues
85. The United Nations Department of Safety and Security in Iraq continuously
monitored developments in Baghdad during the progressive lifting of securi ty
restrictions in the city, particularly in the former International Zone and at Baghdad
International Airport, in order to adjust procedures and mitigation measures to
adequately manage the risk to United Nations personnel and operations in country.
86. During the reporting period, the Department of Safety and Security supported
an average of 52 field missions per day across the country, with assessed risk levels
ranging from medium to high. Close coordination with the Host Government had been
paramount to ensure the proper flow of information and the necessary security support
for United Nations operations.
87. As part of its mandate, UNAMI continued to support the work of the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committe d by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, particularly through the provision of
logistical and administrative assistance.

14/16

19-19498

S/2019/903

IV. Observations
88. More than two years after the conclusion of major combat operations against
ISIL, the hopes and aspirations of the Iraqi people for a better future remain
unfulfilled. The recent public protests and violence are stark reminders of this. I am
deeply concerned by the high number of people who were killed or injured during the
demonstrations, including by the use of live ammunition against demonstrators. I
reiterate my call to all actors to refrain from violence, and to security forces to act
with maximum restraint.
89. The only way forward towards a better future is through peaceful and inclusive
dialogue resulting in concrete outcomes that meet the aspirations of all Iraqis for a
better life and better services. At all times, the constitution of Iraq and fundamental
human rights, including the rights to peaceful assembly and freedom of expression,
must be respected. These rights are critical to allow people to make their voices heard
and to bring key public interest issues to the attention of authorities for action. The
Government’s launch of an investigation into the violence and loss of life is an
essential and important step towards accountability.
90. The Government’s agreement on an initial package of measures and its
commitment to dialogue are steps in the right direction, but swift implementation is
essential to meeting the legitimate and longstanding grievances of the Iraqi people.
91. I reiterate my call for inclusive and effective governance, including further,
immediate appointments of the many talented, qualified women of Iraq to senior
decision-making positions. I welcome the appointment of Suha Ali Bek as Minister
for Education, the first female member of the Cabinet, as an important first step in
the right direction.
92. Efforts taken by the Council of Representatives to combat corruption and to
fulfil its oversight function are commendable but have so far fallen short. Efforts to
counter corruption should not be limited to historic acts but must address ongoing
corruption and its corrosive effects. Parliamentarians and members of the
Government must lead by example.
93. The continuing negotiations between Baghdad and Erbil are important, and I
encourage both sides to reach a comprehensive agreement on outstanding issues,
including oil, the budget, security and the disputed areas.
94. The collaborative process we have witnessed in the Kurdistan Region, with
inter-party consultations on the reform programme and other legislative priorities, is
encouraging. The upcoming period will be crucial in demonstrating the sincerity of
the Kurdistan Regional Government’s commitment and ability to implement genuine
reform.
95. I welcome the Government of Iraq’s attempts to maintain stability and unity
within the country in the face of alleged violations of the country ’s sovereignty.
Confirmed violations should be addressed through diplomatic and legal means.
96. Ongoing regional tensions remain a source of major concern. I commend the
efforts of the leadership of Iraq to promote a balanced regional policy and act as a
stabilizing force. At the same time, urgent domestic priorities and needs must be
addressed by the Government. It is imperative that Iraq be allowed to pursue its
national interests. The country’s regional and international partners must support it in
its efforts to promote stability, in accordance with the principles of respect for its
sovereignty, territorial integrity and good neighbourly relations.
97. As an increasing budget deficit looms, a result of rising expenditures and oil
price volatility, it is important that the Government accelerate its structural reform,
19-19498

15/16

S/2019/903

fostering macroeconomic and financial stability as well as promoting sustainable and
inclusive growth.
98. Ongoing preparations for the Provincial Council elections are under way, and I
encourage all relevant stakeholders to work collectively towards fair, free and
credible elections.
99. The presence of ISIL remnants and other armed groups continues to pose serious
challenges to the stability of Iraq. In this context, further security sector reform,
including the implementation of the Prime Minister ’s Executive Order 237, remains
a national strategic priority.
100. Accountability for human rights violations is of the greatest importance.
Continued impunity will generate further discontent, which may have serious
consequences for promoting reconciliation and social cohesion.
101. A key outstanding humanitarian issue remains the return of internally displaced
persons to their areas of origin. I underline the need for all returns to be informed,
safe, dignified and voluntary. In this context, building mutual confidence and
fostering reconciliation among communities is essential.
102. Amid unpredictable security developments, the return of ISIL affiliates from the
Syrian Arab Republic remains a serious concern that needs to be addressed. The need
for a managed, safe return of the more than 30,000 Iraqis from the al-Hawl camp, and
to address the fate of third-country nationals and their families, require an integrated
approach. Failure of the international community and the Government of Iraq to
comprehensively address this matter is likely to have a far-reaching impact on Iraq,
the region and beyond.
103. Humanitarian and stabilization efforts remain underfunded. Funding for the
Humanitarian Response Plan for 2019 remains at 42 per cent of the amount needed to
provide essential humanitarian services to the country’s internally displaced persons.
The Funding Facility for Stabilization also remains seriously underfunded at
$265 million out of a total requirement of $1.38 billion. The continued funding
shortages will have a significant impact on the ability of displaced Iraqis to return to
their homes, due to the lack of adequate basic services such as electricity, water,
health and education. I call upon the international community to continue its support
of United Nations humanitarian and stabilization efforts. With the recent
establishment of the Iraq reconstruction and recovery trust fund, I also call upon the
international community to support the Government’s efforts to achieve its Vision
2030 and its Sustainable Development Goal targets.
104. Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued
dedication to implementing the Organization’s mandate under challenging
circumstances.

16/16

19-19498
