UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

nd
MEETING:

NEW

13 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2432/Rev. 1) .*.,...*..*.....,,.........*..

I

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I............................

1

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of Nicaragua on the Security
Council addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15746) **...*.

1

WPV. 2432

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.

Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Osficial Records of the Security Council, The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2432nd MEETING
Held
President: Mr. UMBA

in New York on Friday,
di LUTETE

(Zaire),

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2432/Rev.l)
1.

Adoption

of the agenda,

2.

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746).
The meeting was called to order at 4.50 pm,

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted

Letter dated 5 May 1983 from the representative of
Nicaragua on the Security Council addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/15746)
I. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decisions taken at the 2431st meeting of the Council, I invite the representative of Honduras to take a place at the Council table. I invite the
representatives of Grenada, Mexico and the Syrian Arab
Republic to take the places reserved for them at the side
of the Council chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Ortez Colindres
(Honduras) took a place at the Council table. Mr. Taylor
(Grenada), Mr. MuAoz Ledo (Mexico) and Mr. El-Fattal
(Syrian Arab Republic) took the places reserved for them
at the side of the Council chamber.

2. The PRESIDENT:
(interpretation from French): 1
wish to inform members of the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Algeria,
Cuba, Ethiopia, Guatemala, the Islamic Republic of
Iran, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mali and the Seychelles in which they ask to be invited to participate in
the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives to
participate in the discussion without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

13 May

1983, at 4.30 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (Algeria), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr, Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Quiiionesdm6zquita
(Guatemala), Mr. Rajaie-Khorassani
(Islamic Republic of Iran), Mr Treiki (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. Traore’ (Mali) and Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from French):
Members of the Council have before them document
S/15753, containing the text of a letter dated 9 May 1983
from the Deputy Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua to the President of the Security Council,
4. The first speaker is the representative of Mexico,
whom I invite to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
5. Mr. MmOZ
LED0 (Mexico) (interpretation from
Spanish): My delegation offers its best wishes to you, Sir,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council. Your vast experience and that of your country
are a guarantee of commitment to the cause of peace in
your work in this body.
6. For the second time in six weeks the Government of
Nicaragua has been compelled to come to the Council to
denounce the continuance of the escalation of vioIence in
Central America, which threatens the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of that country and endangers international peace and security.
7. I thank the Council for giving me this opportunity to
reaffirm the grave concern of the Mexican Government
at the situation prevailing in Central America, the recurring violation of international legality in that region and
the dangerous trend towards disregard of the right of
self-determination of peoples.
8. The declaration by the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua [243Ist meeting] refers to facts that
demonstrate the undeniable worsening of the crisis in
Central America and an increasingly obvious trend
towards foreign interference in the internal affairs of the
States of the region.
9. In the face of this trend, which heightens the threat
of internationalization
of the Central American crisis,
Mexico has redoubled its efforts in favour of dialogue
and negotiation as methods for the peaceful settlement of
regional disputes within the spirit and letter of the Charter of the United Nations, Together with the Govern-

ments of Colombia, Panama and Venezuela, and in the
framework of the Contadora declaration of 9 January
1983,’ we have stepped up our contacts and consultations aimed at the reduction of tension in the area and at
the search for practical mechanisms accept.able to all parties which can lay the groundwork for the advent of
peace.

they recognized that a permanent solution will only be
possible without foreign interference.”
They also agreed that
“The Central American crisis derives from the economic and social structures that prevail in the region
and, therefore, efforts to resolve it should be aimed at
avoiding the tendency to describe it as a chapter in the
East-West confrontation.”

10. Following the last discussion held in the Council in
connection with the Nicaraguan complaint [242&h2427th meetings], the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of the
four countries made joint visits to Costa Rica, Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras and Guatemala, at the invitation of those Governments. In the course of these visits
they were able to appreciate the desire of the parties to
co-operate and to get their views and opinions concerning the conditions necessary for the restoration of peace.

15. We are convinced that that declaration reflects an
increasingly firm and widespread conviction among the
States Members of the Organization. In spite of this, the
climate of threats and verbal aggression has intensified
and the centres of confrontation have mutiplied. While
many are working sincerely for peace, it would seem that
some are attempting to achieve it through war.

II.
In the light of those talks, they invited the Central
American Foreign Ministers to a second stage of consuItations in the Republic of Panama in April, in order to
promote effective communication and achieve constructive dialogue among the Governments of those countries.
That second stage made it possible to define the main
issues in the dispute and to formulate an initial diagnosis
of their nature. As a result of that meeting, our Governments reaffirmed their profound conviction that through
formulas for peaceful settlement and a genuine spirit of
negotiations it is possible, in a positive way, to deal with
the disputes afflicting the countries of the area.

16. During the past weeks there have been military and
political events that underline the danger of growing
interference in the internal affairs of the Central American States, Nicaragua in particular. If this trend persists,
irreparable damage would be done to the Organization
through the violation of the cardinal principle on which
it is based: respect for the sovereignty of States.
17. The President of Mexico, Miguel de la Madrid,
recently issued a harsh warning in this connection. He
stated:
“The international stage is not a preserve for unilateral action nor should it be a testing-ground for a few.
It is incumbent on the society of States, as a whoie, to
take decisive steps to deal with the crises of our
times.”

I2. We have received testimony of open solidarity with
our efforts from many Governments, and we feel that we
have contributed to the strengthening of a peace-making
spirit with regard to the question of Central America
which has enlisted the overwhelming support of international public opinion.

He also reiterated that Mexico will continue to work to
ensure that our Central American brothers find, in the
principre of the self-determination of peoples, the best
guarantee of their right to live in peace and to seek their
own road to democracy and development.

13. In the joint declaration signed by the Foreign Minister of Mexico and the Secretary of State of the United
States at the conclusion of the third meeting of the Binational Commission established by the two Governments,
the two affirmed that, having exchanged views on the
situation in the Central American region, “they agreed to
promote processes of dialogue and negotiations with a
view to avoiding armed conflict and to promote the
establishment
of peaceful conditions and economic
development”.

18. Given the seriousness of the situation which
prompted the present debate in the Security Council, the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Panama,
Venezuela and Mexico held a consultative meeting which
ended early this morning in Panama City, After having
thoroughly studied the events, they reiterated their intention to continue their diplomatic quest for a solution to
the disputes in the region by promoting dialogue, understanding and the establishment of political machinery for
guaranteeing the full attainment of their objectives.

14. Other countries on the continent have offered their
total support for our efforts. On the conclusion of an
official visit to my country, the President of Brazil,
together with the President of Mexico, signed a declaration in which the two expressed their deep concern at the
“worsening of the situation in Central America and the
increasing risk of military conflicts spreading throughout
the area”. The two Presidents

19. In that connection and pursuant to a request made
by the Government of Costa Rica, they decided to send
a mission ‘of observers to the frontier zone of that
country with Nicaragua, composed of representatives of
each of the countries of the group. It will be responsible
for identifying the facts, evaluating the circumstances
and presenting whatever recommendations are deemed
appropriate.

“considered
it urgent that effective negotiations
should be conducted between the parties involved in
the crisis and urged them to refrain from any actions
that might further worsen the situation. Furthermore,
2

20. The Foreign Ministers of the four countries “note
with deep concern the development of the Central American conflict over the past few days and the repeated
violation of essential principles of the international legal
order”. They recognized that “these circumstances have
given rise to various initiatives aimed at seeking the
intervention of multilateral organizations”. The Foreign
Ministers stated that:

and outside it, will listen to and heed the appeal made to
them to refrain from any acts that may render difficult
the efforts of the Contadora Group and aggravate the
situation.
25. We hope that this draft resolution will command
the unanimous approval of the Council. That would constitute an unequivocal and highly significant political act
which would initiate the process of detente and the restoration of peace in Central America.

“It would be highly desirable that in the deliberations taking place in the aforementioned forums, and
especially those currently under way in the Security
Council, there should be a strengthening of principles
which should guide the activities of States in the international arena.

26. Mr. MASHINGAIDZE
(Zimbabwe): Mr. President, allow me first of all to join those who have already
welcomed you to New York and wished you well in your
new post as your great country’s representative to the
United Nations. As members of the Organization of African Unity and of the movement of non-aligned countries,
and also as developing countries and militarily small
nations, Zimbabwe and Zaire have many common interests. It is my most sincere hope, therefore, that our two
missions here in New York will continue to co-operate in
promoting and protecting those interests and in working
for international peace and security. My second pleasant
duty is to congratulate you on your accession to the
presidency of the Security Council for the month of May.
As you must surely have already realized, this is a very
exacting position, and May is promising to be a very
hectic month. However, your own vast past experience as
a minister in your country’s Government gives us justifiable confidence that the Council, charged with primary
responsibility for international peace and security, will be
in good hands during the month. For our part we of the
delegation of Zimbabwe would like to assure you of our
full co-operation with you in your work.

“These principles include: self-determination
and
non-interference in the affairs of other States, respect
for the territorial integrity of other States, the obligation not to allow the territory of a State to be’used for
committing acts of aggression against other States, the
peaceful settlement of disputes and the prohibition of
the threat or use of force to resolve conflicts.” [See
S/15762, annex.]
21. A State Member of the Organization has brought to
the Council’s attention a situation which from every
standpoint endangers the maintenance of international
peace and security. It has done so in full exercise of its
right under Article 35 of the Charter. The Council is duty
bound to offer a rapid and effective response to the problem brought before it. It must contribute resolutely to the
negotiated settlement of the present conflict, as the conscience of the world requires.
22. The Government of Mexico believes that the draft
resolution drawn up by developing countries, nonpermanent members of the Security Council, contains
the essential elements for furthering a peaceful solution
of the disputes in the region. It affirms the primary competence of this body in the maintenance of collective
security; it emphasizes fundamental principles which are
at stake, and it affords the countries committed to the
Contadora effort additional support to continue their
work. Furthermore, it requests the Secretary-General, in
accordance with the authority conferred on him by the
Charter and the willingness that he himself has
expressed, to use his good offices in co-ordination with
the Contadora Group with a view to achieving the solution to problems which affect peace in Central America.
That could be done in the way considered appropriate to
the circumstances by the Secretary-General.

27. I also wish to pay my delegation’s tribute to Mrs,
Kirkpatrick,
representative of the United States, for a
very productive presidency of the Council during April.
28. Turning now to the subject of this meeting, my delegation observes with deep regret and concern that once
again within six weeks the Republic of Nicaragua has
been compelled to request an urgent meeting of the Security Council on the delicate and rapidly deteriorating
situation within and around its borders. Unless immediately checked, the buildup of tensions on the
Nicaraguan-Honduran
and Nicaraguan-Costa
Rican
frontiers will soon lead to open military conflicts in the
area. The Security Council, the only body which the
international
community
has charged with primary
responsibility for international peace and security, must
be gravely concerned about a conflagration which will
inevitably follow such an outbreak of military conflict, as
the consequences of such a conflagration for regional
stability and international peace and security will be
incalculable.

23. The efforts being made by countries and groups of
countries in fulfilment of their responsibilities as Member
States to help find a peaceful solution to international
disputes should in any event be resolutely supported by
the United Nations and should be related to the actions
taken by its competent bodies.

29. We note with encouragement, however, that, concerned about the grave dangers threatening peace and
stability in the area, some of the Governments in the
region have already taken initiatives aimed at preventing
any further escalation of the situation. We are.referring

24. We thank the international community represented
here for its support of the peace-making efforts of our
countries, and we trust that all States, within the region
3

here to the initiative of the Governments of Colombia,
Mexico, Panama and Venezuela-the
Contadora initiative-the long-term objective of which is the ultimate
normalization
of relations among the affected States by
peaceful means.
30. Our delegation is equally encouraged by the repeatedly declared commitment
to a negotiated solution by
the Government of National Reconstruction of Nicaragua, which was also reaffirmed by its Minister for External Relations, Mr. Miguel D’Escoto Brockmann, in his
statement to the Council on 9 May [2431st meeting] and
again in a letter of 2 May addressed to the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. George Shultz [S/15742].
31. It is the view of the Government of the Republic of
Zimbabwe that the Council must insist on and exert maximum efforts towards negotiated and peaceful solutions
to the problems which are afflicting Central America.
There is no viable alternative policy to this, and there can
be none. My Government would like to see United
Nations efforts for peace in the region exercised through
the Security Council and through the personal involvement of the Secretary-General, We believe that the first
positive step in this direction is for the Council to adopt a
resolution
which, among other things, gives the
Secretary-General
authority to initiate without delay
good-offices efforts, preferably in co-ordination with the
Contadora Group.
32. In addition, the Council should warn all concerned,
and especially States outside Central America, to refrain
from any interference or intervention which is likely to
lead to the aggravation of the situation and which might
frustrate the peace efforts of the Secretary-General and
the Contadora Group.
33. Finally, as we are fully convinced that no settlement
can bring real and lasting peace unless it has the complete
respect and support of the parties directly involved, it is
our hope that at an appropriate stage Nicaragua and
Honduras will have an opportunity for a serious dialogue, possibly with the assistance of the SecretaryGeneral and/or the Contadora Group. We also feel that
such a settlement, resulting from direct talks between the
two, would be greatly enhanced by a similar dialogue
between Nicaragua and the United States. To achieve
their objectives, the diaIogues which are being recommended here must be undertaken in a spirit of seriousness and candidness, and among equal sovereign States.
34. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Seychelles. I invite
her to take a place at the Council table and to make her
statement.
35. Ms. GONTHIER
(Seychelles): Mr. President, as
you have been a foreign minister and have served both
your country and Africa well, we are confident that your
expertise will guide us during this troubled time.
36. The Republic of Seychelles continues to support
Nicaragua’s right to independence and urges all States to

abandon policies of intervention and destabilization and
to seek political solutions through diplomatic channels to
settle whatever differences that might exist between them
and Nicaragua.
37. In Seychellois society, the family is in reality a community in which its members co-operate closely, It is not
a relationship based on the dominant-one
might say
domineering-authority
of a single member. The political or idealogical direction of the family is not exercised
by one member alone, in the position as head of the
family. Each member has the right to participate in all
important procedures. But none of the family members
has the right to interfere in the normal relations between
others, especially distant relatives. The present foreign
interference from Honduras, upsetting normal relations
within the Central American community, exposes this
family member to reprisals and a possible major military
confrontation.
38. By the use of Honduras as a base for a destabilization programme against Nicaragua, current hostilit’ies in
Nicaragua may expand into a war between the two countries. This is not the normal course of action taken by
family members when trying to settle their differences.
But then Nicaragua is not looked upon as a member of a
family by some foreign interests. It is considered to be
more of an orphan needing the supervision of a headmaster or a headmistress.
39. As a result of the current intiltration of counterrevolutionary forces in Nicaragua, the escalation of violence grows worse day by day. This relentless policy of
covert action risks spreading the fire that blazes in Central America to other nations and continents. It disheartens all those attached to peace and who respect the
dignity of people. Under the Somoza regime, the Nicaraguan people endured their Calvary with courage and
pride, and each new ordeal they now suffer only makes
them still more determined in their endless combat to
survive.
40. The will of a people must never be underestimated,
as it has been in the past. The re-establishment of peace
in the Central American community will not come
through inhuman intensification of suffering and mourning for the dead, but through negotiation with the true
representatives of the Nicaraguan people, the Sandinist
Government.
Distant regional relatives must be convinced that intervention is a frightful, frightening mistake, which no victory can end. How many more
casualties are needed for these truths to be recognized
and accepted as the basis of the necessary and urgent
negotiations?
41. While foreign military involvement in Nicaragua
continues to be well documented by the international
and the American press, the reason for its involvement is
not. We can only conclude that the true objective of such
involvement is the overthrow of the present Government
in Nicaragua. Let us remember that the international
community
outlawed intervention as an instrument of
foreign policy of States. In this connection, references

must be made to General Assembly resolution 2625
(XXV) of 1970 containing the Declaration on Principles
of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and
Co-operation among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.

know how one could bring back to life all our Nicaraguan brothers and sisters who have fallen victim to the
murderous bullets of Somozists who are spreading terror in our homeland and who at this very moment are
killing our heroic border guards,, peasants, students,
technicians and doctors-Nicaraguans
and foreigners
alike-as well as members of our glorious Sandinist
People’s Army, the reservists and militiamen,

42. My delegation would like, in closing, to reaffirm the
concern of the Republic of Seychelles about the worsening situation in and relating to Nicaragua. The loss of
Nicaraguan lives is due to the thinking that Nicaragua
does not have the right to independence and territorial
integrity. It is the hope of the Republic of Seychelles that
through negotiation and dialogue-as good members of
a family settle their disagreements-this
thinking will be
reversed.

“We have come before the Council to respond to
aggression and death with an invitation to frank and
constructive dialogue. We abhor war; we cherish
peace. What is the response of my Security Council
colleagues?” [Bid., paras. 4.5 and 46.1
49. My delegation believes that the important contribution of Mr. D’Escoto Brockmann contains serious, positive elements which could bring an end to the present
process of violence and confrontation, the continuance
of which serves the interests of no country in the region.
This reasonable and sensible effort on the part of Nicaragua, at the very time it is the victim of a flagrant act of
aggression and of scarcely camouflaged intervention in
its internal affairs, should find a response in the Council
so that the guidelines may be established for a restoration
of peace throughout the region.

43. In this respect we support the Contadora initiative
which favours peace in Central America. We plead with
the Secretary-General to use all the influence that he has
in order to ensure that the Contadora plan is implemented and that some positive results are achieved.
44, The PRESIDENT (interpretation~om French): The
next speaker is the representative of Algeria. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

50. From this standpoint, Algeria notes with satisfaction the efforts undertaken by the countries of the region,
which have just been described by the representative of
Mexico. In particular, Algeria supports the efforts of
Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela to sketch the
outlines of a lasting, comprehensive settlement of the
crisis affecting the Central American region. The meetings which have taken place among those four countries
in the last few months, and even more recently, constitute
a highly responsible initiative and ofler the promise of a
peaceful outcome. Our duty is to encourage this initiative
and any proposal which might preserve the chance of
achieving a secure and lasting peace. We hope that the
efforts of this group, the Contadora Group, wiIl be successful and that they will be supported and continued
through action by the United Nations itself.

45. Mr. SAHNOUN
(Algeria) (interpretation from
I;.ench): Permit me first of all to convey to you, Sir, my
sincere congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council. The important responsibilities you have assumed in your own country and your
vast experience in international affairs, with which we are
all familiar, will unquestionably be of benefit to the work
of the Council this month. I wish also to pay a tribute to
your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, for the distinguished work she accomplished last month.
46. The Algerian delegation is speaking once more on
this item to express, with a feeling of growing concern, its
anxiety at the ever more dangerous development of the
tension and armed confrontation in Nicaragua, in particular on that country’s borders with Honduras.

51. The convergence of the wills of the countries of the
region and of the international community, through
appropriate and necessary action by the SecretaryGeneral, should make it possible to overcome the present
crisis and to avoid a tragic extension of the conflict.

47. Our duty as regards international peace and security and our anxiety about anything that threatens them,
as well as our solidarity with a friendly country, make it
incumbent upon us, in this consideration of a complaint
which was made to the Security Council a year ago now,
to associate ourselves with all those who hope that in the
final analysis the worst will be avoided and the peoples of
the region will be spared misfortune and disaster.

52. Algeria, in stressing before the Council today its
concerns and its hopes, has acted in strict conformity
with the positions taken by the Movement of NonAligned Countries, both in the final communiquC issued
by the Foreign Ministers of its Co-ordinating Bureau at
their Extraordinary Meeting at Managua in January this
year [see S/15628, annex] and in the documents adopted
at the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries at New Delhi in March

48. I wish to pay a tribute to the Minister for External
Relations of Nicaragua, who, at the conclusion of his
statement in this debate [2431sl meeting], pointed the
way, through reasonable dialogue and with the appropriate partners, to a peaceful settlement of the conflicts
which involve the countries of the region and other, more’
distant countries. In that statement, he said:

[S/1567.5,

annex].

For our part, we should like to repeat our fervent
hope that we may see the beginning of a true dialogue

53.

“We have not come here to engage in recriminations or to seek compensation for damage. We do not
5

i

60. Just a few days ago the mercenaries operating with
impunity on Honduran soil were accorded the status of
“freedom fighters”. Recently also the United States challenged the legitimacy of the people’s Government of Nicaragua. I respectfully submit that any statement that
questions the legitimacy of the Government of Nicaragua must put Orwellianism in the shade. How could a
Government that embraces the racist Pretoria rCgime
and that stands behind those who commit genocide in
Namibia, Sabra and Shatila question the credentials of
the sovereign Government of Nicaragua?

between the States concerned. There is no other way to
put an end to the present escalation of aggression,-the
uncontrolled process of interventionism and the increasingly bitter declarations of hostility.
54. The Council owes to Nicaragua’s remarkable cooperativeness this valuable opportunity once again to put
to work the resources of multilateral diplomacy for preventive purposes. In the face of the unforeseeable consequences entailed by the dangerous development of the
situation, the Security Council cannot but use the full
weight of its authority to bring about fhe restoration of
peace and a peaceful settlement of disputes. In this task,
it is the individual
and collective responsibility
of
members of the Council to be guided solely and exclusively by the need to safeguard international peace and
security. We trust that this will be the case.

61. Three years ago a new crusade in the name of
democracy was started. It seems as though it is the
democracy that legitimizes mass murders; the democracy
that makes its protagonists angels and,the rest of humanity the disciples of Satan; it is the democracy of frontiersmanship,
of policemanship,
of backyardism
and
frontyardism. We do not claim to have made the definitive pronouncement on democracy. We do not arrogate
to ourselves the right to certify what is and what is not
democracy. However, we know that real democracy is
sensitive to the needs and to the aspirations of peoples
and that real democracy cannot be predicated on an
imperial creed.

55. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
French): The
next speaker is the representative of Grenada. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
56. Mr. TAYLOR (Grenada): Sir,:at the outset 1 wish
to congratulate you on your accession to the presidency
of the Council for the month of May. I also wish to take
this opportunity
to thank Council members, through
you, for inviting me to make this presentation.

62. The people of Latin America are the proud inheritors and executors of the lofty ideals proclaimed by
BolEvar, Mnrtl, Sandino and Fed6n. We are fed up with
the policies that regard our soils, soils saturated with the
blood of our martyrs, as someone’s “game reserve”,
“strategic reserve”, “commercial frontier”, “backyard”
or “frontier”.
We are realists. We know the United
States; we pay homage to its great people; we understand
its concerns; we respect its sovereignty; but we fail to
comprehend its contempt for our Government and its
historic opposition to any attempts made by our peoples
to liberate themselves. It is painful when we consider the
fact that the contempt and the implications hurled at us
by successive United States Governments, including the
Reagan Administration,
are the same ones as those that
were hurled at the American people some 200 years ago
when they struggled and won the first successful anticolonialist: revolution in the hemisphere. Sometimes history is an important teacher,

57. These Council meetings have been convened at the
request of the Government of Nicaragua in an effort to
promote peace and good will between itself and its immediate neighbours. This is another attempt by the Nicaraguan Government, consistent with its stated policy and
its unimpeachable practice of encouraging dialogue and
negotiation in order to reduce tensions in the CentraI
American region, to avert a conflagration that would
consume the entire region and would undoubtedly have
ramifications far beyond the frontiers of Central America. The aforementioned facts must inform our deliberations, because they define the parameters of this session
and underline its significance.
58. Today Nicaragua is calling on us to act in accordance with our innumerable resolutions and declarations
in favour of international peace and co-operation and
respect for the sovereignty, territorial integrity, political
independence and the inalienable rights of all peoples to
self-determination.
In truth, Nicaragua is calling upon us
to invoke the relevant sections of the Charter of the
United Nations which enjoin all of us to act in favour of
peace.

63. Two hundred years ago American revolutionaries
were scorned and hounded like beasts. For example, the
Earl of Sandwich, speaking in March 1775 for a policy of
forcible repression of the American revolution, declared:
“Suppose the colonies do abound in men, what does
that signify? They are raw, undisciplined, cowardly
men. I wish instead of 40,000 of these brave fellows
they could produce in the field 200,000; the more the
better; the easier would be the conquest.. . believe me,
my Lords, the very sound of cannon would carry them
off.,. as fast as their feet would carry them.”

59. We are meeting here today against a very tense
background. Numerous appeals for peace made by
regional and extraregional
Governments,
including
France, Mexico, Colombia,
Venezuela, Panama and
even Nicaragua, have been arrogantly dismissed. We
meet at a time when the threat or war between Nicaragua
and Honduras looms ominously on the horizon, when
the obstructionist policies and the bellicose rhetoric of a
permanent member of the Security Council are fanning
the flames of war in our region,

64. Perhaps, too, it would be useful to look at how the
American people protectecl their own glorious revolution
6

in the early days. Counter-revolutionaries who are today
killing innocent Nicaraguans, having been trained and
financed by the United States Government, were described by John Adams, a distinguished American, as:
“the most despicable animals in creation; spiders, toads,
snakes are their only proper emblem”. The American
revplution developed mechanisms to protect its revolutiohary gains, as all revolutions must, and those mechanisms were the Councils of Safety. In March 1777, the
New Jersey Council of Safety was empowered to gaol all
counter-revolutionaries.
In Morristown in July of the
same year, Council members arrested 48 counterrevolutionaries in a single day.

Nicaragua, We believe that the involvement of the
Secretary-General in the ongoing discussions must have
a positive effect, given his interests, his wisdom and his
well-established qualities of leadership.
70, Finally, it is our view that failure to act now in
consonance with the Charter of the United Nations
would be tantamount to sentencing the people of Nicaragua and, indeed, all the peoples of our region that cherish
justice and freedom to deprivation, destruction and
death,
71, The PRESIDENT
(interprefation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

65. For those reasons we fail to understand why United
States Governments have attacked and continue to
attack Governments that have attempted or are attempting to feed the hungry, to clothe the naked and to give
land to the landless tillers. Instead of the co-operation
and good will that these Governments deserve, United
States Governments have overthrown them or subjected
them to tactics of destabilization. How can the United
States reconcile its professions with its practices?

72, Mr, IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): While some have
chosen the irresponsible and destructive path of violence,
Nicaragua has consistently and with an admirable sense
of perseverance pursued the path of international legality. That it has come to the Council for the third time in
the span of one year seeking redress for the unprovoked
and wanton aggression to which its people continue to be
subjected is further proof of its strong commitment to
peace and legality. It is, furthermore, a manifestation of
the trust which the people and the Government of Nicaragua still repose in the Council. Whether the Council
will, despite its past failures, now rise to the challenge of
that trust is yet to be seen, but it is our sincere hope that
it wil1,

66. Arbenz was overthrown when he tried to release his
country from the treadmill of grinding poverty; Allende
was brutally murdered and his Government was brought
down, only because he was trying to give his people some
of the bread that their own hands created. Nicaragua,
Cuba and Grenada are singled out for punishment
because they are attempting to emerge from the cultures
of brutality and oppression created by the bloody dictatorships of Somoza, Batista and Gairy.

73. For our part we pay a tribute to the Government of
Nicaragua for its perseverance in the search for a peaceful negotiated solution to the crisis its country is facing.
In this connection we cannot but express our admiration
to the Minister for External Relations of Nicaragua,
whose clear and eloquent statement defined the nature
and scope of the problem under discussion and underlined once again the gravity of the situation facing his
nation. In that same statement [2431st meeting] he identified the major party-indeed,
the very source of the
problemYwhile at the same time indicating to the Council a peaceful course of action which is in accord with the
purposes and principies of the Charter of the United
Nations.

67. Why is the United States Government defying’the
will of our people? How democratic is it if it scorns the
will of our people? Indeed it was a former Secretary of
State of the United States who, in reference to Allende’s
Chile, said that the United States could not countenance
socialism in Chile if the Chilean people were so irresponsible as to elect Salvador Allende. Whose will should be
respected? That of the oligarchies or the tiny cliques that
extort taxes from the poor? The transnationals that make
men beasts of burden? Is free enterprise the freedom of
small cliques to exploit the majority? On the totem pofe
of democracy does free enterprise come before free men?
68. Today we call for justice, because injustice is suffocating the poor peoples of our region. We demand peace,
because war is debilitating our peoples. We call for
understanding, because the lack of it is perpetuating our
wretchedness. In order to build new and just societies,
thereby fulfilling the dreams of Bolivar, Mart& Sandino
and Fed6n, we need peace, because peace is an indispensable prerequisite for development. Peace and development are inseparable.

74. As we all recall, two representatives spoke after
him-which
indicated not merely their interest in the
matter but perhaps their direct involvement in the conflict as well. One made a long statement which in both
substance and tone, and even in its irrelevant and discourteous references to countries outside the Central
American region, was almost identical to the statement
the other had made to the Council on an earlier occasion.
That they spoke the same language did not come as a
surprise to us inasmuch as the countries of those two
representatives are actually acting in unison to destabilize the Government of Nicaragua. What surprised us,
however, was the cavalier manner in which they dismissed the concrete issues presented to the Council by
Nicaragua’s Minister.

69. In the name of my Government and on behalf of
the people of my country, I wjsh to reaffirm Grenada’s
unstinting support for the constructive proposals put forward by the Contadora Group and also for those proposals outlined by the Minister for External Relations of
7

75. One in fact refused to address himself to the item on
the agenda and opted merely to make a statement in
exercise of the right of reply, in which, unfortunately, the
Government of Nicaragua was both lectured on the
virtues of American democracy and invited to adopt it as
its own, Moreover, both representatives not only refused
to address themselves to the problem at hand but even
went so far as to attempt to deny Nicaragua its sovereign
right to resort to the Security Council for assistance, on
the untenable ground that others in the region which face
internal upheavals had not done so. The fact that Nicaragua is building up its armed forces was given special
emphasis, as though disarmament was the natural and
logical path to follow for a country faced with external
aggression and internal subversion supported from without, Furthermore,
we were informed that arms were
being illegally shipped to El Salvador through Honduras,
as if control of Honduran territory were the responsibility of the Government of Nicaragua. Moreover, both
rcprcsentatives, regrettably, chose to comment extensively on issues which properly fall within the domestic
jurisdiction of Nicaragua and which, as a result, had no
direct relevance to the Council’s agenda.
76. Perhaps the only point in those statements that was
relevant and worth pondering was what one of them had
to say regarding bilateral negotiations. In rejecting bilateral negotiations with Nicaragua, that representativeknowingly or unknowingly-gave
the clear impression
that his Government, which he likened to a piece on a
chess-board, could not act independently to settle its differences with its immediate neighbour without the involvement of an external Power, which, again, he
compared to a giant. If in fact that was the impression he
intended the Council to have, it is indeed a sad reflection
on the sovereignty and national independence of his
country.
77. In the sometimes unreal world of diplomacy such
evasions and, I must say, even deceptions may be an
acceptable practice in extricating oneself from difficult
and embarrassing situations. But let no one have the
illusion that through evasion and deception the issues
can be confused and those responsible exonerated. This
will definitely not happen. What is unfortunate, however,
is that in the process the opportunity to halt and reverse
the deteriorating situation in the region could have been
missed and the Council rendered impotent in the face of
such blatant acts of aggression.
78. Despite all the obfuscations, the issue to which the
Council must address itself could hardly be any’ clearer.
A handful of countries which for very obvious reasons
feel threatened by the long-term prospect of a successful

revolution in Nicaragua have arrogated to themselves the
right to choose the form of government the Nicaraguan
people should have and the type of ideology they should
follow. To this end, they have organized, financed and
trained individuals who are opposed to the Sandinist
revolution and have, indeed, launched them recently on
an open invasion of Nicaraguan territory.
79. As the Minister for External Relations has clearly
stated, these mercenaries are wreaking havoc on life and
property within Nicaragua. The responsibility for these
acts of aggression and subversion lies squarely on the
Governments which have masterminded these military
operations as well as on those which have allowed their
territories to be used as staging grounds and rear bases
for the armed incursions. Those responsible are, of
course, known to the whole world, but what the world
does not know, and would surely like to know, is under
what norm or rule of international law or what moral
principle these Governments have undertaken such a
large-scale operation of interference and intervention.
80. If the reason of power rather than the power of
reason and legality were to be given primacy in the conduct of international relations, the world would undoubtedly be plunged into chaos and anarchy. Reason and
legality, we are convinced, are on the side of Nicaragua.
All acts of intervention and aggression against Nicaragua
must, therefore, cease immediately and unconditionally.
Ail avenues which might lead to a peaceful resolution of
the problem should be explored and exhausted. By acting
with courage and decisiveness in seeking to achieve these
objectives, the Council would not only save a small,
weak and impoverished country from the claws of a big,
powerful and rich one, but would also help put a stop to
the creeping anarchy that is threatening the very fabric of
international relations.
81. Finally, Sir, allow me to discharge the pleasant duty
of congratulating you on your assumption of the presidency of this body and of extending to you the best
wishes of the Ethiopian delegation for a successful and
fruitful term of office. I should also like to thank the
members of the Council for acceding readily to my delcgation’s request to address this body on the agenda item
before it.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m-

NOTE
’ A/38/68,

annex.
