S/PV.7214

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-ninth year

7214th meeting

Thursday, 10 July 2014, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Gasana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

(Rwanda)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Australia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Jordan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Lithuania. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Luxembourg . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Republic of Korea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . 
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Perceval
Mr. Quinlan
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Olguín
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Araud
Mr. Hmoud
Ms. Murmokaitė
Ms. Lucas
Mr. Sarki
Mr. Oh Joon
Mr. Churkin
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

14-46224 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506.
Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the
United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1446224*

S/PV.7214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.

militants by sea from Gaza into Ashkelon on the night
of 8 July was reportedly foiled by the IDF, which killed
the militants. Attacks on both sides continued today.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Israel to participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I welcome the presence of His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon, to whom I now give the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank you, Mr. President,
for the opportunity to brief the members of the Security
Council on the situation in Israel and the Gaza Strip.
I felt that the seriousness of the situation required a
consultation with Council members.
We are now several days into a dangerous escalation
in and around Gaza. Over the past several days, the
Palestinian factions Hamas and Islamic Jihad have
fired a barrage of more than 550 rockets and mortars
from Gaza into Israel, and the Israel Defense Forces
(IDF) have launched more than 500 air strikes on Gaza,
primarily targeting Hamas/Islamic Jihad facilities
and private residences of their members. Eighty-eight
Palestinians, many of them civilians, are reported to
have been killed, and 339 are reported to have been
injured. As of yesterday afternoon, some 150 homes
had been destroyed or severely damaged, with nearly
900 people having been displaced.
Three rockets were reportedly fired at Jerusalem,
with the IDF confirming the impact of one in northern
Jerusalem, without specifying the exact location.
Rockets were also fired at Tel Aviv, Jerusalem,
Hadera, Ashdod and Be’er Sheva, inter alia. Some
were intercepted by the Iron Dome defence system;
others caused material damage and injured two Israeli
civilians. An attempted infiltration by Palestinian

2/8

10/07/2014

The situation leading up to the eruption of the past
few days was already precarious, following the atrocious
kidnapping and murder of four young people — three
Israeli Yeshiva students and one Palestinian teenager.
Those acts shattered a period of relative calm and
were widely condemned by the United Nations and the
international community. Those responsible must be
brought to justice. I would like to take this opportunity
to again express my deepest condolences to the families
and loved ones of the victims of those heinous acts.
Today, we face the risk of an all-out escalation in
Israel and Gaza, with the threat of a ground offensive
still palpable — and preventable only if Hamas stops
the rocket firing. Prime Minister Netanyahu of Israel
has announced that the Israeli Cabinet and security
establishment remain unified in their decision to
intensify operations aimed at targeting terrorist cells
and protecting the security of Israelis. President Abbas
continues to appeal for an end to this crisis and has
reached out to President Sisi of Egypt, seeking Egypt’s
facilitation in the brokering of a ceasefire on the basis
of the Cairo-brokered November 2012 ceasefire of
which I was part.
The rhetoric has been equally unrelenting. The
Hamas leadership, in public statements issued by
Khaled Meshaal and Moussa Abu Marzouk, has called
for continued resistance despite earlier indications by
both Israel and Hamas that they were not interested
in a confrontation. It is now more urgent than ever to
try to find common ground for a return to calm and a
ceasefire understanding.
Once again, civilians are paying the price for the
continuation of conflict. My paramount concern is for
the safety and well-being of all civilians, no matter
where they are. It pains me — and it should pain us all —
to be reliving circumstances that are all too reminiscent
of the two most recent wars in Gaza. I have consistently
condemned indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza into
Israel. At the same time, the excessive use of force and
endangering of civilian lives are also intolerable. It is
unacceptable for citizens on both sides to permanently
live in fear of the next aerial attack.
All parties, including Palestinian armed groups,
must respect international humanitarian law. Israel has
legitimate security concerns, but I am also concerned

14-46224

10/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

at the many Palestinian deaths and injuries as a result
of Israeli operations. I continue to condemn the rising
number of civilian lives lost in Gaza. Once again,
Palestinian civilians are caught between Hamas’s
irresponsibility and Israel’s tough response.
Over the past few days, I have been engaging with
world leaders, including the King of Saudi Arabia, the
Emir of Qatar, the President of Egypt, the heads of the
League of Arab States and the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the United States Secretary of State, the
European Union High Representative, and others. All
agree on the importance of returning to calm. Our
challenge is to help the parties move away from their
entrenched respective narratives.
I have also spoken to Prime Minister Netanyahu
of Israel and President Abbas of Palestine. I called
on both sides to exercise maximum restraint, show
statesmanship and weigh the risks of further escalation.
Gaza, and the region as a whole, cannot afford another
full-blown war and another fault line. The potential
negative spillover elsewhere in the West Bank is also
unpredictable in an already tenuous and combustible
situation. The current crisis underscores yet again that
the status quo is unsustainable.
A solution for Gaza is as indispensable as ever.
Core elements of resolution 1860 (2009) remain
unimplemented, including the reunification of Gaza
and the West Bank under one legitimate Palestinian
Authority, committed to the Palestine Liberation
Organization principles. If diplomacy can restore calm
and end the violence, a broader ceasefire will have
to address the underlying causes of conflict, provide
for a full opening of the crossings and ensure an end
to weapons smuggling. A solution must also include
overcoming the chronic humanitarian vulnerability
of Gaza, where water and energy are in constant short
supply. I continue to encourage the Government of
Egypt to urgently open its crossing for humanitarian
purposes.
Turmoil in the West Bank has continued with
attacks, reprisals and provocations. Although riots in
East Jerusalem have decreased since Monday, clashes
between Palestinians and Israeli security forces in
the rest of the West Bank have continued, including
in and around refugee camps. Yesterday, some 10
Palestinians were reportedly injured by the IDF near
Ramallah and Bethlehem during protests in solidarity
with Gaza, which included attacks on Israeli security
infrastructures in the West Bank. It is clear that the

S/PV.7214

international community must accelerate efforts to
achieve an immediate halt to this escalation and reach
a durable ceasefire. All actors must exercise maximum
restraint and respect international humanitarian law.
I will continue my efforts to bridge gaps and revive
negotiations.
At the same time, I understand that many Israelis
and Palestinians are disenchanted with the peace
process, especially after the lack of results from the
latest diplomatic effort. This setback, and the others
that we have seen over many years of Middle East
diplomacy, have certainly undermined confidence that
peace is possible. But surely no one can wish for the
alternative of perpetual cycles of violence, pervasive
mistrust and polarized peoples. Now is not a time for
further incitement or vengeance. We must not let spoilers
prevail. We must keep the situation from getting any
further out of control. Any further spiral of violence
could have alarming unforeseen consequences.
This is one of the most critical tests the region has
faced in recent years. More than ever, the situation calls
for bold thinking and creative ideas. We must strive to
restore not only calm today but a political horizon for
tomorrow. The parties themselves, regional partners
and the international community must do everything
possible to resume meaningful negotiations towards a
viable two-State solution. All must recognize once and
for all that only a peace agreement will bring lasting
security for Israelis and Palestinians.
The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent Observer of
the Observer State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to begin by
congratulating you, Sir, on your country’s accession to
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
We trust in your wisdom and leadership in successfully
leading the Council this month. We also wish to convey
our thanks to your predecessor, the Ambassador of the
Russian Federation, for a job well done last month.
I also wish to thank all members of the Council,
through you, for responding very swiftly to our call,
the calls of the League of Arab States, the Organization
of Islamic Cooperation, the Non-Aligned Movement
and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, and, I believe, the call
of the Secretary-General for convening this meeting
very quickly. We are grateful that you have done so,

14-462243/8

S/PV.7214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

10/07/2014

and we hope that the Council will find the political will
to act to bring this aggression against our people to an
immediate end.

respect for the sanctity of life and the rights of the
Palestinian people, who history has condemned to the
misfortune of suffering under this occupation.

Let me also thank the Secretary-General for his
personal involvement yesterday and today, for his
contact with leaders in all corners of the globe, for
being with us today, and for his contribution to this
discussion. I hope that his efforts among all Council
members will produce the needed call for an immediate
ceasefire and for an end to the carnage and attacks on
the entire civilian population of Palestine in all parts of
the occupied territory, especially the Gaza Strip.

Yet, absurdly and offensively, the Israeli
Government perpetrating this criminal occupation
claims to be the only so-called democracy in the Middle
East and to have the “most moral army” in the world,
even as that Government is composed of members
openly advocating and inciting the killing and ethnic
cleansing of the Palestinian people and engages in such
ruthless military attacks against a defenceless civilian
population.

I come before the Security Council, on the
instructions of the Palestinian leadership under
President Mahmoud Abbas and with the support
of the Arab Group, the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, the Organization of Islamic Cooperation
and the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, to urgently appeal to
the Security Council to uphold its Charter duties for
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We call upon the Council to act immediately to protect
civilian lives, which are being destroyed and lost with
each passing minute of the Israeli military aggression
being waged against the Palestinian people in occupied
Palestine, in particular in the Gaza Strip. I speak
on behalf of the suffering and grieving Palestinian
people, who are enduring yet another barrage of
death, destruction, trauma and terror, which is being
perpetrated willfully and maliciously against them
by the Israeli occupying forces, before the eyes of the
world, as it persists with its nearly five-decade long
belligerent military occupation.

I come before the Security Council to say: enough
of the bloodshed of the Palestinian people, enough of
their oppression under the Israeli occupation, enough of
this injustice and enough of this violence and conflict,
which is inflicting so much suffering on innocent
people on both sides and undermining regional and
international peace and stability.

This illegal, inhumane Israeli occupation is
unjustifiable in any context and contravenes all
principles of international law, human decency and
moral conscience. It is an occupation — including
armed forces and terrorist settlers — that intentionally
perpetrates the murder, burning and maiming of
children; the killing and wounding of women, men and
elderly persons; extrajudicial executions; the destruction
of homes; the theft and colonization of another people’s
land; the forced displacement and dispossession of
civilians, rendering them homeless and impoverished;
the desecration of holy sites, especially in occupied
East Jerusalem; and the abduction, imprisonment and
detention of thousands of civilians, including children.
It is an occupation that proves, again and again, its
racist, aggressive, expansionist agenda and lack of

4/8

In the past few weeks, I have conveyed many formal
letters to the Council drawing urgent attention to this
crisis, with barely any reaction, with the exception of
the press statement of 2 July regarding the heinous
killing and burning of the Palestinian youth Mohammed
Abu Khdeir by Israeli settler terrorists in occupied East
Jerusalem. In those letters, I have detailed the illegal
actions being committed by Israel in grave violation of
international humanitarian law, particularly the Fourth
Geneva Convention, human rights law and international
criminal law, namely, the provisions of the Rome Statute
of the International Criminal Court. There is no doubt
that the occupying Power is systematically committing
human rights violations, war crimes and State terror.
For days, Israel has persisted with its relentless
attacks, launching hundreds of airstrikes and artillery
bombardment against civilian areas in the Gaza Strip,
terrorizing our people, killing dozens of civilians and
injuring hundreds. The critical humanitarian situation
in Gaza, long-suffering under Israel’s occupation and
blockade, is rapidly deteriorating and, in this holy
month of Ramadan, life there has come to a standstill,
with fear and panic widespread. As the majority of the
civilians in Gaza are refugees, and camps continue to
be among the targets of Israeli military attacks, the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East has declared an emergency
in Gaza.

14-46224

10/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

In the West Bank, Israeli military raids continue
daily in Palestinian cities, towns, villages and refugee
camps, and casualties are continued to be caused by
the excessive, lethal force of the Israeli occupying
forces against Palestinian civilians, including peaceful
demonstrators. Homes have been demolished. Since
the start of the recent crisis, on 12 June, more than 850
Palestinians have been arrested or detained, bringing
the total number of Palestinians captive in Israeli jails
to more than 6,000, including children, women and
elected officials. Moreover, settler violence, terrorism
and incitement against Palestinian civilians, especially
children and farmers, and acts of destruction against
Palestinian homes, orchards and religious sites continue
unabated under the protection of occupying forces,
which the Israeli Government illegally transferred to
the occupied Palestinian territories, including East
Jerusalem.
At this moment, the Palestinian death toll stands
at more than 80 people — in fact, it could be above
90. Today, an entire family of eight was decimated as
a result of the heinous attacks and aggression by the
Israeli occupying forces against our people in Gaza.
Hundreds more civilians have been wounded by Israeli
airstrikes, tank shelling, live ammunition, rubber
bullets, stun grenades, tear gas canisters and beatings.
Many are in critical condition.
Children, who in Gaza constitute over half of
the population, are suffering disproportionately and,
similar to Israel’s military savagery of December 2008
to January 2009 and November 2012, are among the
many victims. Deepening the trauma, families also
continue to bear multiple tragedies, with some families
being decimated by Israeli attacks. Among the family
of eight people murdered today were five children. We
bear witness to their suffering and recall here some
of the many lives that have been lost to this insane,
inhumane Israeli brutality.
(spoke in Arabic)
From this forum, I should like to salute the people
of Gaza and to reiterate that the Israeli aggression
will not alter the determination of our people, which
is stronger than any measures of collective punishment
or reppression by the occupying authority against the
Palestinian people, in particular against the 1.7 million
citizens of our beloved Gaza. We recall the memory of
our martyrs killed as a result of the current aggression.
On behalf of the entire Palestinian people, the
Palestinian Authority and others around the world who

S/PV.7214

love peace and justice, we honour their memory, which
will remain with us in heart and spirit. We will not
forget our beloved children who have been the victims
of settler acts and the Israeli occupying authorities.
No act in self-defence can justifty the killing of
children or the oppression of the Palestinian people
in the occupied territories. I should like to mention
just a few of the Palestinian children who have been
martyred by the occupation: Mohammed Abu Khdeir,
16; Ghanim Abdelgafoor, 1; Mohammed Malaki, 2;
Mohammed Khalaf Al-Nouassrah, 4; Nidal Khalef
Al-Nouassrah, 5; Siraj Abdel-al, 8; Bassim Qawareh,
10; Mohammed Ashour, 13; Hussein Qawareh, 14; and
the child Abdullah Abughazel, 4, who died today.
(spoke in English)
We reject the audacious claims by Israel that the
Palestinian civilian population in Gaza is being used
as a so-called human shield, while it knowingly and
intentionally strikes at densely populated civilian areas.
We also reject the claims of self-defence by Israel,
while, despite the prohibition under international law,
it deliberately carries out reprisals and collective
punishment against the Palestinian people in declared
retaliation and revenge, directly called for by the Israeli
Prime Minister himself, for the killing of three Israeli
settlers, which the Palestinian leadership has clearly
condemned.
We recall that Israel abruptly suspended the peace
negotiations in April in response to the reconciliation
of the Palestinian Liberation Organization and
Hamas — a legitimate and necessary step long called
for by our people, as well as by the international
community. We also recall that Israel has publicly
declared its opposition to the Palestinian national unity
Government and has used every baseless pretext to
provoke and undermine the Palestinian Government
with the aim of forcing its collapse, including through
the latest military aggression. We condemn such
cynical tactics, provocations and illegal behaviour and
call on the international community also to condemn it.
There can be no justification for the killing of
innocent civilians, no matter where, when or by whom.
All pretexts suggesting otherwise must be rejected.
Instead, all efforts must be exerted to bring a halt to the
violence and terror that are being perpetrated against
civilians, including through measures to uphold and
to enforce respect for international law. The Security
Council cannot remain paralysed and marginalized

14-462245/8

S/PV.7214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

as Israeli war crimes continue against the Palestinian
civilian population in the Gaza Strip and in the rest
of the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, and a new cycle of violence consumes
everything in its path. The Council must shoulder its
responsibilities. It must act to protect civilian lives,
de-escalate the current crisis and salvage the prospects
for peace and security in our troubled region. If it fails
to do so, it will further diminish its own credibility and
will be complicit in allowing innocent children, women
and men to die and the situation to further destabilize,
with far-reaching consequences.
We call in particular for the protection of the
Palestinian people. Israel has clearly violated and
abdicated its responsibility as an occupying Power
to ensure the safety and well-being of the civilian
population under its occupation. The international
community, in line with its legal obligations — and I
stress the obligations of the high contracting parties
to the Fourth Geneva Convention — must therefore
ensure the protection of our people until the end of the
military occupation. In that regard, I wish to inform the
Council that President Abbas has officially conveyed
to Switzerland, the depository, a request to convene
the high contracting parties to consider measures to
uphold their obligations, under common article 1 and
article 146, on penal sanctions for grave breaches,
and to enforce the Convention in occupied Palestine,
including East Jerusalem.
The Palestinian people, whose resilience and
steadfastness we honour and praise, look to the Security
Council at this critical moment to uphold its resolutions
and abiding principles first and foremost to save lives
and to safeguard the prospects for a just and peaceful
settlement of the conflict on the basis of the twoState solution and the pre-1967 borders, on which the
international community is united but which has been
so gravely undermined by Israel. A firm message must
be sent by the Council to Israel to immediately cease its
aggression against the Palestinian people and to abide
by its obligations under international law. Moreover, it
is high time that Israel, the occupying Power, be held
accountable for its countless human rights violations
and war crimes, including the killing of Palestinian
civilians, the wanton destruction of Palestinian property
and the malicious colonization of Palestinian land.
We call on the Security Council to act now to stop
the bleeding in occupied Palestine, including the latest
Israeli war on Gaza, and to revive our dying hope in the

6/8

10/07/2014

prospects for an and to the occupation and the tragic
conflict, the achievement of peace and the realization
of the aspirations of Palestinians for their freedom,
rights and justice, which have too long been denied.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Prosor (Israel): I would first like to thank the
Secretary-General for his remarks. In the time that he
spoke, another five rockets were fired from Gaza into
southern Israel, one of which fell on a house. Before I
begin my statement, I would like to thank Ambassador
Gasana for presiding over this important meeting.
As I speak, there is a storm of rockets being fired
by the Hamas terrorist organization in Gaza. Hamas
is intentionally and indiscriminately threatening
the lives of 3.5 million innocent men, women and
children in Israel from the south to the north — from
Beersheba to Tel Aviv and Haifa. In the past three
days, 442 rockets have been fired into Israel. That is
one every 10 minutes. Fifteen seconds is how much
time one has to run for one’s life. Imagine having only
15 seconds to find a bomb shelter. Now imagine doing
that with small children, elderly parents or an ailing
friend. A generation of Israeli children is growing up
under the shadow of that threat. Such an abnormal way
of life has become the norm for many Israelis. That is
absolutely unacceptable. No nation, no people and no
Government could tolerate it.
Hamas dragged us into this conflict. On the evening
of 12 June, three Israeli teenagers — Eyal, Gilad and
Naftali — were on their way home from school when
they were kidnapped and murdered by Hamas terrorists.
In the days that followed, Hamas began raining rockets
indiscriminately on our homes and cities. While Israel
showed restraint, Hamas responded with unrestrained
aggression. There were more rockets and more terror
attacks. Some people in this Chamber have criticized
Israel for finally responding to those provocations.
They have accused us of reacting disproportionately.
Asking Israel to show restraint while our cities are
under constant attack is like asking a fire brigade to
battle an inferno with nothing more than buckets of
water.
No country would accept the threats that Israel
faces. We are determined to give Israelis the safety and
security that they deserve. This week, Israel launched
a self-defence operation, called Protective Edge, to
counter the attacks, to defend our citizens and to

14-46224

10/07/2014

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

secure for them a life without a constant threat. The
goal of our operation is to remove the threat posed by
Hamas by dismantling its military infrastructure and to
restore calm in Israel. We are not looking for a band-aid
solution that will allow Hamas to rest and regroup. We
are not going to give them so-called time out so that
they can replenish their rocket supplies and hit us again
in a few weeks.
Israel is taking great measures to avoid harming
innocent civilians. The Israel Defense Forces (IDF)
warn the Palestinians in Gaza of imminent strikes. At the
same time, Hamas instructs those civilians to stand on
the roofs of those buildings and to act as human shields.
Hamas exploits our concern for human life by hiding in
Palestinian homes, schools and mosques and by using
the basement of a hospital in Gaza as its headquarters.
They are committing a double war crime, targeting
Israeli civilians while hiding behind Palestinian
civilians. Hamas is targeting the supply lines of its
own people. It is firing rockets at an electrical plant in
Ashkelon that is keeping the lights on for the citizens
of Gaza. Earlier this week, Hamas blew up a tunnel
near the Kerem Shalom crossing, and it has been firing
rockets and missiles at this critical entry point. Let me
be clear. Hamas is targeting the only crossing through
which food, medicine and other essentials enter Gaza.
That is how much it really cares about its own people.
Despite the attacks, Israel is keeping the crossing open,
and on Tuesday and Wednesday 242 truckloads of
goods were delivered into the Gaza Strip.
Members of this body have repeatedly criticized
Israel for restricting the entry of construction materials
into Gaza. Let me explain what that cement and steel
are being used for. They are certainly not being used to
build schools, kindergartens or homes. They are being
used to build rockets that Hamas shoots indiscriminately
at Israeli schools, kindergartens and homes. They are
being used to build terror tunnels that Hamas uses to
kidnap Israelis.
Over the past few years, Hamas has built up a
massive military machine with 10,000 rockets. Israel
is now acting to dismantle that machine. Hamas is
determined to escalate the situation with an arsenal it
has acquired courtesy of one of the world’s primary
sponsors of terrorism, Iran. In March, Iran was caught
red-handed trying to transfer long-range missiles into
Gaza. Those missiles have a range of 160 kilometres
and can hit Israel’s largest population centres. Hamas
must understand that it cannot target Israeli civilians.

S/PV.7214

Just this morning, on one of our highways, the IDF
stopped a car that was packed with explosives, en route
to carrying out a suicide attack. Earlier this week,
terrorists infiltrated Israel from the sea on a mission to
attack a nearby kibbutz.
I would like to remind the Council that the terrorist
group behind those attacks has a seat in the Palestinian
unity Government. Hamas is recognized internationally
as a terrorist organization by many countries, including
members of the Security Council — the same Hamas
that does not recognize Israel and promotes a genocidal
agenda by seeking Israel’s destruction. Its Charter
states clearly that Israel exists and will continue to exist
until Islam obliterates it. Hamas is practising what it
preaches. It has sent suicide bombers into our shopping
centres, buses and cafés. It has brainwashed an entire
generation of Palestinian children and sent thousands
of young people to terrorist training camps. Since 2013,
it has attempted to kidnap 64 Israelis.
Members of the international community have
embraced this Fatah-Hamas partnership, even though
Hamas has not changed its tune or acted in concert with
the Quartet principles. It has not recognized Israel,
renounced violence or accepted previous agreements.
Nonetheless, the international community has been
willing to buy into this bad deal, and now Israeli citizens
are paying the price. It is time for the international
community to right this wrong and make it clear to
Hamas that unity does not equal impunity.
Meanwhile, the Palestinian observer sits in this
Chamber and has the audacity to shield Hamas even as
that terror organization uses its own people as human
shields. In his remarks, he did not mention a single
one of the rockets fired into Israel — 442 rockets, and
he does not say a word. His silence is as deafening as
the rockets exploding in Israel right now. Through his
choice of words, the Palestinian observer has become
the mouthpiece of Hamas. Since when does a terror
organization get a seat and a voice in the United
Nations?
For years, we have called on the international
community to condemn the rocket fire. We have
been met with silence. For years, we spoke about the
thousands of rockets that Hamas was smuggling into
Gaza. Everyone thought we were exaggerating and said
not a word. For years, we warned of the impending
escalation and were ignored. Now that the rockets are
landing in our backyard and the terrorists are on our
doorstep, it is time for the international community to

14-462247/8

S/PV.7214

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

finally recognize Hamas for what it really is — a terrorist
organization that should be denounced, dismantled and
delegitimized.
Unlike our enemies, Israel believes in the infinite
value of human life. The Bible says, “I have set before
you life and death.... therefore choose life.” The Jewish
people always choose life. Yet that is not what we see
on the other side. In 2005, Israel evacuated from Gaza
and in the process uprooted 12,000 Israelis from their
homes. The Palestinians had the opportunity to build a
prosperous and peaceful society. Instead of building the
Palestinian people up, they have committed to tearing
Israel down. Instead of choosing life, they celebrate
death. In Gaza, there are public squares and hospitals
named after terrorists. Visit a Gaza school and there are
children dressed up as suicide bombers and chanting
death threats to Israel. Visit the home of Abu Aysha’s
mother, and she will say how proud she is that her son
was behind the kidnapping and murder of Eyal, Gilad
and Naftali. A culture that celebrates martyrdom and
murder is a culture that will always be at war with itself
and with its neighbours.
Israel is at the forefront of the free world in
fighting radical Islamic terrorism. The threat posed by
terrorism is a global one — the Islamic State in Iraq

8/8

10/07/2014

and the Levant, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram, Hizbullah and
Hamas. From Abuja to Fallujah, terrorists are attacking
our schools and skyscrapers, our homes and hospitals,
our malls and embassies. No nation is immune. If
the international community wants the nations of the
world to stand with it in the battle against terrorism
tomorrow, it must stand with Israel today. The call
from our capitals must be loud and clear — opposing
terrorism in one place means opposing it in every place.
It is our cities, homes and families that are under fire
right now. I ask each and every person in this Chamber
what they would do if it was their family under attack.
What would they expect their own Governments to do?
There is only one responsible course of action for the
Council — it is to condemn Hamas, condemn terrorism
and condemn the rocket fire. It must call on President
Abbas to dissolve the unity Government and support
Israel’s right to defend itself. That is the only way to
achieve peace in our region.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 10.50 a.m.

14-46224
