UNITED

NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL

COUNCIL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

2485th

MEETING:

25 OCTOBER

1983

NEW.YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional
Adoption

agenda

of the agenda

The situation

....................................

1

...............................................

1

(S/Agenda/2485)

in Namibia:

(4

Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);

(b)

Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);

(cl

Further report of the Secretary-General
concerning the implementati?m
of Security Council resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

WPV.2485

1

NOTE
SymboIs of United Nations documents are composed of capital- letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol,S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2485th
Held

MEETING

in New York on Tuesday,

President: Mr. Abdullah SALAH

25 October

(Jordan).

2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the President of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of the
Council to take places at the Security Council table.

Present: ’ The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of
the United N&ions Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took piaces at the CounciI table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2485)
1. Adoption

1983, at 11 a.m.

3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481s.t meeting, I
invite Mr. Mueshihange to take a place at the Council
table.

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
(a) Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Senegal to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16048);
(b) Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(c) Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the implementation of Security Council
resolutions 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of Namibia (S/15943)

At the invitatioit of the President, Mr. Mueshihange took a
place at the Council table.
4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): In
accordance with decisions taken at the 2481st to 2484th
meetings, I invite the representatives of Algeria, Angola,
Botswana, Canada, Cuba, Ethiopia, the German Democratic Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, India,
Kenya, Kuwait, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico,
Mozambique, Nigeria, Sierra Leon&, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Tunisia, the United Republic of Tanzania, Venezuela, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the places reserved
for them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting was called to order at 11.50 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sahnoun (AZgeria),
Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Legwaila (Botswana), Mr.
Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Roa Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Wolde (Ethiopia). Mr, Ott (German Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well
(Federal Republic of Germany), Mr. Krishnan (India)), Mr.
Wabuge (Kenya), Mr. Abulhassan (Kuwait), Mr. Treiki
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Mr. MutIoz Ledo (Mexico), Mr.
DOS Santos (Mozambique), Mr. Fafowora (Niieria), Mr.
Koroma (Sierra Leone), Mr. von Schirnding (South Africa)).
Mr. Fonseka (Sri Lanka), Mr. Slim (Tunisia). Mr. Rupia
(United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Martini Urdaneta (Venezuela), Mr. Golob (&xgoslavia) and Mr. Kunda (Zambia)
took the places reservedfor them at the side of the Council
chamber.

The agenda was adopted
The situation in Namibia:
(4 Letter dated 17 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Senegal to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16048);
(4 Letter dated 18 October 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/16051);
(4 Further report of the Secretary-General concerning the
implementation of Security Council resolutions 435
(1978) and 439 (1978) concerning the question of
Namibia (S/15943)

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Czechoslovakia, in which he requests to be invited to participate
in the discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite that representative to
participate in the discussion without, the right to vote, in

from Arabic): In
1. The PRESIDENT
._ _
. (interpretation
.
accordance with the decision taken at the 2481st meeting, I
invite the representative of Senegal to take a place at the
Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Kamara (Senegao
took a place at the Council table.
1

-

accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter and’
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

.1966, which ended South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia.
The Security Council, in its resolution 264 (1969) recognized the termination of the Mandate and appealed to the
Pretoria r@me to withdraw immediately its administration from the Territory. However, the racist regime disregarded the General Assembly resolution and that of the
Security Council and continued its defiance of the will of
the international community.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. KuIawiec (Czechoslovakia) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from Arabic): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter dated 24 October from the representatives of Togo, Zaire and Zimbabwe [S/16064), which
reads as follows:

13. More than five years ago, the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978), which approved the United Nations plan
for the independence of Namibia. The majority of the
countries of the world believed that all would go well for
the speedy independence of Namibia because the United
Nations plan was formulated by the Western contact
group, which was made up of five major States, all having
strong friendly relations with the racist regime in South
Africa. It was thought, therefore, that they could bring
pressure to bear on the regime in South Africa to comply
with the will of the international community. However, the
experience of the last five years has frustrated the intemational community. Today we are still watching the Namibian people languishing
under imperialism
and
suffering from the policy of apartheid. Their right to selfdetermination has been denied.

“We, the undersigned members of the Security Council, have the honour to request that the Security Council
extend an invitation, under the provisions of rule 39 of
its provisional rules of procedure, to Mr. Johnstone F.
Makatini, representative of the African National Congress of South Africa (ANC), to participate in the
Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’.”
7. If I hear no objection, I shall take it that the Council
agrees to this request.
It was so decided

14. The majority of the countries of the world have realized that the prevarication and delaying tactics pursued by
the racist regime in South Africa are designed to prolong
its period of occupation in Namibia and to impose a
puppet government on its people. However, certain Westem countries have always obstructed any attempt by the
Council to invoke Chapter VII of the Charter of the
United Nations in order to compel the racist regime to
comply with the resolutions of the United Nations and to
withdraw from Namibia. I am sure that all of us still
remember the results of the meeting of the Council held in
April 198 1, at which three countries members of the Western contact group resorted to the use of the veto in the vote
on the draft resolutions before the Council concerning Namibia.

8. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation ;from Arabic): The
first speaker is the representative of the Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
9. Mr. TREIKI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (interpretation
from Arabic): I wish at the outset, Sir, to congratulate you
on your assumption of the presidency of the Council for
this month. My delegation is all the more happy about this
because you are the representative of a fraternal country
that is linked to mine by bonds of brotherhood and of
consanguinity as part of the greater Arab nation. I am
confident that your experience, skill, ability and expertise
will enable you to guide the Council’s work to achieve the
best possible results, despite the difficulty of the circumstances that we face.

15. It has been evident that the Western contact group is
not serious in its commitment to help the United Nations
reach a solution to the question of Namibia. So far the
members of the group have not exercised any significant
pressure on South Africa. It is clear that their interest in
maintaining the flow of enormous profits through their
companies in Namibia far outweighs their interest in the
independence of Namibia. They still encouraged their
companies to invest in Namibia and South Africa despite
the numerous resolutions adopted by the United Nations
that cali for boycotting the racist regime. In Namibia at
present there are 190 companies that are subsidiaries of
companies based in countries of the Western contact
group. The racist regime receives financial support from
Western financial institutions and banks or from those in
which the Western countries have some influence. Loans
granted to the racist regime in the period from the beginning of 1979.to the middle of 1982 amount to approximately $2,756 million, which covers the annual military
expenditures for, Sputh Africa and Namibia.

10. I cannot fail to express my delegation’s appreciation
to our friend Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana for brilliantly
guiding the Council’s work last month.
11. The Council is once more seized of the question of
Namibia, which it has met to consider scores of times and
which the General Assembly has debated at all its.regular
sessions ‘since the first; held in 1946, and at two special
sessions and an emergency special session devoted to the
question. Hundreds of resolutions on the subject have
been adopted in international forums, and all the details of
the matter are clear. Therefore, I shall not go into the
details, but shall confine myself to certain observations on
the situation in Namibia and the reasons for the obstruction of its independence so far.
12. Almost 17 years have elapsed since the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) on 27 October
2

16. In the military field, despite the long period that has
elapsed since the adoption of Council resolution 418
(1977) imposing an arms embargo against South Africa,
that embargo has not been strictly implemented and the
racist regime has been able to receive enormous quantities
of arms as a result of the collusion of the Zionist entity and
certain Western countries. The racist regime, as a result of
the help given by those countries, or some of them, in the
field of military technology has been able to develop its
military industries and has become almost self-sufficient in
producing most of the major military materM. Hence, it
has been able to increase its military strength, to continue
its occupation of Namibia and to intensify its barbaric acts
of aggression against neighbouring countries, violate their
sovereignty and destabilize their structures, either through
the use of regular forces or through the use of special
mercenary bands established for that purpose.

19. As the Secretary-General

stated in his report:

“In fact, we have never before been so close to finality
on the modalities of implementating
resolution 435
\ (1978).
“However, the position of South Africa regarding the
issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola
as a precondition for the implementation of resolution
435 (1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
3 Nations plan.” [S/25943, parm. 24.and 25.1
20. The attempt to link the independence of Namibia to
the withdrawal of the Cuban troops from Angola is
nothing but a delaying manoeuvre by South Africa in collaboration with the United States Administration to postpone the implementation of the United Nations plan for
the independence of Namibia, to deplete the riches of the
region to the fullest and to give more time to the racist
regime to establish puppet elements to which it could hand
over the rule of the Territory. That manoeuvre has been
condemned several times in international forums as being
extraneous to Council resolution ,435 (1978).

17. Reliable reports indicate that South Africa maintains
more than 100,000 soldiers in Namibia who are stationed
in more than 40 military bases. The report of the United
Nations Council for Namibia on the military situation in
and relating to Namibia’ states that an estimated 2,000 to
3,000 mercenaries, most of them from the United States,
the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom,
France, Australia, Chile and Israel, are fighting side by
side with the forces of South Africa in the campaign aimed
at crushing the liberation struggle of the people of Namibia.

21. The Cuban troops arrived in Angola at the request of
the legitimate Government of Angola in order to ward off
aggression and invasion by South Africa after Angola
acceded to independence. The Cuban troops would not
have remained so long in Angola if-it had not been for the
repeated racist acts of aggression against Angola and Pretoria’s continuous violations of Angola’s sovereignty, its
continued occupation of a part of Angola and its use of
bands of UNITA (National Union for the Total Independence of Angola) to undermine the unity of the country in a
desperate attempt to topple the legitimate Government of
Angola.

18. The racist regime in South Africa persists in its occupation of Namibia because it receives absolute support
from certain Western countries that consider it to be an
ally in watching over their interests in southern Africa, and
also because it obtains support from another racist regime,
namely, the Zionist entity in occupied Palestine. The similarity between the two regimes and their identical aggrcssive natures is crystal clear. The racist regime in South
Africa denies the black majority its fundamental rights and
in Namibia it denies the Namibian people their right to
selfdetermination
and independence. The racist Zionist
regime denies the Palestinian people their right to selfdetermination and to the establishment of their own independent State. The racist regime in southern Africa
occupies Namibia and parts of the territory of Angola, and
the Zionist racist entity occupies Palestine and the territories of other neighbouring Arab countries. The racist
regime in South Africa has linked its withdrawal from
Namibia to the withdrawal of the Cuban troops from
Angola, whose presence is legitimate and is the sole concern of the Governments of Cuba and Angola. Similarly,
the racist Zionist entity links its withdrawal from Lebanon
to the withdrawal of the Arab forces that are there legitimately and whose presence is the sole concern of the Lebanese Government and the Arab parties concerned. As we
see in South Africa, ‘the bands of Savimbi are used to
striking against the unity of Angola, while the racist Zion;
ist entity is using the bands of Saad Haddad to divide
Lebanon. We also see the two regimes committing
repeated acts of aggression against the neighbouring countries on the pretext of pursuing the members bf the liberation movements, whom they fallaciously call terrorists.

22. To any impartial observer of the events, Pretoria’s
real intentions in insisting that the independence of Namibia be linked to the withdrawal of Cuban troops are
well known. Its malicious intentions are crystal clear. If the
conditions the Pretoria1 regime has set-conditions
that
the international community
regards as illogical and
unacceptable-are not met, Pretoria will have thus created.
an excuse for its continued occupation of Namibia and its
obstruction of Namibia’s independence. And if the intemational community acquiesces in those conditions, Pretoria
stands to gain in this way too: the path would be open for
its troops to march on the capital of Angola and topple the
r&ime there.
23. If those were not the racist regime’s intentions, its
demands would make absolutely no sense, because if
South Africa withdrew from Namibia it would be
hundreds of miles away from the Angolan border and the
presence of Cuban troops in Angola would not be a source
of annoyance or a threat to its security in any way.
24. The question of Namibia’s independence is clear: the
international community is faced with a blatant challenge
by the racist Pretoria regime. It is now high time that the
Council fulfilled the pledge it made about five years ago in
3

resolution 439 (1978), in which- it warned the Pretoria
regime that its failure to cooperate in the implementation
of Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) would
compel the Council to “mee.t forthwith to initiate appropriate actions under the Charter of the United Nations,
including Chapter VII therefore, so as to ensure South
Africa’s compliance with the aforementioned resolutions”.

Government
States.

guarding

the interests of the imperialist

30. Finally, I wish to express my country’s unconditional
support for the Namibian people in their just struggle, led
by SWAPO, for self-determination and independence. We
shall continue to give all forms of moral and material
support to those heroic people and to the people of South
Africa until they achieve independence and racism in
southern Africa has been totally eliminated. We wish also
to reaffirm our solidarity with the front-line States, which
are the victims of repeated aggression by the racist regime.
We condemn these acts of aggression. We also condemn
South Africa for its continued occupation of Namibia and
a part of Angola’s territory.

25. The situation in Namibia is deteriorating every day.
There are daily acts of oppression, persecution, detention
and assassination of the black people in Namibia by the
racist regime. That regime is intensifying its invidious
manoeuvres within Namibia, in a desperate attempt to
side-step the South West Africa People’s Organization
(SWAPO), the sole and legitimate representative of the
Namibian people. It is increasingly pursuing the members
of SWAP0 and attempting by all means to establish a
puppet Government in the Territory.

31. The live States of the contact group bear considerable responsibility in regard to Namibia’s independence.
The States that we see sending troops here and there to
occupy islands, topple tigimes and crush peoples, would
have been better advised to send their troops to implement
Chapter VII of the Charter and to work for Namibia’s
independence.

26. The situation in southern Africa poses a grave threat
to international peace and security. One of the reasons for
that threat is the deteriorating situation in Namibia. The
international community must redouble its efforts to guarantee Namibia’s speedy independence, in accordance with
United Nations resolutions, and particularly Council resolution 435 (1978). My country maintains that Namibia’s
independence can be achieved only on the following bases.

32. At the verv moment when we are debating an important question-the
decolonization of Namibia-inthe
Council, we see a State being invaded for the purpose of
colonizing it once again. The Council must aftirm its presence and its effectiveness as an instrument for the achievement of peace and security and the maintenance of the
independence of peoples.

27. First, all States must give their complete and unconditional support to the Secretary-General in the praiseworthy efforts he is ‘making to ensure implementation of
the United Nations plan for the independence of Namibia.
Secondly, it must be reaffirmed that the two main parties
to the conflict are SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the Namibian people, which is struggling for
the Territory’s independence, and the racist Pretoria
regime, which is illegally occupying the Territory. Thirdly,
there must be support for the armed struggle waged by
SWAPO, in order to increase the pressure on the racist
regime to induce it to comply with the will of the intemational community and withdraw from Namibia. Fourthly,
a specific timetable must be set for the strict and speedy
implementation
of resolution 435 (1978), without any
amendments and in such a way as to guarantee Namibia’s
full independence and the sovereignty of the Namibian
people, led by SWAPO, over all their territory, including
Walvis Ray and the offshore islands. Fifthly, mandatory
sanctions must be imposed in accordance with Chapter
VII of the Charter to compel the racist regime to withdraw
its administration
from Namibia, thereby strengthening
the prestige of the United Nations.

33. In conclusion, I wish to pay a tribute to Mr. Paul
Lusaka of Zambia and to the Secretary-General for the
efforts they are making to ensure speedy independence for
Namibia.
34. The PRESIDGNT
(in~erprerafian from Arabic): The
next speaker is the representative of Venezuela. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
35. Mr. MARTINI

URDANETA

(Venezuela) (interpre-

ration from Spanish): On behalf of the Venezuelan delega-

tion, allow me, Mr. President, to’tell you how pleased we
are to see you presiding over the Council this month, during this important series of meetings. Your excellent diplomatic record is a guarantee that you will be able to guide
the Council towards the fulfilment of its desired goals.
36. My delegation wishes also to express its most sincere
congratulations to Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana on the
way in which he directed the Council’s work in September.

28. My delegation sincerely hopes that the Council’s
efforts will be crowned with successand that the Namibian
people will be enabled to exercise their right to selfdetermination and independence.

37. The Venezuelan delegation thanks you, Mr. President, and all the other members of the Council for giving
us this opportunity to participate in this debate, which is of
exceptional importance.

29. My delegation wishes to warn the Council against the
manoeuvres to which South Africa and its allies resort
under the slogan of “peaceful solution”. The real aim is to
side-step SWAP0 and impose a tendentious solution the
final result of which would be a dependent, puppet

38. The Council is meeting once again to consider the
situation in Namibia. The United Nations is committed to
the cause of Namibia’s independence, not only by virtue of
4

General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), containing the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples, but also by the plan-known
as
the United Nations plan-approved
in Council resolution
435 (1978).

extremely serious situation that calls into question the
alleged good intentions of the racist Pretoria regime.
46. Lastly, we wish to say that we share the optimism of
the Secretary-General when he aftirms that “we have never
before been so close to finality on the modalities of implementing resolution 435 (1978)” [ibid., paru. 243. At the
same time, we reiterate our firm and resolute intent to
contribute to the independence of Namibia and to cooperate with the people of Namibia through SWAPO,
their authentic and legitimate representative, in every way
possible in the struggle for independence and freedom and
the establishment of a democratic State, respectful of
human rights, whose presence and influence are needed
not only by the African continent but by the entire intemational community.

39. From 23 May to 1 June this year the Council met to
resume its consideration of the situation in Namibia. During those meetings 12439th to 2444th and 2446th to 245Zst],
the participation of ministers for foreign affairs of a large
number of countries confirmed the importance and
urgency of seeking a solution that would enable the people
of Namibia to exercise their right to self-determination and
independence promptly.
40. On 31 May, the Council adopted resolution 532
(1983), in which it called upon South Africa to heed and
comply with resolution 435 (1978) and to co-operate forthwith with the Secretary-General to expedite the implementation of that resolution, since it was the only ‘valid basis
for a negotiated solution to the question of Namibia.

47. Therefore, we condemn the linkage thesis advanced
by the South African regime, which is attempting to make
Namibian independence dependent upon irrelevant issues
extraneous to resolution 435 (1978). We urge the members
of the Council to lend their support so that 1984 may be
the year of the independence of Namibia, thus crowning
with success this prolonged effort by the entire intemational community.

41. In compliance with paragraph 4 of resolution 532
(1983), the Secretary-General held consultations with the
parties involved in the question of Namibia. He has set
forth the results of those consultations in the report he has
submitted to the Council [S/159433.

48. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) (interpretation from French): Five months ago, in its resolution
532 (1983), the Security Council unanimously decided to
mandate the Secretary-General to undertake consultations
with the parties to the proposed cease-fire with a view to
securing the speedy implementation
of resolution 435
(1978).

42. The Venezuelan delegation wishes to take this opportunity to congratulate the Secretary-General on his efforts
undertaken in compliance with resolution 435 (1978), 439
(1978) and 532 (1983) and to state the following.
43. First, we are pleased that, as affirmed by the
Secretary-General, it has been possible to resolve some
outstanding problems such as the selection of an electoral
system and the question of the United Nations Transition
Assistance Group (UNTAG) and its .composition, progress that brings us closer to a final solution as to the
modalities for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978).
_
44. Secondly, we are extremely concerned at South Africa’s attempt to continue to set preconditions for the effective and rapid implementation
of resolution 435 (1978),
adducing the presence of Cuban troops in Angola, a matter that could “only be dealt with in its own context by
those directly concerned acting within their sovereign
rights”, as the Secretary-General made clear in his report.
We reject such attempts by the Pretoria authorities and
consider them inadmissible in the context of resolution 435
(1978).

49. At the outset I should like to pay a tribute to the
Secretary-General, who has courageously carried out a difficult mission. My delegation notes three points in particular in his report [S/1.5943].
50. First, we note the confirmation of the good will and
the spirit of compromise manifested by SWAPO, in particular Mr. Sam Nujoma’s reaffirmation that his organization was, in principle, prepared to accept either
proportional representation or the single-member-constituency system for the elections.
51. I welcome the responsible attitude of the SWAP0
leaders. Notwithstanding the repeated frustrations during
endless negotiations and the intensification of the fighting,
they have maintained a moderate policy throughout.
52. Secondly, we note with satisfaction the resolution,
during the Secretary-General’s stay in Cape Town, of the
last of the problems still pending in the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978); I refer to the composition and status
of UNTAG and the question of impartiality.

45. Thirdly, we regret that it has been impossible to
obtain a cease-fire commitment in spite of the stated willingness of SWAP0 to sign a cease-tire agreement with
South Africa, an indispensable requirement for the holding of elections in Namibia, with a view to establishing the
Constituent Assembly, in an atmosphere of peace and
tranquillity.
One the contrary, South Africa’s acts of
aggression against neighbouring countri~es ‘have multiplied
in recent months, contributing to mounting destabilization
of the democratic regime of the region and creating an

53. It is in the name of that impartiality that my delegation wishes today to give credit-to the Pretoria Government for the gestures they made last August, which,
though belated, are positive none the less. The progress
made is described clearly and precisely in the SecretaryGeneral’s report, and it has led to significant results.
5

Agreement is now being reached on a!! the modalities for
the implementation of the United Nations plan for a settlement in Namibia.

61. My delegation fully understands and shares the feelings of bitterness and frustration many African delegations
have expressed here. At the end of last spring, a wave of
optimism was felt in New York. Once again, however,
hopes for a prompt settlement were disappointed.

54. That means that South Africa cannot now reopen the
subject. Everything has been compietely settled as regards
the conditions for implementation
of resolution 435
(1978). It now only remains for South Africa to notify. the
Secretary-Genera!% Special Representative of the choice of
electoral system. In the opinion of the French delegation it
would be desirable, if only for practical reasons, that the
announcement be made as soon as possible.

62. Yet, as the President of the Republic, Mr. Francois
Mitterand, stated at a press conference held in this building
on 28 September, France feels that “although the game is a
difficult one, it is not over” and “concessions are still
possible”.
63. South Africa must real& that it cannot use force
to resolve its problems as it did in Maputo on 17 October,
or by resorting to the language of threats as its representative did here on 20 October. Force and constraint have
never been the basis for lasting settlements acceptable to
a!!.

,55. My last andmost important comment on the report
is that the Secretary-Genera! has only been able to obtain a
reaf!irmation from Pretoria, without any concessions, of
the unacceptable link between settlement of the Namibian
question and the : withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola. On 20 October, at the 2481st meeting, we heard
the South African representative reiterate in intransigent
terms the views of his Government on this matter.

64. At this stage a!! that my country can do is to make
yet another emphatic appeal to South Africa.. Since that
country, by its demands-which
have been endorsed by
others-is contributing to the deadlock in the negotiations,
it should now make the gestures that will lead to an agreement and to the implementation, at long last, of the United
Nations plan for a settlement in Namibia.

56. France’s position on the question of a linkage is we!!
known here. It was defined most clearly by the French
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Claude Cheysson, at the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, held in Paris in April
!ast.2
57. Our position has not changed in the interim, nor will
it change. It can be expressed succinctly: neither Namibia’s
accession to independence, nor the implementation
of
Council resolutions 385 (1976) and 435 (1978) can be
impeded by external considerations. Those resolutions
stand on their own merits. They must be fully implemented as they were adopted, without conditions or prerequisites. France unswervingly upholds this position
within the contact group.

65. Mr. LING Qing (China) (interpretation from Chinese): It is really a great pleasure to see you, Sir, the distinguished representative of Jordan, as President of the
Council for this month. There exists a profound friendship
between our two countries and peoples. Not long ago, His
Majesty King Hussein paid a successful visit to China
which further enhanced the relations of friendly cooperation between China and Jordan. I am convinced that
with your outstanding talent and rich diplomatic experience you will successfully guide the Council in discharging its important duties for this month.

58. Virtually the whole of the international community
now condemns the so-called linkage. The question that
now arises, it seems to me, is whether we are to conclude
from South Africa’s continued insistence on linkage that
the time for negotiation is past and that there no longer
exists any hope for a peaceful settlement.

,66. I also wish to take this opportunity to express our
appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Noel Sinclair of
Guyana, for his contribution to the completion of the
Council’s heavy tasks during the month of September. We
deeply admire the abilities with which he conducted his
work.

59. We too asked ourselves that question when we
thought of the victims of a conflict that is being endlessly
protracted. I refer to an entire population, the people of
Namibia, who have for so long a time, as the SecretaryGenera! pointed out, been “suffering.. . denial of their
legitimate aspirations for genuine self-determination and
independence” [ibid, para. 24. But I am aho thinking of
the front-line countries, and in particular of Angola, which
has not known a single day of peace since its accession to
independence and which has been the victim of deadly
raids, large-scale destruction and even partial occupation.

67. Ministers for foreign affairs from some 20 African
and non-aligned countries attended the Council meetings
on Namibia last May. On 31 May, the Council adopted
resolution 532 (1983), by which it decided to mandate the
Secretary-Genera! to undertake consultations with the parties to the proposed cease-fire, with a view to securing the
speedy implementation of resolution 435 (1978). In accordance with the mandate assigned to him by the Council and
following consultations with the parties concerned, the
Secretary-Genera! paid a visit to South Africa, Namibia
and Angola-in the latter half of August and submitted a
further report on the implementation
of Council resolution 435 (1978) and 439 (1978) [S/15943]. We deeply
appreciate the efforts made by the Secretary-Genera! for
the implementation
of resolutions 435 (1978) and 532
(1983) .with a.view to achieving the independence of Namibia at an early date.

60. When we think of the victims of that conflict, can we
.resign ourselves to the idea that negotiation no longer has
any justification and that henceforth the prospects before
us offer nothing but the pursuit and, doubtless, the worsening of military operations?
6

68. In the conclusions to his report the Secretary-General
stated:

nal settlement”. They have been trying for years to foster
puppets. After the collapse early this year of the “Ministers
Council”, which was rigged by them, the South African
authorities have now been hatching out a “Council of
State” for “drafting the constitution”.

“These prolonged and intensive consultations have
resulted, as far as UNTAG is concerned, in resolving
virtually all the outstanding issues. In fact, we have
never been so close to finality on the modalities of
implementing resolution 435 (1978).” [ibid, para. 24.1

72. The South African authorities have carried out
repeated armed invasion and political subversion against
Angola and other neighbouring countries, attempting by
intimidation to make them stop supporting the just cause
of the Namibian people. They are still occupying part of
the territory of southern Angola. Their recent attack on
the residences of South Africans in Maputo is another
instance of violence against the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of Mozambique and a new crime against the peoples of South Africa and Mozambique. Furthermore, they
have incessantly carried out intimidation, subversion and
even blockade against Lesotho, which is geographically
surrounded by. South Africa. Their subversive activities
against the other front-line States have never ceased. Such
perverse acts on the part of the South African authorities
constitute the root cause of the turmoil in southern Africa.

Since all the outstanding issues have been resolved, it
should have been possible to implement resolution 435
(1978) right away, but that, however, is not really the case.
As the Secretary-General -pointed out,
“the position of South Africa regarding the issue of the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola as a pmcondition for the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
Nations plan.” [Zbid., para. 25.1
69. Five years have passed since Council resolution 435
(1978) was adopted. During that period, SWAP0 and the
front-line States have worked tirelessly to promote the
United Nations plan. Their responsible position has been
widely praised and supported by the international community. The Government of Angola and SWAP0 gave the
Secretary-General full co-operation during his visit to
southern Africa, which demonstrates once again their sin-’
cere desire for the implementation of resolution 435 (1978)
and the peaceful settlement of the Namibian question.
_-

73. The Chinese delegation strongly condemns the South
African -authorities for obstructing the implementation of
resolution 435 (1978) and resolutely opposes the unreasonable proposition of linking Namibian independence with
the Cuban troops’ ‘withdrawal from Angola. We firmly
support the Namibian people, who are waging a just struggle for national independence and liberation under the
leadership of SWAPO. We support the jusr demands and
correct proposals put forward by SWAP0 and the African
countries. The Chinese delegation is also in favour of
strong measures, sanctions, against the South African
authorities by the Council in accordance with the relevant
provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter of the United
Nations.

70. It is the South African racist regime which has been
obstructing the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978)
over the past live years. In the negotiations for implementing that resolution, South African authorities have repeatedly raised side issues and created excuses of all kinds to
procrastinate further in reaching agreement on relevant
questions. To link the independence of Namibia with the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola is the main pretext that has been used by the South African authorities
for the past year or more for not implementing the resolution. It is common knowledge that there is no justification
whatsoever for linking Namibia’s independence with the
withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola, which are two
issues of different nature. How can a country be denied
independence because there are foreign troops in another
country? This argument put forward by the South African
authorities was thoroughly refuted at the Council meetings
held last May, as well as at other international meetings.
The umeasonable position of the South African authorities has met not only with outright rejection and stem
condemnation, by SWAP0 and the front-line States, but
also with strong opposition by the international community. Most members of the Western contact group have
indicated that they do not approve of such linkage. It is
regrettable, however, that there is still a permanent
member of the Council that supports this unreasonable
position of the South African authorities and. has thus
inflated their arrogance.

74. We are convinced that no force on earth can stop
Namibia from winning independence and liberation.
75. Mr. TINOCO FONSECA (Nicaragua) (inrerpreration from Spanish): I wish first of all,’ Sir, to tell you how
pleased my-delegation’ is to see you presiding over these
debates of the ‘Council. We have full confidence in your
diplomatic talents and skill, and we are convinced that
your leadership will continue in an effective manner to
bring about the results for which we all hope.
76. We also commend Mr. Noel Sinclair of Guyana for
the admirable work that he accomplished last month when
he presided over the Council.
77. The colonialist occupation of Namibia by South
Africa, the permanent and continued violation of the rights
of the Namibian people , and the attempts to place the
independence of that Territory within the framework of
East-West confrontation
have brought the’ Council
together again at the very moment when another act of
invasion has taken place, in a Caribbean nation, the offspring of Africa, an act which weakens international law
and the principle of non-intervention and non-interference
in the internal affairs of other States.

71. What merits our special attention’is.‘the:fact
that,
while obstructing the United Nations plan,‘the South African authorities are stepping up their scheme
t of an “inter7

78. In connection with Namibia, we are now facing a
new challenge and we are being given a new opportunity to
show mankind that our existence responds to the needs of
a modem world in turmoil.

85. An outstanding son of Africa, a brilliant politician
and statesman, and a standard-bearer of non-alignment,
Mr. Julius K. Nyerere, President of the United Republic of
Tanzania, said with admirable clarity when he referred to
this issue that:

79. The efforts of the international community to put an
end to the illegal occupation of Namibia have been repeatedly ignored and, in one way or another, evaded. When
the oppressor mentality of the Pretoria racists has itself
been unable to create new pretexts, the United States presence rises up and offers new elements.

“We know that South Africa has adopted this policy
in the last two years on the encouragement of a permanent member of the Security Council. We know that
South Africa is remaining stubborn with the encouragement of that State.. . Angola is an independent sovereign State which has suffered from external aggression
from the moment of its birth. It has a right to decide for
itself on its defence needs. The attempt to link the independence of Namibia with Angola% sovereign decisions
has to be rejected by the whole of the United Nations.“’

80. It is a widespread feeling, shared by allies and adversaries alike, that, in the final analysis, it is the United States
that is responsible for South Africa’s continued disregard
of the resolutions of the Council, especially its resolution
435 (1978), and is therefore responsible for Namibia’s continued status as a South African colony, a homeland enslaved, a victim of the most pitiless plunder and exploitation
by Western transnational corporations, and a hostage to
the securing and protection of the strategic interests of the
United States.

86. With brazen cynicism, the United States and South
Africa have dared to demand the withdrawal of troops
that are helping Angola to defend itself against aggression
launched by South Africa against that country from Namibian territory. South Africa invades, attacks and
attempts to destabilize Angola; it maintains and supports
operations by counter-revolutionary
forces, for whom it
had planned to reserve a portion of Namibia in an iniquitous partition plan which South Africa had in mind a few
months ago. We recall that since 1981 parts of southern
Angola have been occupied by South African troops.

81. When, in January 1981, South Africa sabotaged the
Geneva talks, it impugned the impartiality of the United
Nations. The real reasons for that attitude are found in the
attempts to install a puppet regime in Namibia, guaranteeing the perpetuation of colonial domination, plunder, subjugation, and the protection of those inadmissible
interests, to which we have already referred.

87. It was the same Pretoria racists that, two years ago,
launched the infamous Operation Protea against the
Angolan people. On 23 August 1981, the South African
expansionists launched an invasion against that sister
country [see S/14646], which involved more than 11,000
troops and an impressive amount of war matPriei appropriate to its work of annihilation, including tanks, aircraft,
helicopters and so on: Aggression is still a constant. Nevertheless, Pretoria and Washington demand the withdrawal
of the troops that are helping Angola to confront that
aggression. It is not difficult to imagine the true purpose of
such demands. They form part of the imperialist policy of
asking independent countries that are attacked to give up
their right of selfdefence. Angola and Nicaragua are two
eloquent cases in point.

82. With the patience, flexibility and exemplary attitude
of SWAPO, the sole and authentic representative of the
heroic people of Namibia, and with the support of the
United Nations, it was possible to overcome obstacles to
the implementation
of the plan for the independence of
Namibia pursuant to resolution 435 (1978). Considerable
progress was achieved and, perhaps ndively, it was thought
that everything was ready for the achievement by Namibia
of independence. It was thought that that great undertaking, which today is once again putting the effectiveness of
the Organization to the test, would.quickly achieve the
results hoped for by all. Perhaps we had forgotten the
capacity of Pretoria and its United States allies for manipulation.

88. My country, aware of the pain caused by aggression,
supports the people and Government of Angola in their
struggle and recognizes their right to obtain the means
necessary for the defence of their sovereignty and independence.. Consistent with that position of principle, Commander Daniel Ortega Saavedra, Coordinator
of the
Governing Junta of National Reconstruction of the
Republic of Nicaragua, in his statement to the General
Assembly on 27 September stated:

83. When agreement approaches, the United States gives
South Africa yet another-pretext to delay the implementation of the independence plan: the presence in Angola of
Cuban troops, and their withdrawal as a sine qua non for
the granting of independence to Namibia. Needless to say,
that issue had never been considered before, and resolution 435 (1978), which had been accepted by South Africa
and which the United States had voted in favour of, does
not include such considerations.

“The racist regime of Pretoria, with the approval and
encouragement of the United States Government and
other Governments which’ paradoxically claim to be
concerned for human rights, attacks and invades
Mozambique, Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Seychelles,
Lesotho, Botswana and Swaziland in an attempt to consolidate and perpetuate apartheid and racism. Nicaragua condemns the racist South African regime and

84. During the recent general debate in the General
Assembly,, the most eminent representatives of the intemational community rejected the attempts to make the independence of. Namibia dependent on the withdrawal of
Cuban troops from an attacked, but independent and sovereign, Angola.
8

voices its solidarity with the front-line States in their
decision to support the total liberation of southern
Africa.

tain ‘Powers concerned to introduce into the question of
Namibia elements completely extraneous to it. Attempts to
establish linkage or parallelism between the independence
of Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola, in addition to being incompatible with resolution
435 (1978), constituted interference in the internal affairs
of Angola and were unacceptable.

“By the same token, we support the struggle of the
people of Namibia and their legitimate representative,
the South West Africa People’s Organization, and we
demand the speedy implementation of Security Council
resolution 435 (1978), as the Organization of African
Unity demanded at its most recent summit meeting.“4

92. Nicaragua considers that all the real pitfalls have
been overcome; agreement on an electoral system and the
composition and emplacement of UNTAG.
In other
words, everything requiring discussion within the framework of resolution 435 (1978) is now the subject of agreement. There are some minor details which should not
entail major difficulties: However, Africans are very familiar with the protagonists in this issue. The New African in
its issue of October this year predicts that, even if an agreement is reached in the Security Council, the United States
can be expected to invoke the question of Cuban troops in
Angola, thus frustrating the independence of Namibia;
and, of course, with the United States engaged in a “constructive engagement” with South Africa, anything may be
expected. This “constructive engagement” has been given
concrete expression. The United States Government has
just approved multi-milliondollar
contracts with seven
transnational corporations of the United States to provide
training, servicing and spare parts for nuclear installations
in South Africa, in open violation of the arms embargo
decreed by the Council. Thus the United States is strengthening the nuclear capacity of its gendarme in that region,
which refuses to sign the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons [General Assembly resolution 2373
(XXI.,
annex], and whose nuclear installations are not
subject to international supervision, thereby constituting
an enormous threat to African security.

89. We agree with the view of the Secretary-General,
stated in his report to the Council, to the effect that a
peaceful solution of the Namibian problem is also the key
to a peaceful and co-operative future for all countries of
the region and that the instability and conflict generated by
the failure to resolve this problem have had disastrous
results for the neighbouring countries, and especially for
Angola. [See S/15943, para. 27.1 Furthermore, we associate
ourselves with the Secretary-General’s statement in the
same report that, however, “the position of South Africa
regarding the issue of the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola as a precondition for the implementation ofresolution 435 (1978) still makes it impossible to launch the United
Nations plan.” [Ihid., para. 25.1 We resolutely support the
efforts of the Secretary-General and his attempts to help the
Namibian people to attain independence.
90. The Council has fundamental responsibilities in this
issue and therefore it must take immediate measures. It
must reaffirm that the independence plan for Namibia in
accordance with resolution 435 (1978) constitutes the only
genuine basis for a solution of the problem. It must
demand the immediate implementation of that resolution,
categorically and definitively reject attempts by South
Africa and the United States to link the independence of
Namibia with the withdrawal of Cuban troops from
Angola and declare that the latter comes exclusively within
the sphere of sovereign decisions of the Government of
Angola. The Council must dismantle the entire range of
manoeuvres aimed at maintaining and perpetuating colonial domination.

93. We wish to affirm our position clearly. We demand
the immediate implementation
of resolution 435 (1978).
We wish to express our solidarity with the struggle of the
people of Namibia and their authentic and legitimate representative, SWAPO, and with the front-line States; we
condemn the acts of aggression that they have suffered at
the hands of the Pretoria racists, the most recent having
been perpetrated against the ANC offices at Maputo,
which affects the territorial integrity and sovereignty of
that sister country. We, feel that, if the irrational and
defiant attitude of South Africa continues, as is suggested
by its arrogant statement in this body recently, the Council
will have to consider the adoption of appropriate measures
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.

91. The Meeting of Ministers for Foreign Affairs and
Heads of Delegations of the Non-Aligned Countries to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session, held in New
York from 4 to 7 October 1983, referred to the situation in
extremely clear terms in its tinal communique [S/Z6035,
annex.] It denounced the South African manoeuvres to
strengthen its domination in the Territory. In particular it
deplored the establishment by South Africa of the’ socalled Council of State in Namibia, which would draft a
constitution in the Territory in violation of the resolutions
of the United Nations, and it urged the member States not
to acknowledge such manoeuvres. The Non-Aligned
Movement on that occasion also firmly asserted its position with regard to the presence of troops in Angola by
stating that the Meeting regretted the continued failure to
implement the United Nations plan for Namibia contained
in Council resolution 435 (1978), which represented the
only basis for a peaceful settlement of the question of
Namibia. In particular, it rejected recent attempts by cer-

The meeting rose at 1 p.m.

NOTES
’ See AKONF.12013

and

Corr.l

and

2, para.

30.

1 Report of the International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, Paris, 25-29 April 1983
(A/CONF.120/13),

annex

II, sect. A. 3.

’ Official Records of the General Assembly. Thirty-eighth Session,
Plenary Meetings, 14th meeting, para. 11.
’ Ibid., 7th meeting, paras. 85-86.

9

-Al
&sill

2

l+s

&.“I

. +I

d-4

*$

&I

,,JJ

,dl

dgcll

(y

abr:’
i&l

Jc Jdl

?Ql

G&s

&

a
J,AI

js,

.~3,i~~r.~3~lrj.‘~l~j/l:J!~l,ilyu~LLj~l
$+lmm~eFfilkmm
a9~~n~af~aaa~#~w~~k~~aae.
wslFBI?H.

HOW

TO OBTAIN

ullaa5ifim?efE~~~a~&aAEm

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PtJBiICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositair&
du monde entier. Informez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous ?I : Nations Unies,
Section des ventes, New York w Geneve.
KAK

nomwmb

H~,~AHHH

1’13nartux Opramf3amiu

~JPTAHE~~AuMM

G6~ennnemrbrx Hat&l

.ofmwimmbIx
MOXRO

HBrCHT~BaXBOBCeXp~OHaXMHpa~HaBOAHTeCnpaBKI106

H3AiUiWXX

Ms3 nHmuTe no anpecy: GpraHn3at.um 06beAaHeHHbIx

Mara3WHe
.npOAaXW.

Ii3AaHIi&

COMO

CONSEGUIR

HbKdopx

AIW

PUBLICACIONRS

mwiB

B xmixcHbIx

xymi~b

hfara3nuax

BBillllCMKHH~HOM

Hattut% CeKmrR no

%HeBa.

DE LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de las Naciones Unidas e&n en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas panes de1 mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccidn de Ventas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

.

,

Litho in United Nations, New York

al300

4

904020S-March

>

1992-2;050
