86

General Asaembl,--Thirtieth Seuion

Discrimination and Protection of Minorities, to the
General Assembly at that session.
2400th plenary meeting
JO November 1975
3384 (XXX), Declaration on the Use of Scientific
and Technological Progress in the Interests
of Peace and for the Benefit of Mankind

The General Assembly,
Noting that scientific and technological progress has
become one of the most important factors in the development of human society,
Taking into consideration that, while scientific and
technological developments provide ever increasing opportunities to better the conditions of life of peoples
and nations, in a number of instances they can give rise
to social problems, as well as threaten the human rights
and fundamental freedoms of the individual,
Noting with concern that scientific and technological
achievements can be used to intensify the arms race,
suppress national liberation movements and deprive
individuals and peoples of their human rights and fundamental freedoms,
Also noting with concern that scientific and technological achievements can entail dangers for the civil
and political rights of the individual or of the group
and for human dignity,
Noting the urgent need to make full use of scientific
and technological developments for the welfare of man
and to neutralize the present and possible future harmful consequences of certain scientific and technological
achievements,
Recognizing that scientific and technological progress
is of great importance in accelerating the social and
economic development of developing countries,
Aware that the transfer of science and technology is
one of the principal ways of accelerating the economic
development of developing countries,
Reaffirming the right of peoples to self-determination
and the need to respect human rights and freedoms and
the dignity of the human person in the conditions of
scientific and technological progress,
Desiring to promote the realization of the principles
which fonn the basis of the Charter of the United
Nations, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
the International Covenants on Human Rights, the
Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Declaration on Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, the Declaration on Social Progress and Development, and the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Solemnly proclaims that:
1. All States shall promote international co-operation to ensure that the results of scientific and
technological developments are used in the intere~ts
of strengthening international peace and sec-urity,
freedom and independence, and also for the purpose
of the economic and social development of peoples
and the realization of human rights lllld freedoms in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
2. All States shall take appropriate measures to
prevent the use of scientific and technological devel-

opments, particularly by the State organs, to limit or
interfere with the enjoyment of the human rights and
fundamental freedoms of the individual as enshrined
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
International Covenants on Human Rights and other
relevant international instruments.
3. All States shall take measures to ensure that
scientific and technological achievements satisfy the
material and spiritual needs of all sectors of the
population.
4. All States shall refrain from any acts involving the use of scientific and technological achievements for the purposes of violating the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of other Stares, interfering
in their internal affairs, waging aggressive wars, suppressing national liberation movements or pursuing a
policy of racial discrimination. Such acts are not
only a flagrant violation of the Charter of the United
Nations and principles of international law, but constitute an inadmissible distortion of the purposes
that should guide scientific and technological developments for the benefit of mankind.
5. All States shall co-operate in the establishment, strengthening and development of the scientific and technological capacity of developing countries with a view to accelerating the realization of the
social and economic rights of the peoples of those
countries.
6. All States shall take measures to extend the
benefits of science and technology to all strata of the
population and to protect them, both socially and
materially, from possible harmful effects of the misuse of scientific and technological developments, including their misuse to infringe upon the rights of
the individual or of the group, particularly with regard to respect for privacy and the protection of the
human personality and its physical and intellectual
integrity.
7. All States shall take the necessary measures,
including legislative measures, to ensure that the
utilization of scientific and technological achievements promotes the fullest realization of human
rights and fundamental freedoms without any discrimination. ~hatsoever on grounds of raoe, sex, language or rehg1ous beliefs.
8. All States shall take effective measures includin~ _Ieg!slative m~asu!es, to pre~nt and preciude the
utilizatton of sc1~ntific and technological achievements to the detnment of human rights and fundamental freedoms and the dignity of the human person.
. 9. AH States sh~I, whenever necessary, take ac!1on to ensu~e comphance with legislation guaranteem~ h1;1man nghts and freedoms in the conditions of
sc1ent1fic and technological developments.
2400th plenary meetinK
10 November 1975
344._1 (XXX).

1971 Convention on Psychotropic
Substances

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3147 (XXVIII) of 14 De~ember _1973, in which it stressed the importance to
n~rernational di:ug control of universal accession to the
Smg]e Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961,D the 1971
9

United Nations, Treaty Series. vol. 520, No. 7515, p. 151.
