UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1998/777
19 August 1998
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 18 AUGUST 1998 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL ADDRESSED
TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to transmit to you herewith the interim report of the
International Commission of Inquiry (Rwanda) submitted to me by the Chairman of
the Commission in pursuance of Security Council resolution 1161 (1998) of
9 April 1998.
You will note from section V, Administrative and budgetary aspects, the
difficulties that the Commission has experienced and that have hampered it in
its work. The Commission is financed entirely from the United Nations Trust
Fund for Rwanda established for that purpose, to which a number of Member States
have offered to contribute. Of the approximately $710,000 pledged by Member
States, some $425,000 has been received. I would therefore urge those
Governments that have pledged but not yet disbursed contributions to the Trust
Fund to do so as soon as possible, in order to enable the International
Commission to pursue its inquiries and complete its work in a timely manner.
In accordance with resolution 1161 (1998), it would be my intention to
request the Commission to submit to the Security Council a final report before
the end of November 1998.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to
the attention of the members of the Security Council.

(Signed)

98-24303 (E)

200898

200898

Kofi A. ANNAN

S/1998/777
English
Page 2

Annex
[Original:

English/French]

Interim report of the International Commission
of Inquiry (Rwanda)

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
By paragraph 1 of its resolution 1161 (1998) of 9 April 1998, the Security
Council requested the Secretary-General to reactivate the International
Commission of Inquiry, with the following mandate:
"(a) To collect information and investigate reports relating to the
sale, supply and shipment of arms and related matériel to former Rwandan
government forces and militias in the Great Lakes region of central Africa,
in violation of Security Council resolutions 918 (1994), 997 (1995) and
1011 (1995);
"(b) To identify parties aiding and abetting the illegal sale to or
acquisition of arms by former Rwandan government forces and militias,
contrary to the resolutions referred to above; and
"(c) To make recommendations relating to the illegal flow of arms in
the Great Lakes region".
2.
The International Commission of Inquiry was established pursuant to
Security Council resolution 1013 (1995) of 7 September 1995, and it conducted
investigations in the Great Lakes region and elsewhere between October 1995 and
October 1996. The Commission’s reports can be found in documents S/1996/67,
S/1996/195, S/1997/1010 and S/1998/63.
3.
In a letter addressed to the President of the Security Council dated
27 May 1998 (S/1998/438), the Secretary-General notified the President of the
Security Council that the membership of the Commission was as follows:
Mr. Mahmoud Kassem (Egypt) (Chairman);
Brigadier-General Mujahid Alam (Pakistan);
Mr. Gilbert Barthe (Switzerland);
Mr. Mel Holt (United States of America).
The Commission is assisted in the field by a political officer and a secretary.

II.

DEVELOPMENTS IN THE SITUATION SINCE 1995-1996

4.
Following a series of briefings and consultations with members of the
Security Council, representatives of other interested Member States and
Secretariat officials from 4 to 8 May 1998 at United Nations Headquarters, the
Commission re-established itself at its headquarters in Nairobi on 13 May. Some

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 3

members of the Commission visited London en route for consultations, as
described below.
5.
Upon its return to Nairobi, it quickly became clear to the Commission that
the circumstances in which it was pursuing its investigations had been
transformed since the period 1995-1996. At that time, the former Rwandan
government forces were overwhelmingly concentrated in north Kivu province of
what was then eastern Zaire, with smaller numbers in south Kivu and in the
north-western part of the United Republic of Tanzania. There was then, and
apparently still is, significant organized support for the former Forces armées
rwandaises (FAR) in Kenya, where members of the Rwandan Hutu community have been
engaged in raising money to buy arms.
6.
Just as the Commission was completing its third report (S/1997/1010) in
late October 1996, the Banyamulenge and their allies launched an uprising in
Kivu that began with attacks on the refugee camps and ex-FAR concentrations
there and culminated in the overthrow of the Mobutu regime and the founding of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. It was those tumultuous events that
radically transformed the situation being investigated by the Commission and,
incidentally, led to a delay of more than one year in the publication of the
Commission’s third report.
7.
Thus, although the mandate adopted by the Security Council in reactivating
the International Commission of Inquiry on 9 April 1998 (resolution 1161 (1998))
was essentially the same as that originally contained in resolution 1013 (1995)
of 7 September 1995, the Commission has been obliged to adopt a different
approach to its investigations necessitated by its absence from the region for
19 months. Nearly two years of violent upheavals have left remnants of the
ex-FAR scattered across the African continent, to the point where the first task
facing the Commission was to establish their whereabouts and current activities
and, to the extent possible, their military capacities and intentions. In order
to mount a systematic investigation into the sale or supply of arms to the
former Rwandan government forces and to identify parties aiding and abetting
them, the Commission has travelled widely throughout Africa. A list of the
countries visited and representatives of Governments and organizations
interviewed is contained in appendix I.

III.

ACTIVITIES OF THE INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION OF INQUIRY
A.

Activities in Kenya

8.
In Nairobi, the Commission resumed the contacts it had established during
the period 1995-1996 and initiated additional contacts among Kenyan government
officials, the diplomatic community, United Nations agencies, non-governmental
organizations, members of civil society and private individuals.
9.
On 18 May 1998, the Chairman of the Commission wrote to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs, Mr. Bonaya Godana, requesting a meeting to acquaint his
Government with the nature and purpose of the Commission and to request his
assistance and cooperation. The Chairman also wrote on the same day to the
Attorney General of Kenya, Mr. Amos Wako.
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 4

10. At his meeting with the Foreign Minister on 22 May, the Chairman requested
his assistance in placing the Commission in contact with senior officials from
the Ministry of the Interior, the armed forces and customs, police, civil
aviation and intelligence officers who might be in a position to assist the
Commission in its inquiries. Minister Godana pledged his Government’s
cooperation and agreed to designate a liaison officer to work with the
Commission in its dealings with other government officials.
11. Despite repeated attempts on the part of the Commission to follow up on the
Minister’s offer of assistance, including a second letter from the Chairman to
the Minister dated 15 July 1998, no liaison officer has yet been appointed. No
reply has been received to the 15 July letter.
12. The Commission has also attempted, without success, to meet with the
Attorney General, who has been travelling outside the country, or with a
representative of his office. The office of the Attorney General has confirmed
receipt of a second letter to him from the Chairman dated 10 June 1998
requesting an appointment, but has not yet replied, nor has it responded to
subsequent telephone calls.
13. From 9 to 11 July, two commissioners visited the Kakuma refugee camp and
Lokichokio in northern Kenya, in connection with reports of the trans-shipment
of weapons from the Horn of Africa to the Great Lakes region. They met with
United Nations officials and aid workers, as well as with refugees.
14. Numerous sources in Kenya impressed upon the Commission that Rwandan Hutus
continued to be very active in the country in raising funds, maintaining
political organizations, seeking external support, recruiting soldiers and
procuring false passports.
15. While in Nairobi during the period 1995-1996, the Commission had met with
Mr. Seth Sendashonga, a former Minister of the Interior (1994-1995) in the
Government of Rwanda, who was a member of and retained close links with the
Rwandan Hutu community. Mr. Sendashonga had at that time broken with the
Government and resumed his links with the Hutu community. Shortly after meeting
with the Commission in February 1996, Mr. Sendashonga was wounded by gunfire in
Nairobi in an assassination attempt, from which he subsequently recovered. The
Commission attempted to meet with him again on its return to Nairobi in
May 1998, but Mr. Sendashonga was shot dead two days before the appointment
could take place.
16. The Commission has discovered that in Nairobi and in the Kakuma refugee
camp, personalities close to the late Mr. Sendashonga are still actively
recruiting young men for their military training camps in Lukole and Karagwe,
United Republic of Tanzania. Various sources report that the purpose of
Mr. Sendashonga’s involvement in creating a militia was "to open a new front" in
eastern Rwanda. It is understood that recruitment and training have continued
since his death.
17. These sources further indicate that in Nairobi, a group of Hutu extremists
under the leadership of Major André Bizimana is exerting pressure on refugees
and running counter-intelligence operations. There is a common understanding
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 5

among various sources that some of the proceeds of the many appeals for funds by
church groups and women’s organizations are used to finance military activities.
18. The political organization Peuple en armes pour la libération du Rwanda,
which issues pamphlets distributed in Rwanda and elsewhere, is represented in
Nairobi by two individuals who inform the press agencies about the military
successes of the insurgents in Rwanda.
19. On 2 August, the Commission met with a delegation from the Human Rights
Watch Arms Project, including its Executive Director, Mr. Joost Hiltermann, as
part of its long-standing dialogue on issues of mutual concern. Mr. Hiltermann
discussed with the Commission a forthcoming meeting of non-governmental
organizations in Canada on the issue of small arms and a joint governmental and
non-governmental organization meeting in October in Belgium on the gravity of
the problem of small-arms flows in Africa and the great interest in the
Commission’s work among civil society institutions.

B.

Activities in Rwanda

20. Members of the Commission visited Rwanda three times, from 3 to 6 June,
from 1 to 4 July and from 13 to 17 July. They met several times in Kigali with
government officials, members of the diplomatic community, United Nations
officials and officials of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, as
well as members of non-governmental organizations.
21. On 4 June 1998, the full Commission met with the Minister of State for
Defence, Lt.-Col. Emmanuel Habyarimana, accompanied by other senior Rwandan
government officials. The Minister welcomed the Commission and pledged his
Government’s cooperation.
22. The Chairman of the Commission recalled that in November 1996, the
Banyamulenge and its allies had attacked the Mugunga refugee camp in what was
then eastern Zaire. Besides Rwandan civilian refugees, a concentration of
former Rwandan government forces and militia also inhabited the camp.
Journalists entering Mugunga shortly after the attack reported finding documents
bearing the names of companies that had apparently sold weapons to the former
Rwandan government forces. Upon learning of those accounts, the Chairman had
written to the Government of Rwanda, on 21 November 1996, requesting the
Commission’s access to the documents reportedly found at the camp. At his
meeting with Minister Habyarimana, the Chairman requested to be allowed to
examine the documents, to inspect weapons seized in recent engagements between
the Rwandan Patriotic Army (RPA) and insurgents, and to interview some of the
captured insurgents. The Chairman also requested that a liaison officer be
designated to assist the Commission. At the invitation of the Government, the
Chairman subsequently put his requests in writing.
23. The liaison officer appointed by the Government, Lt.-Col. Patrick Karegeya,
the Chief of External Intelligence of RPA, promised the cooperation of his
Government to the extent possible without compromising sensitive intelligence
sources and operations. At his invitation, the Commission has begun to study
some of the documents seized at Mugunga camp in November 1996. However,
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 6

according to Lt.-Col. Karegeya, many documents were removed by journalists at
the time and are not in the possession of the Rwandan Government.
24. Following an agreement reached with the Deputy Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Mr. Bernard Muna, Commission members
met with him and his staff during June and July.
25. The Commission understands that the ex-FAR, or at least the part operating
inside Rwanda, refers to itself as the Armée pour la libération du Rwanda (ALIR)
and were under the operational command of Lt.-Col. Leonard Nkundiye until his
death on 24 July 1998 in a fight with RPA inside Rwanda.
26. From the Commission’s numerous discussions and meetings in Kigali, a broad
range of opinions emerged that the insurgency in Rwanda, particularly in the
north-west, represented a significant security threat to the Government and that
the former Rwandan government forces and militia were responsible. There was a
unanimous belief that in many recent attacks on civilians and in ambushes of RPA
patrols, the insurgents tended to use only small arms or machetes.
Nevertheless, it was widely believed that they were in possession of larger
stocks of more sophisticated armaments and might be using machetes rather than
firearms for psychological effect. Many believed that they were biding their
time in preparation for more destructive attacks, the objective of which was
eventually to regain power.
27. Some indication of the intentions and possible strength of the insurgents
was gained from an underground newspaper published at Gisenyi and distributed
secretly as far as Kigali. This propaganda paper, called Umucunguzi, or
"Saviour", purports to describe the activities of ALIR. The paper accuses the
Rwandan Patriotic Army of a campaign of massacre against the people of Rwanda
and threatens to extend the struggle against the Government to all parts of the
country. In order to demonstrate their freedom of movement within Rwanda, their
discipline and their efficiency, the insurgents have also kidnapped missionaries
and nuns they believe to be sympathetic to their cause. They are then released
unharmed to make public statements about how well they have been treated while
in captivity.

C.

Activities in South Africa

28. During the period 1995-1996, the Commission visited South Africa and
established numerous official and private contacts with those who were
knowledgeable about arms flows throughout Africa generally and about the
situation in the Great Lakes region in particular. Among the Commission’s
interlocutors was Mr. Willem Ehlers, who had brokered the weapons sale described
in some detail in the Commission’s first substantive report (S/1996/195), which
the Commission had concluded was a highly probable violation of the Security
Council embargo. In order to re-establish those contacts and to learn the
latest developments, the Commission visited South Africa from 22 to
29 July 1998.
29. The Commission met with a number of senior government officials, including
the Minister of Justice, Mr. Abdulah H. Omar; the Director-General of the
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 7

Department of Foreign Affairs, Mr. Jakkie Selebe; the Deputy Director-General of
the Department’s Multi-Affairs Branch, Mr. Abdul S. Minty; the Chairman of the
National Conventional Arms Control Committee, Professor Kader Asmal; the Deputy
Director-General of the Secret Service, Mr. Barry Gilder; representatives of the
National Intelligence Coordinating Committee and the National Interdepartmental
Structure for Border Control; and others in a wide range of academic and
non-governmental circles.
30. The Commission’s interlocutors in the South African Government made clear
the Government’s determination to curtail the illegal shipment of arms from and
through its territory. To that end, the Government was reducing to 10 the
number of airports permitted to handle international flights in order to promote
better compliance with laws governing illegal arms trafficking. The Government
was also aware of the difficulty of controlling illegal arms transfers by road
across its extensive borders and through the some 3,000 airfields located
throughout the country. The Government had also adopted legislation to curtail
the activities of South African companies and individuals seeking to profit by
the sale and supply of weapons and the provision of military training abroad.
Government approval of such activities was now granted only if strict
guidelines, including adherence to United Nations embargoes and compliance with
end-user certificates, were met. The National Conventional Arms Control
Committee reviewed requests for the sale of arms and non-lethal military
equipment and denied those it considered unwarranted. Where the Committee
became aware of apparent violations, it sought to have them investigated. The
Government of South Africa had placed the issue of illegal arms transfers on the
agenda of the Organization of African Unity, resulting in the adoption of a
resolution requesting Governments to provide information on its transfers and
receipts of weapons.
31. Nevertheless, information made available to the Commission by knowledgeable
and reliable sources concerning, inter alia, the alleged transport of arms from
South African territory to the Great Lakes region by road via Zimbabwe and
Zambia suggests that the scale of illegal trafficking appears to exceed the
present capacity of the Governments concerned to control it in full accordance
with their laws.

D.

Activities in Uganda

32. The Commission visited Kampala from 5 to 10 July 1998 and held a total of
19 meetings with government officials, members of the diplomatic community,
officials of United Nations agencies, representatives of non-governmental
organizations and others. The government officials included Mr. Muluri Mukasa,
the Minister of State for Security; Mr. Tom Butime, the Minister for Internal
Affairs; Mr. Amama Mbabazi, the Minister of State for Political Affairs; and
Mr. Rukahana Rugunda, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs.
33. In their meetings with the Commission on 7 and 10 July 1998, Minister
Mukasa and Minister Rugunda informed the Commission that small groups of the
ex-FAR and Interahamwe militia were operating in western Uganda. The Government
of Uganda understood that elements of the former Forces armées zaïroises
(ex-FAZ) were collaborating with ex-FAR elements in the eastern part of the
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 8

Democratic Republic of the Congo, taking advantage of a degree of support among
the local population and the tenuous control exercised over the province from
Kinshasa. Those armed groups financed themselves partly through gem mining and
support from some local traders said to be opposed to the Kabila Government.
34. The Commission’s other interlocutors provided it with a greatly improved
understanding of the complex and volatile situation along Uganda’s border with
the Democratic Republic of the Congo as well as the continuing activity of the
former Rwandan government forces in the area and their links with other armed
groups.
35. The Ugandan People’s Defence Force has reportedly engaged the ex-FAR inside
Uganda. Ex-FAR elements had also reportedly established armed camps in the
vicinity of Kisoro, north of Goma. The ex-FAR were said to be the best
organized of the many armed groups operating in North Kivu province of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, having forged close links with remnants of
FAZ. The province is generally considered highly insecure and replete with
small arms in numerous depots and caches; the local price of an automatic weapon
was said to be approximately $12. The former Rwandan government forces were
believed to oppose President Museveni’s Government because of its perceived role
in support of the successful campaigns of the Rwandan Patriotic Front and the
Congolese Alliance of Democratic Forces in 1994 and 1996 respectively. As a
result, the ex-FAR have allied themselves with at least one armed
anti-Government group in Uganda, the Allied Democratic Front (ADF). The ex-FAR
and ex-FAZ are thought by some observers to be supplying weapons to ADF.
36. In his meeting with the Commission, also on 7 July 1998, Mr. Butime, the
Minister for Internal Affairs, estimated that the ex-FAR and ex-FAZ comprised
40 per cent of the 500 ADF fighters. The Minister subsequently wrote to the
Chairman mentioning companies from three countries, two in Europe and one in
Africa, as having supplied weapons to the former Rwandan government forces and
militia in 1994 and 1996. The Commission intends to write, if necessary, to the
Governments concerned in its further investigation of the matter. The following
day, the Minister of State for Political Affairs, Mr. Amama Mbabazi, spoke of a
shipment of arms in contravention of the embargo, believed to be for the ex-FAR,
which Uganda had impounded at Entebbe airport in 1996, but provided only sketchy
details.

E.

Activities in the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland

37. En route to Nairobi, some members of the Commission met in London in
mid-May with Amnesty International to discuss the flow of arms in central and
southern Africa and to develop additional contacts.
38. Between 22 and 26 June 1998, a member of the Commission revisited London to
meet with a number of organizations and individuals, including Ms. Oona King, a
member of the British Parliament and Chairman of the All-Party Group on Rwanda
and the Prevention of Genocide. The Commissioner also met again with Amnesty
International officials concerning the activities of the ex-FAR and arms
transfers in East Africa, and with officials of other non-governmental
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 9

organizations as well as with private individuals familiar with air cargo
operations in Africa. The Commissioner also obtained a large number of
documents, including papers said to have been captured from the former Rwandan
refugee camp of Mugunga in eastern Zaire, which was attacked by Banyamulenge and
allied forces in November 1996. Some documents contain the names of companies
that had apparently been supplying arms to the Rwandan government forces, and
others describe military plans. The Commission will continue to study those
documents with great care and take whatever follow-up action is necessary within
the time remaining to it.
39. On the basis of documents found at Mugunga and now in its possession, the
Commission has also been in preliminary contact with United Kingdom customs
authorities concerning the apparent involvement of a British company in the sale
of armaments to the ex-FAR after the imposition of the arms embargo in May 1994.
Those allegations were widely publicized at the time of the attack on the camp
in November 1996.

F.

Activities in Zambia

40. In its third report on its activities and the addendum to it (S/1997/1010,
para. 71 and S/1998/63, para. 32), the Commission described its exchange of
correspondence with the Government of Zambia concerning allegations that weapons
apparently destined for Goma and Bukavu had been shipped via Mpulungu, a port at
the southern tip of Lake Tanganyika. The Zambian Government, in its reply dated
3 December 1996, had invited the Commission to participate in a joint
investigation of the allegation.
41. Accordingly, the Commission visited Zambia from 29 July to 1 August 1998.
During its visit the Commission met with Zambian government officials in Lusaka
and travelled with them to Mpulungu.
42. On 29 July, the Commission met with the Zambian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mr. S. K. Walubita, who informed the Commission that Zambia had
investigated reports of arms shipments occurring via Mpulungu and determined
that they were not true. However, the Minister also mentioned one incident in
which armed men had intercepted a cargo ship on Lake Tanganyika and forced the
crew to abandon its cargo of 100 tons of cement and to take on board a shipment
of arms. The Commission subsequently investigated the incident in greater
detail, as described below (see paras. 55 and 56), and considers it highly
significant.
43. Also on 29 July, the Commission met with the Zambian Minister of Defence,
Mr. Chitalu Sampa, who was concurrently serving as Acting Minister of Home
Affairs. Other officials from the Ministries of Defence and Home Affairs as
well as representatives of the police and immigration service also attended.
Minister Sampa stressed that his Government was unaware of the shipment of arms
through Zambia, but acknowledged that such shipments might take place. In that
context, the Minister recalled that his Government had impounded two aircraft at
Ndola Airport that were loaded with weapons apparently intended for the União
Nacional para a Independência Total de Angola (UNITA). The aircraft had flown
from Lanseria Airport in South Africa via Entebbe. The Permanent Secretary of
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 10

Home Affairs added that small arms were traded and sold in small quantities, but
that this activity was not organized and occurred on a small scale.
44. The Commission learned nothing to contradict credible reports of arms
shipments through Zambia, and noted that unless there were discrepancies in the
accompanying documentation, customs officials did not physically inspect
shipments passing through the country.
45. While in Zambia, the Commission heard from a well-informed and reliable
source of possible links between elements of the ex-FAR/Interahamwe and ex-FAZ
with UNITA. It was also informed that approximately 2,000 Rwandan Hutus
described as "génocidaires" had fled the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
were staying in Maheba camp in the north-western region of Zambia. The source
also reported that Ndola Airport, in Zambia near the Congolese border, was
widely believed to serve as an important hub of arms trafficking, mostly to
UNITA, but also to the Great Lakes region. Those reports had led the Government
of Zambia to take stricter measures to control the flow of cargo at Ndola
Airport.

IV.

CASE STUDY: LINKS BETWEEN THE FORMER RWANDAN GOVERNMENT
FORCES AND BURUNDIAN INSURGENTS

46. In its third report (S/1997/1010, para. 108 (d)), the Commission stated its
conviction that a close link existed at that time (October 1996) between the
former Rwandan government forces and the Burundian Conseil national pour la
défense de la démocratie (CNDD) and its military wing, the Front pour la défense
de la démocratie (FDD) for armed action against both Rwanda and Burundi. That
conviction has been further reinforced by documentary evidence now in the
possession of the Commission (see appendix II) demonstrating that very close
cooperation exists between the ex-FAR and two of the Burundian rebel groups:
CNDD/FDD and the Parti pour la libération du peuple Hutu (PALIPEHUTU) and its
military wing, the Forces nationales de libération (FNL). The collaboration
between the ex-FAR and CNDD/FDD covers both political and military aspects.
47. A Convention of Cooperation (see appendix II) was signed by the High
Command of FAR and CNDD on 22 May 1995 at Bukavu (Zaire), which formalized the
cooperation between the two parties. The Convention was signed by
Léonard Nyangoma, President of CNDD, and Major General Augustin Bizimungu,
Commander and Chief of Staff of the ex-FAR. The Convention consists of a
preamble that highlights the urgent need for both parties to share:
"both material and financial resources and to coordinate all actions to be
taken with a view to ensuring the final victory of the FAR and FDD".
The preamble also refers to "the dilatory and confused attitude of the
international community towards our problems". The document then goes on to
list specific actions, including the following:
"-

To establish a joint politico-military commission responsible for
designing and elaborating joint strategies to harmonize our points of

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 11

view on common political problems and for suggesting ways and means of
resolving them;

48.

49.

"-

To elaborate a joint education and ideological mobilization programme
in order to raise our peoples’ awareness of the reasons and
justification for our struggle;

"-

To elaborate and implement strategies and mechanisms for diplomatic
and media penetration in order to deflect the campaigns of
demonization and globalization fed and maintained by our common and
respective enemies."

The commission established by the Convention was also mandated:
"-

To elaborate a programme of military cooperation and an inventory of
logistic, financial and human resource requirements in order to ensure
their coordination in the common interest; and

"-

To establish a joint military and civilian information service and to
provide for the training of ad hoc personnel in order to ward off the
danger and destabilization threatening the two parties".

The Convention came into force with immediate effect.

50. Another document made available to the Commission (see appendix III) is a
mission order signed at Bukavu on 4 March 1996 by the ex-FAR general,
Gratien Kabiligi, and the Vice-President of CNDD, Christian Sendegeya. The
order concerns the transfer of the ex-FAR Lt. Col. Gasarabwe to the staff of FDD
temporarily.
51. A note signed by Mr. Sendegeya acknowledging receipt of $5,000 from
General Kabiligi, signed at Bukavu on 31 March 1996, indicates some financial
support from the ex-FAR to CNDD. The transaction was effected "in the context
of a special relationship" (see appendix IV).
52. A more recent document illustrating the relationship between the Rwandan
insurgent group ALIR and the Burundian rebel group PALIPEHUTU takes the form of
a letter with letterhead of PALIPEHUTU/FNL addressed to Lt. Col. Nkundiye, then
the commander of ALIR, written at Bubanza (Burundi) on 20 November 1997 by
Abbé Nyandwi, the emissary of ALIR to the Burundian opposition. The letter
mentions the presence of ex-FAR fighting alongside FNL in Burundi and describes
an earlier written agreement that forms the basis for cooperation between
Rwandan and Burundian insurgents as "a draft cooperation agreement between FNL
and the ex-FAR, a document which is still open to possible further amendments".
The letter includes the following description of the situation:
"The incessant fighting against the forces of the Rwandan Patriotic Army
(RPA), our scarce supply of matériel, the lack of fresh supplies and the
loss of human lives were all factors which caused us to withdraw to
Burundi, where we found a significant number of Rwandan soldiers within the
Forces Nationales de Libération (FNL), currently the most serious armed
branch of the opposition."
/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 12

The letter goes on:
"I informed FNL of the special mission which you had entrusted to me,
namely, to promote collaboration between ALIR and the Burundian opposition.
The commanders of FNL were apprised of this request, and were very honoured
and pleased about it. This collaboration has proved to be essential at
this juncture, when FNL has advanced considerably in its struggle against
the government army; with serious support from ALIR, this war could be
ended, to the benefit of all Burundian and Rwandan Bahutu."
In an apparent reference to the Convention cited above, the writer adds:
"This method of work should make it possible very shortly to resolve, once
and for all, the longstanding Hutu-Tutsi problem in our subregion."
A copy of the letter appears in appendix V.
53. In addition to the above documentary evidence of political agreements
between the ex-FAR and CNDD and the ex-FAR and PALIPEHUTU, there is evidence of
cooperation at the operational level between their military wings. The
Commission has become aware of a number of incidents that appear to show that
the two parties to the Convention have indeed collaborated militarily. The two
most significant are described below.
54. The Commission has discovered evidence of the military coordination called
for by the Convention in the shipment of arms which, it has reason to believe,
were intended for the use of the former Rwandan government forces in or around
Rwanda. The incident was briefly mentioned to the Commission by the Zambian
Minister for Foreign Affairs and investigated in greater detail by the
Commission subsequently.
55. According to the information available to the Commission from government
and other sources at Mpulungu, on 13 March 1997 the Rwegura, a 500-ton cargo
ship registered in Burundi, left Mpulungu port in Zambia loaded with 100 tons of
cement destined for Bujumbura. The following day, about half-way up Lake
Tanganyika, the ship was forcibly stopped and boarded by a group of armed and
uniformed men travelling in two large boats. The rebels, who spoke Kirundi and
Kinyarwanda and who identified themselves as Burundian and Rwandan Hutus,
ordered the ship to proceed towards Zaire and weigh anchor, where more armed men
loaded the vessel with large quantities of arms and ammunition. Between 14 and
27 March, the ship was forced to stop at various points along the Zairian
coastline to take on additional loads of arms and matériel. The rebels ordered
the crew to dump the cargo of cement into the lake in order to accommodate the
extra weight. It is estimated that as many as 400 armed men may have boarded
the ship during that period. As the ship made its way northwards with its cargo
of armaments, it came under attack by an aircraft believed to have originated in
Burundi but suffered no serious damage. The Rwegura continued to a point off
the Tanzanian coast about 10 kilometres south of Kigoma, where, on 28 March, the
armed intruders unloaded the arms and ammunition and their personal belongings
and set off inland.

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 13

56. On the basis of its inquiries among sources with intimate knowledge of this
incident and of the peoples and languages of the regions bordering the lake, the
Commission strongly believes that the armed men who seized the ship to transport
arms comprised both CNDD/FDD fighters and ex-FAR personnel who had fled from the
Uvira region after the Banyamulenge attacks of late 1996.
57.
The Commission has also been informed that two columns of ex-FAR under the
command of a major participated in the attack on Bujumbura airport on
31 December 1997, which resulted in the massacre of some 200 civilians.
58. The fact that CNDD/FDD is not subject to any arms embargo therefore
represents a loophole through which the ex-FAR, through their collaboration with
that and other Burundian armed groups, can acquire weapons and matériel in
violation of the resolutions of the Security Council.

V.

ADMINISTRATIVE AND BUDGETARY ASPECTS

59. In accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 1161 (1998), the International
Commission of Inquiry is financed entirely from the United Nations Trust Fund
for Rwanda (Trust Fund for the International Commission of Inquiry into arms
flows in the Great Lakes region of Central Africa), and receives no financing
from the United Nations regular budget.
60. At the 3870th meeting of the Security Council, on 9 April 1998 when it
adopted resolution 1161 (1998) reactivating the Commission, a number of speakers
announced the intention of their Governments to contribute to the Trust Fund.
They were Belgium ($100,000), Germany ($50,000), Japan ($40,000), the United
Kingdom (100,000 pounds sterling) and the United States of America ($100,000).
The Government of Belgium had also made a contribution of $100,000 to the Trust
Fund in 1995, shortly after the adoption of resolution 1013 (1995) establishing
the Commission. In meetings with the Chairman during the week of 4-8 May 1998,
when the Commission visited New York for briefings and consultations, the
representatives of France and Sweden also pledged to make contributions of
$40,000 and $50,000 respectively. The Government of the Netherlands has also
subsequently pledged $70,000 for the Commission’s work.
61. Taken together, those contributions were estimated to be sufficient to
finance the six-month period of operations envisaged in resolution 1161 (1998).
However, at the time of the drafting of the present report, contributions had
not yet been received from all the countries that had declared their intent to
make them. Since spending authority can be issued only upon receipt of cash
contributions, the great discrepancy and time lag between pledges and
disbursements has led to serious disruptions and numerous administrative
obstacles to the work of the Commission. The Commission, nevertheless, has
persevered in its work as best it could under the difficult circumstances. The
Commission strongly feels that if it is to successfully accomplish its mandate
in the short time available, then the various financial and administrative
difficulties encountered so far need to be resolved on an urgent basis. The
Commission expresses its appreciation to the Governments that have pledged, and
paid, contributions to the Trust Fund to support its work.

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 14

VI.

OBSERVATIONS AND NEXT STEPS

62. The Commission will reserve its conclusions and recommendations for its
final report, due in November 1998. At this stage, however, it is already clear
that the situation that prompted the Security Council to establish the
Commission in 1995 has become much more complex and difficult to interpret.
Many questions remain to be answered about the impact of the physical dispersion
of the former Rwandan government forces since 1996 on their long-term
intentions, military planning and operational effectiveness, as well as about
the implications of their alliances with other local rebel groups in their
present countries of refuge and their capacity to achieve their objectives
through the purchase of arms to be used in Rwanda in violation of the United
Nations arms embargo.
63. The general picture that the Commission has been able to build up since its
return to the region indicates that significant numbers of ex-FAR and militia
personnel remain deeply hostile to the Government of Rwanda and are still
committed to its violent overthrow. To that end, many of those who remain in
both North and South Kivu provinces and those who have returned to north-western
Rwanda since November 1996 are engaged in an insurgency against the Government
characterized by repeated attacks against Rwandan civilians and government
forces.
64. Several indications suggest that armed groups, especially Burundian
insurgents and elements of the ex-FAZ and ADF in Uganda, are aiding and abetting
the ex-FAR and closely collaborating with them, including in violations of the
United Nations embargo. The Commission intends to investigate further credible
accounts it has received concerning the relationship between elements of the
ex-FAR and UNITA.
65. On the basis of the information it has gathered so far about the new
profile of the ex-FAR, the Commission therefore intends, time and funding
permitting, to pursue its investigations into reports of the sale or supply of
arms to the former Rwandan government forces and militia and the parties aiding
and abetting them. As essential background for those investigations, the
Commission will continue to compile data showing the current geographical
distribution of the former Rwandan government forces, their political activities
and their military plans and intentions. The Commission will continue its
efforts to indicate their approximate strength in each country, the alliances
they have formed with local groups and their military and political activities,
including rearmament, fund-raising and military training and intentions.
66. One of the most important countries on the Commission’s future itinerary is
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, whose territory, as Zaire, provided the
backdrop for some of the most dramatic events involving the ex-FAR and
Interahamwe. Repeated efforts by the Commission in 1995-1996 to obtain from the
Government of Zaire information about breaches of the embargo on the ex-FAR
proved fruitless, as described in the Commission’s previous reports. In its
second report (S/1996/195), the Commission concluded that the Zairian Government
had aided and abetted what the Commission considered to be a highly probable
violation that the Commission exposed in some detail.

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 15

67. Indirect and informal contacts conducted in New York and Kinshasa in May
and June indicated that the Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
would welcome a visit from the Commission and would be prepared to cooperate
fully with it. The Commission requested from the Government an invitation to
visit the country in a letter dated 11 June 1998 and had looked forward to
receiving its cooperation during the course of its investigations. However, the
Commission will now review its approach in the light of current developments in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
68. The Commission also has provisional plans to visit Angola, Burundi, the
Central African Republic, the Republic of the Congo, Mozambique, the United
Republic of Tanzania and the Organization of African Unity, as well as any other
countries in which ex-FAR activity can be detected to gather information from
Governments, United Nations agencies, non-governmental organizations and other
sources, as well as following up leads identified in the Commission’s earlier
investigations.
69. The complications in the situation arising from the links between the
ex-FAR and other armed groups in the region should be viewed in the light of
resolution 1011 (1995) of 16 August 1995, by which the Security Council
prohibited the sale and supply of arms and related matériel to Rwanda or to
persons in the States neighbouring Rwanda if such sale or supply was for the
purpose of the use of such arms or matériel within Rwanda. During the previous
three months the Commission has heard compelling reports of ex-FAR involvement
in procuring weapons reportedly for use in Angola, Congo, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Uganda and possibly elsewhere.
70. Moreover, the current upheavals throughout the central region of Africa are
likely to prompt the ex-FAR and Interahamwe to forge new operational alliances
with a variety of parties, thus opening up additional avenues for the provision
of arms and related matériel to the ex-FAR and Interahamwe and further
complicating the investigation of sources. The Commission will address those
considerations when it formulates its recommendations to the Security Council in
its final report, to be submitted to the Council in November.

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 16

Appendix I
List of countries visited and representatives of Governments
and organizations interviewed

The International Commission of Inquiry wishes to express its deep
appreciation to the government officials, diplomats, non-governmental
organizations, individual relief workers, journalists and others who assisted it
in its inquiries. The following list is incomplete in deference to the wishes
of those who requested anonymity.

In Kenya
Government officials
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Representatives of States
Belgium
Burundi
Canada
China
Democratic Republic of the Congo
France
Mozambique
Rwanda
South Africa
Uganda
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
United Republic of Tanzania
United States of America
Zambia
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
World Food Programme
Representative of the Secretary-General and Regional Humanitarian Adviser for
for the Great Lakes Region
Operation Lifeline Sudan
Non-governmental organizations
Human Rights Watch
International Resource Group
Oxfam

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 17

In Rwanda
Government officials
Minister of State for Defence
Secretary-General of the Ministry of Defence
Diplomatic Adviser to the Vice-President
Rwandan Patriotic Party Chief of External Intelligence
Rwandan Patriotic Party Assistant Chief of External Intelligence
Representatives of States
Belgium
Germany
Netherlands
United States of America
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
United Nations International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
World Food Programme
Non-governmental organizations
Human Rights Watch
Oxfam

In South Africa
Government officials
Minister of Justice
Minister for Water Resources and Forestry/Chairman of the National Conventional
Arms Control Committee
Director-General of the Department of Foreign Affairs
Deputy Director-General of the Department of Foreign Affairs (Multilateral
Affairs)
Director of the Defence Secretariat’s Directorate of Conventional Arms Control
Executive Director of the National Interdepartmental Structure for Border
Control
Deputy Director General of the Secret Service
Coordinator of Intelligence of the National Intelligence Coordinating Committee

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 18

Representatives of States
Belgium
France
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
United Nations Development Programme
Non-governmental organizations
Centre for Conflict Resolution (Cape Town)
Institute for Security Studies

In Uganda
Government officials
Minister of Internal Affairs
Minister of State for Foreign Affairs (Regional Cooperation)
Minister of State for Political Affairs
Minister of State for Security
Chairperson of Uganda’s Human Rights Commission
Representatives of States
France
Italy
United Kingdom
United States
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
United Nations Development Programme
United Nations Children’s Fund
Non-governmental organizations
Centre for Conflict Resolution
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
Oxfam
World Vision

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 19

In the United Kingdom
Government officials
Member of Parliament
Non-governmental organizations
Amnesty International
International Alert
Saferworld

In Zambia
Government officials
Minister of Foreign Affairs
Minister of Defence
Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs
Deputy Minister of Defence
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Defence
Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Deputy Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
Deputy Commissioner of Police
Deputy Chief Immigrations Officer
Representatives of States
Egypt
United Nations agencies and international humanitarian organizations
United Nations Development Programme
World Food Programme
Non-governmental organizations
Zambian Red Cross Society

/...

S/1998/777
English
Page 20

Appendix II
Convention de Coopération entre le Conseil national pour
la défense de la démocratie et le Haut Commandement des
Forces armées rwandaises

/...
