50

General AHembly-Twenty-ninth SeHion

3253 (XXIX). Consideration of the economic and
&ocial &ituation in the Sudano-Sahelian region &tricken by drought and mea&ure& to
be taken for the benefit of that region

3281 (XXIX) Charter of Economic Right& and
Duties of States

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17 October 1973 and 3153 (XXVIII) of 14 December
I 973, and Economic and Social Council resolutions
1834 (LVI) of 1'4 May 1974 and 1874 (LVII) and
1876 (LVII) of 16 July 1974 concerning the situation in the Sudano-Sahelian region and the adjacent
areas and the assistance to be given to the droughtstricken countries,
Further recalling Economic and Social Council resolution 1878 (LVII) of 16 July 1974 concerning the
situation in the Sudano-Sahelian region and the assistance to be given to the drought-stricken areas of
Ethiopia,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the economic and social situation in the
Sudano-Sahelian region stricken by drought and measures to be taken for the benefit of that region, 33
Noting with satisfaction the part played by the Office
.for Sahelian Relief Operations of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and by the
United Nations Special Sahelian Office,
l. Expresses its profound gratitude to the Governments, United Nations bodies, private organizations
and individuals that have given assistance to the
Sudano-Sahelian population;
2. Welcomes the establishment of a United Nations
Sahelian Office in Ouagadougou, whose main functions
are described in the report of the Secretary-General;
3. Invites the Secretary-General to hasten the
preparatory work on the establishment of a research
institute for the arid Sahelian zone;
4. Recommends the establishment of a United
Nations information centre at Ouagadougou, the headquarters of the Permanent Inter-State Committee on
Drought Control in the Sahel, in view of the need to
obtain directly on-the-spot information designed to
maintain and intensify to the widest possible extent
public ~wareness of the tragedy which has befallen the
Sudano-Sahelian countries and to sustain the momentum of active and involved interest in the successful
implementation. of the programme as outlined by the
Permanent Inter-State Committee;
5. Urges all Member States and United Nations
bodies to intensify their efforts to attain the objectives
stated in the relief and recovery programmes formulated by the countries concerned;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to pursue with
determination and in co-operation with the appropriate financial institutions and organizations the action
necessary to meet, in an effective and continuing manner, the requests for medium-term and long-term
assistance formulated by the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel and by
the Governments concerned;
7. Further requests the Secretary-General to continue to report periodically on the implementation of
the present resolution and to report to the General
Assembly through the Economic and Social Council.
2306th plenary meeting
4 December 1974

Recalling that the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, in its resolution 45 (Ill) of
18 May J 972,:14 stressed the urgency to establish generally accepted norms to govern international economic
relations systematically and recognized that it is not
feasible to establish a just order and a stable world
as long as a charter to protect the rights of all countries, and in particular the developing States, is not
formulated,

aa A/9733.

The General Assembly,

Recalling further that in the same resolution it was
decided to establish a Working Group of governmental
representatives to draw up a draft Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, which the General
Assembly, in its resolution 3037 (XXVII) of 19 December 1972, decided should be composed of forty
Member States,
Noting that, in its resolution 3082 (XXVIII) of
6 December 1973, it reaffirmed its conviction of the
urgent need to establish or improve norms of universal
application for the development of international economic relations on a just and equitable basis and urged
the Working Group on the Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States to complete, as the first step in
the codification and development of the matter, the
elaboration of a final draft Charter of Economic Rights
and Duties of States, to be conside_red and approved by
the General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session,
Bearing in mind the spirit and terms of its resolutions
3201 (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of 1 May 1974, containing, respectively, the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, which underlined the
vital importance of the Charter to be adopted by the
General Assembly at its twenty-ninth session and
stressed the fact that thf' Charter shall constitute an
effective instrument towards the establishment of a new
system of international economic relations based on
equity, sovereign equality and interdependence of the
interests of developed and developing countries,
Having examined the report of the Working Group
on the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States on its fourth session, 35 transmitted to the General Assembly by the Trade and Development Board
at its fourteenth session,
Expressing its appreciation to the Working Group
on the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States which, as a result of the task performed in its
four sessions held between February 1973 and June
1974, assembled the elements required for the completion and adoption of the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States at the twenty-ninth session
of the General Assembly, as previously recommended,
Adopts
Charter:

and solemnly

proclaims

the

following

34 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.
35 TD/B/AC.12/4 and Corr.I.

Re1olu1ions adopted on lhe reports of the Second Commillee

CHARTER OF ECONOMIC RIGHTS
AND DUTIES OF STA TES
PREAMBLE

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the fundamental purposes of the
United Nations, in particular the maintenance of
international peace and security, the development
of friendly relations among nations and the achievement of international co-operation in solving international problems in the economic and social fields,
Affirming the need for strengthening international
co-operation in these fields,
Reaffirming further the need for strengthening international co-operation for development,
Declaring that it is a fundamental purpose of the
present Charter to promote the establishment of the
new international economic order, based on equity,
sovereign equality, interdependence, common interest and co-operation among all States, irrespective
of their economic and social systems,
Desirous of contributing to the creation of conditions for:
(a) The attainment of wider prosperity among
all countries and of higher standards of living for
all peoples,
( b) The promotion by the entire international
community of the economic and social progress of
all countries, especially developing countries,
(c) The encouragement of co-operation, on the
basis of mutual advantage and equitable benefits for
all peace-loving States which are willing to carry
out the provisions of the present Charter, in the
economic, trade, scientific and technical fields, regardless of political, economic or social systems,
(d) The overcoming of main obstacles in the
way of the economic development of the developing
countries,
( e) The acceleration of the economic growth of
developing countries with a view to bridging the
economic gap between developing and developed
countries,
(/) The protection, preservation and enhancement
of the environment,
Mindful of the need to estaolish and maintain a
just and equitable economic and social order
through:
(a) The achievement of more rational and equitable international economic relations and the encouragement of structural changes in the world
economy,
(b) The creation of conditions which permit the
further expansion of trade and intensification of
economic co-operation among all nations,
( c) The strengthening of the economic independence of developing countries,
(d) The establishment and promotion of international economic relations, taking into account the
agreed differences in development of the developing
countries and their specific needs,
Determined to promote collective economic security for development, in particular of the developing
countries, with strict respect for the sovereign equality of each State and through the co-operation of
the entire international community,

51

Considering that genuine co-operation among
States, based on joint consideration of and concerted
action regarding international economic problems,
is essential for fulfilling the international community's
common desire to achieve a just and rational development of all parts of the world,
Stressing the importance of ensuring appropriate conditions for the conduct of normal economic
relations among all States, irrespective of differences
in social and economic systems, and for the full respect of the rights of all peoples, as well as strengthening instruments of international economic co-operation as a means for the consolidation of peace
for the benefit of all,
Convinced of the need to develop a system of
international economic relations on the basis of sovereign equality, mutual and equitable benefit and
the close interrelationship of the interests of all
States,
Reiterating that the responsibility for the development of every country rests primarily upon itself
but that concomitant and effective international cooperation is an essential factor for the full achievement of its own development goals,
Firmly convinced of the urgent need to evolve a
substantially improved system of international economic relations,
Solemnly adopts the present Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States.
CHAPTER I
FuNDAMENTALS OF INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC RELATIONS

Economic as well as political and other relations
among States shall be governed, inter alia, by the
following principles:
(a) Sovereignty, territorial integrity and political
independence of States;
( b) Sovereign equality of all States;
(c) Non-aggression;
(d) Non-intervention;
(e) Mutual and equitable benefit;
(f) Peaceful coexistence;
(g) Equal rights and self-determination of
peoples;
(h) Peaceful settlement of disputes;
(i) Remedying of injustices which have been
brought about by force and which deprive a nation
of the natural means necessary for its normal development;
(j) Fulfilment in good faith of international obligations;
( k) Respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms;
(l) No attempt to seek hegemony and spheres of
influence;
(m) Promotion of international social justice;
(n) International co-operation for development;
( o) Free access to and from the sea by landlocked countries within the framework of the above
principles.

sz

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

CHAPTER II
EcONOMIC RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF STATES

Article I

Every State has the sovereign and inalienable right
to choose its economic system as well as its political,
social and cultural systems in accordance with the
will of its people, without outside interference, coercion or threat in any form whatsoever.
Article 2

1. Every State has and shall freely exercise full
permanent sovereignty, including possession, use
and disposal, over all its wealth, natural resources
and economic activities.
2. Each State has the right:
(a) To regulate and exercise authority over foreign investment within its national jurisdiction in
accordance with its laws and regulations and in conformity with its national objectives and priorities.
No State shall be compelled to grant preferential
treatment to foreign investment;
(b) To regulate and supervise the activities of
transnational corporations within its national jurisdiction and take measures to ensure that such activities comply with its laws, rules and regulations and
conform with its economic and social policies. Transnational corporations c;hall not intervene in the internal affairs of a host State. Every State should,
with full regard for its sovereign rights, co-operate
with other States in the exercise of the right set forth
in this subparagraph;
(c) To nationalize, expropriate or transfer ownership of foreign property, in which case appropriate compensation should be paid by the State adopting such measures, taking into account its relevant
laws and regulations and all circumstances that the
State considers pertinent. In any case where the
question of compensation gives rise to a controversy,
it shall be settled under the domestic law of the
nationalizing State and by its tribunals, unless it is
freely and mutually agreed by all States concerned
that other peaceful means be sought on the basis of
the sovereign equality of States and in accordance
with the principle of free choice of means.
Article 3
In the exploitation of natural resources shared
by two or more countries, each State must co-operate on the basis of a system of information and
prior consultations in order to achieve optimum use
of such resources without causing damage to the
legitimate interest of others.
Article 4

Every State has the right to engage in international trade and other forms of economic co-operation irrespective of any differences in political, economic and social systems. No State shall be subjected
to discrimination of any kind based solely on such
differences. In the pursuit of international trade and
other forms of economic co-operation, every State
is free to choose the forms of organization of its
foreign economic relations and to enter into bilateral

and multilateral arrangements consistent with its international obligations and with the needs of international economic co-operation.
Article 5

All States have the right to associate in organizations of primary commodity producers in order to
develop their national economies, to achieve stable
financing for their development and, in pursuance
of their aims, to assist in the promotion of sustained
growth of the world economy, in particular accelerating the development of developing countries.
Correspondingly, all States have the duty to respect
that right by refraining from applying economic and
political measures that would limit it.
Article 6
It is the duty of States to contribute to the development of international trade of goods, particularly
by means of arrangements and by the conclusion of
long-term multilateral commodity agreements, where
appropriate, and taking into account the interests of
producers and consumers. All States share the responsibility to promote the regular flow and access
of all commercial goods traded at stable, remunerative and equitable prices, thus contributing to the
equitable development of the world economy, taking
into account, in particular, the interests of developing countries.

Article 7

Every State has the primary responsibility to promote the economic, social and cultural development
of its people. To this end, each State has the right
and the responsibility to choose its means and goals
of development, fully to mobilize and use its resources, to implement progressive economic and
social reforms and to ensure the full participation
of its people in the process and benefits of development. All States have the duty, individually and collectively, to co-operate in eliminating obstacles that
hinder such mobilization and use.
Article 8

States should co-operate in facilitating more rational and equitable international economic relations
and in encouraging structural changes in the context
of a balanced world economy in harmony with the
needs and interests of all countries, especially developing countries, and should take appropriate measures to this end.
Article 9

All States have the responsibility to co-operate in
the economic, social, cultural, scientific and technological fields for the promotion of economic and
social progres!tthroughout the world, especially that
of the developing countries.
Article JO

All States are juridically equal and, as equal members of the international community, have the right
to participate fully and effectively in the international decision-making process in the solution of
world economic, financial and monetary problems,
inter alia, through the appropriate international or-

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

ganizations in accordance with their existing and
evolving rules, and to share equitably in the benefits
resulting therefrom.
Article 11
All States should co-operate to strengthen and
continuously improve the efficiency of international
organizations in implementing measures to stimulate
the general economic progress of all countries, particularly of developing countries, and therefore
should co-operate to adapt them, when appropriate,
to the changing needs of international economic cooperation.
Article 12
I. States have the right, in agreement with the
parties concerned, to participate in subregional, regional and interregional co-operation in the pursuit
of their economic and social development. All States
engaged in such co-operation have the duty to ensure
that the policies of those groupings to which they
belong correspond to the provisions of the present
Charter and are outward-looking, consistent with
their international obligations and with the needs
of international economic co-operation, and have
full regard for the legitimate interests of third countries, especially developing countries.
2. In the case of groupings to which the States
concerned have transferred or may transfer certain
competences as regards matters that come within
the scope of the present Charter, its provisions shall
also apply to those groupings in regard to such matters, consistent with the responsibilities of such States
as members of such groupings. Those States shall
co-operate in the observance by the groupings of
the provisions of this Charter.

Article 13
1. Every State has the right to benefit from the
advances and developments in science and technology for the acceleration of its economic and
social development.
2. All States should promote international scientific and technological co-operation and the transfer
of technology, with proper regard for all legitimate
interests including, inter alia, the rights and duties
of holders, suppliers and recipients of technology. In
particular, all States should facilitate the access of
developing countries to the achievements of modern
science and technology, the transfer of technology
and the creation of indigenous technology for the
benefit of the developing countries in forms and in
accordance with procedures which are suited to their
economies and their needs.
3. Accordingly, developed countries should cooperate with the developing countries in the establishment, strengthening and development of their
scientific and technological infrastructures and their
scientific research and technological activities so as
to help to expand and transform the economies of
developing countries.
4. All States should co-operate in research with
a view to evolving further internationally accepted
guidelines or regulations for the transfer of technology, taking fully into account the interests of
developing countries.

Article 14
Every State has the duty to co-operate in promoting a steady and increasing expansion and liberalization of world trade and an improvement in the welfare and living standards of all peoples, in particular
those of developing countries. Accordingly, all States
should co-operate, inter alia, towards the progressive
dismantling of obstacles to trade and the improvement of the international framework for the conduct
of world trade and, to these ends, co..ordinated efforts
shall be made to solve in an equitable way the trade
problems of all countries, taking into account the
specific trad~ problems of the developing countries.
In this connexion, States shall take measures aimed
at securing additional benefits for the international
trade of developing countries so as to achieve a
substantial increase in their foreign exchange earnings, the diversification of their exports, the acceleration of the rate of growth of their trade, taking
into account their development needs, an improvement in the possibilities for these countries to participate in the expansion of world trade and a balance more favourable to developing countries in the
sharing of the advantages resulting from this expansion, through, in the largest possible measure, a
substantial improvement in the conditions of access
for the products of interest to the developing countries lind, wherever appropriate, measures designed
to attain stable, equitable and remunerative prices
for primary products.
Article 15
All States have the duty to promote the achievement of general and complete disarmament under
effective international control and to utilize the resources. released by effective disarmament measures
for the economic and social development of countries, allocating a substantial portion of such resources as additional means for the development
needs of developing countries.
Article 16

I . It is the right and duty of all States, individually and collectively, to eliminate colonialism,
apartheid, racial discrimination, neo-colonialism and
all forms of foreign aggression, occupation and domination, and the economic and social consequences
thereof, as a prerequisite for development. States
which practise such coercive policies are economically respon'iible to the countries, territories and peoples affected for the restitution and full compensation for the exploitation and depletion of, and
damages to, the natural and all other resources of
those countries, territories and peoples. It is the duty
of all States to extend assistance to them.
2. No State has the right to promote or encourage investments that may constitute an obstacle to
the liberation of a territory occupied by force.
Article 17
International co-operation for development is the
shared goal and common duty of all States. Every
State should co-operate with the efforts of developing countries to accelerate their economic and social
development by providing favourable external conditions and by extending active assistance to them,

General Assembly-Twenty-ninth Session

54

consistent with their development needs and objectives, with strict respect for the sovereign equality of
States and free of any conditions derogating from
their sovereignty.

Article 18
Developed countries should extend, improve and
enlarge the system of generalized non-reciprocal and
non-discriminatory tariff preferences to the developing countries consistent with the relevant agreed
conclusions and relevant decisions as adopted on
this subject, in the framework of the competent international organizations. Developed countries should
also give serious consideration to the adoption of
other differential measures, in areas where this is
feasible and appropriate and in ways which will
provide special and more favourable treatment, in
order to meet the trade and development needs of
the developing countries. In the conduct of international economic relations the developed countries
should endeavour to avoid measures having a negative effect on the development of the national economies of the developing countries, as promoted by
generalized tariff preferences and other generally
agreed differential measures in their favour.

Article 19
With a view to accelerating the economic growth
of developing countries and bridging the economic
gap between developed and developing countries, developed countries should grant generalized preferential, non-reciprocal and non-discriminatory treatment
to developing countries in those fields of international economic co-operation where it may be
feasible.

Article 20
Developing countries should, in their efforts to increase their over-all trade, give due attention to the
possibility of expanding their trade with socialist
countries, by granting to these countries conditions
for trade not inferior to those granted normally
to the developed market economy countries.

Article 21
Developing· countries should. endeavour to promote the expansion of their mutual trade and to this
end may, in accordance with the existing and evolving provisions and procedures of international agreements where applicable, grant trade preferences to
other developing countries without being obliged to
extend such preferences to developed countries, provided these arrangem.ents do not constitute an impediment to general trade liberalization and expansion.

Article 22
1. All States should respond to the generally recognized or mutually agreed development needs and
objectives of developing countries by promoting increased net flows of real resources to the developing
countries from all sources, taking into account any
obligations and commitments undertaken by the
States concerned, in order to reinforce the efforts
of developing countries to accelerate their economic
and social development.

2. In this context, consistent with the aims and
objectives mentioned above and taking into account
any obligations and commitments undertaken in this
regard, it should be their endeavour to increase the
net amount of financial flows from official sources
to developing countries and to improve the terms
and conditions thereof.
3. The flow of development assistance resources
should include economic and technical assistance.

Article 23
To enhance the effective mobilization of their own
resources, the developing countries should strengthen
their economic co-operation and expand their mutual
trade so as to accelerate their economic and social
development. All countries, especially developed
countries, individually as well as through the competent international organizations of which they are
members, should provide appropriate and effective
support and co-operation.

Article 24
All States have the duty to conduct their mutual
economic relations in a manner which takes into
account the interests of other countries. In particular,
all States should avoid prejudicing the interests of
developing countries.

Article 25
In furtherance of world economic development,
the international community, especially its developed
members, shall pay special attention to the particular needs and problems of the least developed among
the developing countries, of land-locked developing
countries and also island developing countries, with
a view to helping them to overcome their particular
difficulties and thus contribute to their economic and
se,cial development.

Article 26
All States have the duty to coexist in tolerance
and live together in peace, irrespective of differences
in political, economic, social and cultural systems,
and to facilitate trade between States having different economic and social systems. International
trade should be conducted without prejudice to generalized non-discriminatory and non-reciprocal preferences in favour of developing countries, on the
basis of mutual advantage, equitable benefits and
the exchange of most-favoured-nation treatment.

Article 27
1. Every State has the right to enjoy fully the
benefits of world invisible trade and to engage in the
expansion of such trade.
2. World invisible trade, based on efficiency and
mutual and equitable benefit, furthering the expansion of the world economy, is the common goal of
all States. The role of developing countries in world
invisible trade should be enhanced and strengthened
consistent with the above objectives, particular attention being paid to the special needs of developing countries.

Re110lution1 adopted on the reports of the Seeond Committee

3. All States should co-operate with developing
countries in their endeavours to increase their capacity to earn foreign exchange from invisible transactions, in accordance with the potential and needs
of each developing country and consistent with the
objectives mentioned above.

Article 32
No State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other type of measures to
coerce another State in order to obtain from it the
subordination of the exercise of its sovereign rights.

Article 33

Article 28
All States have the duty to co-operate in achieving adjustments in the prices of exports of developing countries in relation to prices of their imports
so as· to promote just and equitable terms of trade
for them, in a manner which is remunerative for producers and equitable for producers and consumers.

1. Nothing in the present Charter shall be construed as impairing or derogating from the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations or actions
taken in pursuance thereof.
2. In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of the present Charter are interrelated
and each provision should be construed in the context of the other provisions.

CHAPTER III

Article 34

COMMON RESPONSIBILITIES TOWARDS THE
INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY

Article 29
The sea-bed ar.d ocean floor and the subsoil
thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction,
as well as the resources of the area, are the common
heritage of mankind. On the basis of the principles
adopted by the General Assembly in resolution 2749
(XXV) of 17 December 1970, all States shall ensure that the exploration of the area and exploitation of its resources are carried out exclusively for
peaceful purposes and that the benefits derived therefrom are shared equitably by all States, taking into
account the particular interests and needs of developing countries; an international regime applying to
the area and its resources and includin·g appropriate
international machinery to give effect to its provisions shall be established by an international treaty
of a universal character, generally agreed upon.
Article 30
The protection, preservation and enhancement of
the environment for the present and future generations is the responsibility of all States. All States shall
endeavour to establish their own environmental and
developmental policies in conformity with such responsibility. The environmental policies of all States
should enhance and not adversely affect the present
and future development potential of developing countries. All States have the responsibility to ensure that
activities within their jurisdiction or control do not
cause Jamage to the environment of other States or
of areas beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.
All States should co-operate in evolving international
norms and regulations in the field of the environment.
CHAPTER IV
FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 31
All States have the duty to contribute to the balanced expansion of the world economy, taking duly
into account the close interrelationship between the
well-being of the developed countries and the growth
and development of the developing countries, and
the fact that the prosperity of the international community as a whole depends upon the prosperity of
its constituent parts.

SS

An item on the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States shall be included in the agenda of
the General Assembly at its thirtieth session, and
thereafter on the agenda of every fifth session. In
this way a systematic and comprehensive consideration of the implementation of the Charter, covering
both progress achieved and any improvements and
additions which might become necessary, would be
carried out and appropriate measures recommended.
Such consideration should take into account the evolution of all the economic, social, legal and other
factors related to the principles upon which the present Charter is based and on its purpose.

2315 th plenary meeting
12 December 1974
3305 (XXIX). Revision of the lists of Statee
eligible for membership in the Industrial
Development Board

The General Assembly,
Recalling section II, paragraph 4, of its resolution
2152 (XXI) of 17 November 1966 on the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization,
Decides to include Guinea-Bissau in list A and Grenada in list C of the annex to resolution 2152 (XXl).11
2319th plenary meeting
14 December 1974

•

•

•

As a result of the above resolution, the lists of States eligible
for membership in the Industrial Development Board will be
as follows:
A.

LIST OF STATES INDICATED IN SECTION JI, PARAGRAPH 4 (a),
OF GENERAL ASSEMBLY RESOLUTION 2152 (XXI)

Afghanistan
Algeria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Bhutan

Botswana
Burma
Burundi
Central African Republic
Chad

se For the other changes in the lists since the adoption of
resolution 2152 (XXI), see reso4utions 2385 (XXIII) of
19 November 1968, 2510 (XXIV) of 21 November 1969,
2637 (XXV) of 19 November 1970, 2824 (XXVI) of 16 December 1971, 2954 (XXVII) of 11 December 1972 and 3088
(XXVIII) of 6 December 1973.
