General Auembly-Fourteenth Senion

10

Council, and commends the Governing Council on the
first year of its work ;
2. Commends the Managing Director of the Special
Fund on the successful beginning of the operations of
the Fund;
3. Notes the increase in the total of contributions
announced on 8 October 1959 at the United Nations
Pledging Conference on the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund;
4. Expresses iJs confidence that the Managing Director, from the outset of the operations of the Special
Fund, in conformity with all the provisions related to
voluntary contributions and to the use of resources
embodied in General Assembly resolution 1240 (XIII),
will endeavour to make the fullest possible use of all
resources available to the Fund;
5. Calls upon States Members of the United Nations
or members of any of the specialized agencies or of the
International Atomic Energy Agency so to contribute
to the Special Fund that it rapidly attains resources
sufficient to enable it to undertake and execute on a
sustained basis the tasks laid upon it in the founding
resolutions 1219 (XII) and 1240 (XIII).
841st plenary meeting,
20 November 1959 .

1383 (XIV). Expanded Programme of Technical
Assistance
A

The General Assembly,
Taking note of chapter Ill, section XII, of the report
of the Economic and Social Council,2
Recalling General Assembly resolution 1255 A
(XIII) of 14 November 1958 and Economic and Social
Council resolutions 222 (IX) of 14 and IS August
1949, 542 B II (XVIII) of 29 July 1954, 734
(XXVIII), 735 (XXVIII), 736 (XXVIII) and
737 (XXVIII) of 30 July 1959,
Bearing in mind that the year 1959 marks the tenth
anniversary of the establishment of the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance,
Believing that the Expanded Programme has an important and urgent role to play in the United Nations
efforts for the economic and social development of
under-developed countries,
Noting with satisfaction the results achieved by the
Expanded Programme during its first ten years,
Noting that, in order to ensure more ample and effective results in the future, it would be desirable to obtain
larger contributions from the participating countries,
Believing that industrialization and agricultural development are among the most important aims of the
under-developed countries, and that countries in this
process of development need increasing technical
assistance,
Noting with appreciation that, at the United Nations
Pledging Conference on the Expanded Programme of
Technical Assistance and the Special Fund on 8 Octoher
1959, a number of countries expressed their intention
of increasing their contributions for 1960.
Regretting however that the resource~ at present
envisaged for 1960 are not sufficient even to maintain
the present level of operations,
2 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fourteenth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/4143).

Commends the Executive Chairman and the members of the Technical Assistance Board for the effective
manner in which the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance is being executed ;
2. Takes note of the appraisal made by the Economic
and Social Council and its Technical Assistance Committee, together with the Technical Assistance Board
and the participating organizations, of administrative
arrangements which have the purpose of achieving increased efficiency in the operations of the Expanded
Programme;
3. Notes also the decision taken by the Economic
and Social Council in its resolution 735 (XXVIII) to
provide greater flexibility and longer range planning
in country programming procedures;
4. Affirms the desirability of continuing to endeavour
to make the fullest possible use of all available contributions consistent with the existing principles and
procedures of the Expanded Programme;
5. Expresses the hope that Governments will, in
accordance with their financial possibilities, continue
to support the Expanded Programme and so contribute
to the Programme that increasing resources will be
available:
(a) For undertaking and executing on a sustained
basis the tasks laid upon the Programme;
( b) For devoting urgent attention to the compelling
rn:ecb of newly independent countries and countries in
a similar economic and social condition without prejudice to the possibility of further assistance to other
under-developed countries.
841 st plenary meeting,
20 N 01•embcr 7059.

B
The General Assembly,
Noting that the technical assistance programmes of
the United Nations after ten years of operation have
become, thanks to the constantly increasing number of
countries actively participating in their execution, programmes of international technical co-operation,
1.. Canswers that, in the present circumstances, the
term "technical co-operation" would more accurately
describe the nature of the assistance provided by the
United Nations and the specialized agencies under the
technical assistance programmes;
2. Expresses the wish that the term "technical
assistance" may be replaced by the term "technical
co-operation" to designate both the United Nations
regular programme of technical assistance and the Expanded Programme of Technical Assistance, and requests the Economic and Social Council to consider the
possibility of such a change and to report thereon to
the C;eneral Assemhly at its fifteenth session.
841st pletmry meeting,
20 November 1959.
1384 (XIV). United Nations regular programme
of technical assistance
Thr (;cneral Assembly,
llaving considered chapter Ilf, section X, of the
report of the Economic and Social Council, 2
Rcralling its resol11tio11 200 (III) of 4 December
]()48.

Resolutiom adopted on the reports of the Second Committee
11
- - - - - - - - - - - - ----·----------------------------

1. Notes with appreciation the activities of the
Secretary-General under the United Nations regular
programme of technical assistance ;
2. Notes also the measures taken by the SecretaryGeneral and announced on his behalf by the Commissioner for Technical Assistance with a view to facilitating the consideration of the regular programme by
the Economic and Social Council and its Technical
Assistance Committee.
841st plenarv meeting,
20 Nm,ember 1959.
1385 (XIV). United Nations usistance in public
administration
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 1256 (XIII) of 14 November
1958,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 739 (XXVIII) of 30 July 1959,
Recognizing that the time that has elapsed since the
establishment of the experiment for. the provision of
operational, executive and administrative personnel to
Governments requesti.ng assistance in this form has been
too brief, and that, for this reason, the range of the
experiment has been too narrow to justify drawing final
conclusions,
Recalling that several Member States have centres
and institutes for training in public administration, some
of which have been created or expanded with the technical assistance of the United Nations,
I. Resolves that the experimental programme started
in 1959 should be continued in 1960 on the basis of
General Assembly resolution 1256 (XIII), and that
the Secretary-General should be allowed adequate scope
in the carrying out of the experiment within the limits
of the resources to be made available for 1960;
2. Recommends that, in suggesting to recipient Governments the appointments of qualified officials under
the programme, the Secretary-General should make use
of all available resources and, as much as possible, of the
experts who have been trained in the above-mentioned
centres and institutes for public administration;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to present to the
Economic and Social Council at its thirtieth session and
to the General Assembly at its fifteenth session a report
analysing in detail the progress and results of the experiment, including whatever comments the recipient
Governments ·may wish to make, and in particular the
degree of success achieved in the training of nationals
to assume as early as possible the responsibilities temporarily assigned to the internationally recruikd staff,
together with recommendations based on this report.
841 st plenary mectinr,,
20 N 01 1cmber 1959.
1420 (XIV). International Development
Association
The General, Assembly,
Mindful of the determination of the United Nations,
as expressed in its Charter, to promote social progress
and better standards of life in larger freedom and, for
these ends, to employ international machinery for the
promotion of the economic and social advancement of
all peoples,

Recalling the General Assembly's interest in new
forms of international financing for the purpose of
accelerating the economic development of underdeveloped countries,
Welcoming the decision in principle taken at the
recent annual meeting of the Board of Governors of
the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to establish an International Development Association as an affiliate of the Bank,
1 Expresses the belief that the new affiliate of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development will provide under-developed countries with types
of financing which have not hitherto been available from
multilateral agencies and which, while stimulating economic development, would tend to ease their balance
of payments position ;
2. Expresses the hope that adequate provisions will
be made and appropriate procedures adopted for a close
working relationship and effective co-ordination and
consultation between the International Development
Association and the United Nations;
3. Calls attention to the desirability of appropriate
relations between the International Development Association and the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, as suitable;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to trammit to the
President of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development, for communication to the Executive
Directors of the Bank, the records of the debates of the
General Assembly on this subject at its present session.
846th plenary meeting,
5 December !959.
1421 (XIV). Strengthening and development of
the world market and improvement of the
trade conditions of the economically less
developed countries
The General, Assembly,
Guided by the principles set forth in the Charter of
the United K ations and wishing to extend international
economic co-operation, to bring about full employment
and to foster economic and social progress and development,
Considerin_<7 that world trade is a natural and reliable
factor in the development of peaceful relations between
Stall'.,,
l >csiring to promote the development and extension
of trade, to ease the exchange of goods and to create
the ,tabilitv and welfare essential for peaceful anti
friendly relations between nations,

I
1. Recommends that all '.\kmber States should, individually and jointlv, continue their efforts to prnmotl'
and extrnd mutually beneficial trade between all States,
regardles.s of their economic systems:
2. Reaffirms its belief that international organizations
concerned with the regulation and development of
international trade should rontinue to ,qntrilmtc to the
extension of multilateral world commerce and should
facilitate the expansion of trade between States regardless of their •economic systems;
3. Requests the Secretary-General, taking- fully into
consideration all the views expressed and proposals
submitted on this subject at the present session of the:
