(;eneral Assembl} - 1 hirty-dghth Session

226

with General Assembly rcsolution 1514 (XV), as wcll as ali
other relevant rcsolutions of thc Asscmbly;
5. Reacffirms that it i~ ultimatcly for thr peoplc of tlw
British Virgin lslands thcmsclvcs to determine their futurc
political status in accordanrc with the rclcvant provision,
of the Charter of thc United Nations and the Declaration
and reaffirms thc importancc of fostcring an awarencss
among the people of thc Territory of thc possibilities open
to them in the exercise of their right to sclf-determination:
6. Ca/Is upan thc administcring Powcr. in consultation
with the frecly elected authorities of thr territorial Government, to take ali necessary stcps to ensure the full and
speedy attainmcnt of thc objcctivcs of dccoloni1ation set
out in thc Charter and thc Dcclaration and ali other rclevant resolutions of thc Unitcd Nations;
7. Notes the continuing commitmcnt of thc territorial
Govemment to the goal of cconomic divcrsifi.cation, particularly in the arcas of agriculturc, fishcrics and small
industries and rcitcratcs its call upon thc administcring
Power, in consultation with the local authoritics, to intcnsify its efforts in this rcgard:
S. Urges thc admimstcring Powcr, in co-operation with
thc territorial Government, to safcguard the inalü-nable
right of thc pcoplc of thc Territory to thc enJoymcnt of
thcir natural resourccs by taking cffectivc mcasurcs to
cnsurc thcir right to own and disposc of thosc resourccs
and to cstablish and maintain control of thcir futurc dcvclopmcnt;
9. Urges thc speciali:ted agencies and othcr organi:tations of thc United Nations systcm, as wcll as regional
institutions such as the Caribbcan Dcvelopmcnt Bank. to
take measures to acceleratc progress in thc social and cconomic life of the British Virgin !stands;
IO. Notes with satisfaction thc request of the llritish
Virgin Islands, through the administering Power, for associate membership in the Economic Commission for Latin
America and, in that connection, rC'quests the administC'ring Power to facilitate thc participation of the Territory in
various organizations within thc Unitcd Nations system in
an appropriate capacity;
11. Considers that thc possibility of scnding a lurthcr
visiting mission to thc British Virgin lslands at an appropriate time should be kept under rcview:
12. Requests the Spccial Committec to continuc thc
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the British
Virgin Islands at an appropriatc time and in consultation
with the administering Power. and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-ninth scssion.
86th p/cnar_¡' meeting
7 Deccmbcr 1983

38/45.

Question of the Cayman Islands

The General .4sscmhly,
Having considered the question of the Cayman Islands,
Having examined thc relevan! chapters of the report or

the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to thc
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting or
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 1'
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on thr Granting of Indcpendence to Colonial Countrics and Peoplcs, and all other
resolutions and decisions ofthe Unite-d Nations rclating to
the Cayman Islands,
15 /bid., chap, 111. V and X XI

Fakinl{ i1110 anmmt the statemrnt or thc rcpresentativc
of thc administenng Power relating to the- Territory, 111 in
which he said that his liovernment would fülly rcspcct thc
wishes ofthc pcoplc ofthe Cayman Islands in dctcrmining
thc futurc constitutional status of the Territory,
C'onscious of thc nced to cnsurc thr full and spced~
implcmcntation of thc Dcclaration in rcspcct of thc Tcrritnry,
l\/oting that. in thc pcriod undcr rcvicw, thc cconomy of
the Territory has continucd to sustain sound rates of
growth. cspccially in thc tourist, international tinancc and
real estate industncs.
.\Jind_fi¡/ that Llnitcd Nations visiting missions providc
Jll cffectivc mcans of asccrtaining the situation in thc
~mall Tcrritorics and cxpressing its satisfaction at the willingness ofthe administering Power to receive visiting missions in the Temtories under its administration.
.·hrnrc of the spccial circumstances of thc geographical
location and economic conditions of the Tcrritory and
bcaring in mind the necessity of diversifying and strcngthcning further thc cconomy as a mattcr of priority in order
10 promotc cconnmic stahility.
1. -lppmvcs the chapter of thc report of the Special
Committce on thc Situation with regard to thc Implemcntation of the Dcclaration on the Granting of Independencc
to Colonial Countries and Pcoples rclating to thc Cayman
!stands; 10
2. Reaftirms thl' inalienable right of the people of thc
( ·ayman Islands to sclf-determination and independencc
in conformity with thc Declaration on the Granting of
lndependencc to Colonial Countries and Peoplcs, co11taine-d in General Asscmbly resolution 1514 (XV);
3. Reitera/es thc view that such factors as territorial
size, geographical location, size of population and limitcd
natural resourccs should in no way delay the spccdy implcmcntation of thc process of self-determination in accordance with the Dcclaration contained in General Assembly
rcsolution 1514 (XV), which fully applics to thc Cayman
!stands:
4. Note~ with appreciation thc participation of thc
administering Powcr in the work ofthe Special Committec
in regard to thc Cayman Islands, thereby enabling it to
conduct a more informed and meaningful examination of
the situation in the Territory, with a view to accelerating
the process of dC'colonization for the purposc of the full
implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reitera/es that it is the responsibility ofthe admimstering Power to creatc such conditions in thc Cayman
lslands as will enable the people of thc Tcrritory to excrcisC' freely and w1thou1 intcrfercncc their inalienable right
10 sclf-detcrmmation and independencc in accordancc
with General Assemhly resolution 1514 (X V), as wcll as ali
nther relevant rl'solutions of the Asscmbly:
6. Reafhrms that it is ultimately for the pcople of thc
( ·ayman Islands themselves to determine their future
political status in accordance with the relevan! provisions
of the Chartcr of the llnited Nations and thc Declaration
and rcaffirms thc importance of fostering an awarencss
among the peoplc of the Territory of the possibilities open
to them in the excrcise of their right to sclf-dctermination;
7. Reaffirms the responsibility of the administering
Power for the cconomic and social development of thc
Tcrritory and urges it, in co-operation with thc territorial
Government, to render continuing support, to the fullest
cxtent possible, to the development of programmes of economic diversification which will bcndi.t the pcople of thc
Tl'rritory·
16 11>,d. chap

XX,

Vil.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fourth Comm_it_te_e_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

8. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to safeguard the inalienable
right of the people of the Territory to the enjoymcnt of
their natural resources by taking effective measures to
ensure their right to own and dispose of those resourccs
and to establish and maintain control oftheir future development;
9. Urges the specialized agencies and othcr organizations of the United Nations system, as well as regional
institutions such as the Caribbean Development Bank. to
take ali the necessary measures to accelerate progress in
the social and economic life of the Cayman !stands;
10. Notes the continuing assistance provided to the
Territory by the United Nations Development Programme;
11. Considers that the possibility of sending a further
visiting mission to the Cayman !stands at an appropriatc
time should be kept under review;
12. Requests the Special Committee to continue the
examination of this question at its next session, including
the possible dispatch of a visiting mission to the Cayman
Islands atan appropriate time and in consultation with the
administering Power, and to report thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
86th p/enary meeting
7 Decemher 1983

38/46. Question of Montserrat
The General Assemb/y,
Having considered the question of Montserrat,
Having examined the relevant chapters of the report of
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, 17
Recalling its resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960, containing the Declaration on the Granting of lndependence to Colonial Countries and Peoples,
Recalling a/so its resolution 37/27 of 23 November
1982 on the question of Montserrat,
Recalling the dispatch, in I 975 and I 982, of United
Nations visiting missions to the Territory,
Taking into account the statement of the representative
of the administering Power, 18 in which he said that the
policy of bis Government was to respect the wishes of the
people ofthe Territory in determining their future political
status,
Reaffirming the responsibility of the administering
Power for the economic and social development of the
Territory,
Noting that during the period under review the economy
of Montserrat grew in real terms and that in recent years
no budgetary grant-in-aid from the administering Power
has been considered necessary to balance the regular
budget of the Territory,
Noting that an in-service review ofthe organization and
training needs of the public service was undertaken in
1982 and that priority would be given to the establishment
of a civil service training centre,
Mindful of the responsibility of the United Nations to
help the people ofMontserrat to realize their aspirations in
accordance with the objectives set forth in the Declaration,
17 !bid., chaps. llI and XXII.
18 !bid., Thirty-eighth Snsion. Fourth Co1111111/ttc. 11 th meeting, paras. ')16.

227

NotinK the assistancc being rendered by those organizations ofthe United Nations system operating in the Territory.
Aware of the special problems facing the Territory by
virtuc of its isolation. small size. limited resources and
lack of infrastructure,
Mindful that United Nations visiting missions provide
an effcctive means of ascertaining the situation in the Territories visited,
1. Approves the chapter of thc report of the Special
Committee on the Situation with regard to the lmplementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples relating to
Montserrat; 14
2. Reaffirms the inalienable right of the people ?f
Montserrat to self-determination and independence m
conformity with the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in
General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December
1960;
3. Reiteratcs the view that such factors as territorial
size. geographical Iocation, size of population and Iimited
natural resources should in no way delay the speedy exercise by the people ofthc Territory oftheir inalienable right
to self-determination and independence in conformity
with the Declaration, which fully applies to Montserrat;
4. Notes with apprcciation the continued participation
of thc administering Power in the work of the Special
Committee, which enables it to conduct a more meaningful examination of the situation in the Territory with a
view to accelerating the process of decolonization for the
purpose of the full implementation of the Declaration;
5. Reitcrates that it is the responsibility ofthe administering Power to create such conditions in Montserrat as
will enable its people to exercise freely and without interference their inalienable right to self-determination and
independence in accordance with General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV), as well as ali other relevant resolutions
of the Assembly;
6. Reafjirms that it is ultimately for the people of
Montserrat themselves to determine their future political
status in accordance with the relevant provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations and the Declaration and
reiterates its call upon the administering Power to launch.
in co-operation with the territorial Government, programmes of política! education so that the people of Montserrat
may be fully informed of the options available to them in
the exercise of their right to self-determination and inde-pendence;
7. Calls upon the administering Power to continue, in
co-operation with the territorial Government, to
strengthen the economy and to increase its assistance to
programmes of diversification;
8. Takes note of the growth of the manufacturing, construction and tourist industries and urges the administering Power, in co-operation with the territorial Govemment, to intensify the development of other sectors of the
economy, in particular agriculture, Iivestock and fisheries,
for the benefit of the people of the Territory;
9. Urges the administering Power, in co-operation with
the territorial Government, to continue to take effective
measures to safeguard, guarantee and ensure the rights of
the people of Montserrat to own and dispose of their natural resources and to establish and maintain control oftheir
future development;
14 lhul. Thirt_1•-e1ghth Ses.11011. Supplemenr No . .?3 (A/38/23). chap. XXII.
