A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/52/12 B
9 January 1998

Fifty-second session
Agenda item 157
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/52/L.72/Rev.1)]
52/12.

Renewing the United Nations: a programme for reform
B*

The General Assembly,
Having considered further the report of the Secretary-General on renewing the United Nations: a
programme for reform,1 and the recommendations contained therein,
Recalling its resolution 52/12 A of 12 November 1997,
Recalling also its resolutions 50/227 of 24 May 1996, 51/240 of 20 June 1997 and 51/241 of 31 July
1997, as well as all other relevant resolutions and decisions, which contain legislative mandates and
programme guidance, and, in particular, the medium-term plan for the period 1998-2001,
Reaffirming that financial implications of any reform measure or proposal on which the General
Assembly is to take action should be considered in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly,
A. Deputy Secretary-General
1. Decides to establish the post of Deputy Secretary-General as an integral part of the Office of the
Secretary-General, as set out in addendum 1 to the report of the Secretary-General2 and in the statement
made by the Secretary-General on 4 November 1997 to the open-ended informal consultations of the General

* Consequently, resolution 52/12 of 12 November 1997 becomes resolution 52/12 A.
1
2

A/51/950 and Add.1-7.
A/51/950/Add.1.

98-76111

/...

A/RES/52/12 B
Page 2

Assembly on United Nations reform: measures and proposals,3 without prejudice to the mandate of the
Secretary-General as provided by the Charter of the United Nations and, in accordance with the existing
system of decision-making, with responsibilities delegated by the Secretary-General, including the following:
(a) To assist the Secretary-General in managing the operations of the Secretariat;
(b) To act for the Secretary-General at United Nations Headquarters in the absence of the SecretaryGeneral and in other cases as may be decided by the Secretary-General;
(c) To support the Secretary-General in ensuring intersectoral and inter-institutional coherence of
activities and programmes and to support the Secretary-General in elevating the profile and leadership of the
United Nations in the economic and social spheres, including further efforts to strengthen the United Nations
as a leading centre for development policy and development assistance;
(d) To represent the Secretary-General at conferences, official functions and ceremonial and other
occasions as may be decided by the Secretary-General;
(e) To undertake such assignments as may be determined by the Secretary-General;
2. Notes that the Secretary-General will appoint the Deputy Secretary-General following consultations
with Member States and in accordance with Article 101 of the Charter of the United Nations and that the
term of office of the Deputy Secretary-General will not exceed that of the Secretary-General;
B. New approaches to policy formulation
3. Welcomes the recommendations of the Secretary-General aimed at the rationalization, streamlining
and enhancement of the work of the General Assembly, taking into account the measures already undertaken
towards this end in order to further strengthen the Assembly as the organ of the United Nations that most
fully embodies the universal and democratic character of the Organization;
4. Decides, in this context, to continue during its fifty-second session its in-depth consideration of
those recommendations under the item entitled "Revitalization of the work of the General Assembly", taking
into account the report to be submitted by the Secretary-General in accordance with resolution 51/241;
C. Peace, security and disarmament
5. Invites Member States to improve the supply of information to the Secretary-General that could
assist the Organization to prevent conflict and maintain international peace and security in full accordance
with the provisions of the Charter of the United Nations;
6. Stresses that enhancing the rapid deployment capacity of the United Nations in peacekeeping
operations can play a valuable role in the effectiveness of its response to a conflict, and, in this context,
requests the appropriate organs to consider, as a matter of priority, specific measures to that effect, in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 52/69 of 10 December 1997 and taking into account the
proposals to be submitted by the Secretary-General and the views of Member States;
7. Endorses the recommendation that the Security Council, in establishing a peacekeeping operation
in the future, should prescribe a time-frame for the conclusion of the status-of-forces agreement between the
United Nations and the host Government for the operation in question and that, pending the conclusion of

3

See A/52/585.
/...

A/RES/52/12 B
Page 3

such an agreement, a model status-of-forces agreement would apply provisionally unless otherwise agreed
by the parties concerned, and invites the Security Council to consider the matter;
8. Decides that the Disarmament Commission and the First Committee of the General Assembly should
undertake a review of their work, to be concluded before the end of the fifty-second session, with a view to
its revitalization, rationalization and streamlining, taking into account discussions that have already taken
place on this issue;
D. Economic and social affairs
9. Invites the Economic and Social Council to consider, at its organizational and substantive sessions
in 1998, as part of the review of the mandates, composition, functions and working methods of its functional
commissions and expert groups and bodies, as mandated by the General Assembly in its resolution 50/227,
the recommendations of the Secretary-General relating to the reform of its subsidiary bodies, including a timeframe for implementation of its decisions thereon, as well as his recommendations relating to the organization
and methods of work of the Council, and to report thereon to the Assembly as early as possible during its
fifty-second session;
10. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with Member States and appropriate
intergovernmental regional bodies, to conduct a general review of the regional commissions at its substantive
session of 1998, bearing in mind the relevant provisions of resolution 50/227 and the individual reviews each
commission has already carried out, in order to consider the competencies of the regional commissions, taking
into account the competencies of global bodies and other regional and subregional intergovernmental bodies,
and to submit a report thereon to the General Assembly before the end of its fifty-second session;
11. Endorses the recommendation of the Secretary-General to discontinue the High-level Advisory
Board on Sustainable Development;
E. Development cooperation
12. Accepts that management of funds and programmes would be enhanced by greater integration of
intergovernmental oversight, and requests the Economic and Social Council, in the context of the next
triennial policy review of the United Nations, during its operational activities segment of 1998, to consider
arrangements for closer integration of the governance oversight of the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Population Fund and of the United Nations Children’s Fund, with
consecutive and/or joint meetings of the existing Executive Boards, bearing in mind the respective mandates
of the Executive Boards of the funds and programmes;
13. Takes note, in this context, of the decision already taken by the Executive Board of the United
Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Population Fund and by the Executive Board of
the United Nations Children’s Fund to organize a joint meeting in January 1998;
14. Recognizes the urgent need for resources for development on a predictable, continuous and assured
basis, taking fully into account the principle of neutrality, and requests the Secretary-General to submit, by
the end of March 1998, for consideration by the General Assembly, specific proposals for the establishment
of a new system of core resources, taking into account the views expressed by Member States;
F. Humanitarian affairs
15. Decides to designate the Emergency Relief Coordinator as the United Nations Humanitarian
Assistance Coordinator, who will, inter alia, retain responsibility for coordination of natural disaster relief;
16. Decides also to transfer to the United Nations Development Programme the responsibilities of the
Emergency Relief Coordinator for operational activities for natural disaster mitigation, prevention and
/...

A/RES/52/12 B
Page 4

preparedness, with the understanding that the resources for this task will be separate and additional to the
resources of the United Nations Development Programme for development activities and that they will be
provided by a grant from the regular budget of the United Nations for the biennium 1998-1999;
17. Requests the Secretary-General to submit, before the end of the fifty-second session of the General
Assembly, a report on the method of financing of natural disaster mitigation, prevention and preparedness
activities beyond the biennium 1998-1999;
18. Decides to establish a humanitarian affairs segment of the Economic and Social Council, with effect
from 1998, and, in this connection, requests the Council to consider expeditiously the related practical
arrangements and make an early recommendation to the General Assembly, without prejudice to the work
of the other segments of the Council;
G. Financing the Organization
19. Reaffirms the obligation of all Member States, in accordance with the Charter, to pay their assessed
contributions in full, on time and without conditions;
20. Takes note of the recommendation of the Secretary-General that a revolving credit fund be
established through voluntary contributions or any other means of financing that Member States may wish
to suggest, and requests the Secretary-General, taking into account the views expressed by Member States,
to submit by the end of March 1998 detailed proposals to the General Assembly, through the competent
bodies, for the proposed establishment of such a fund, including its financing, management and operation,
while emphasizing that the priority lies in the compliance by all Member States with their financial
obligations to the United Nations;
21. Takes notes also of the recommendation of the Secretary-General that, in future, any unspent
balances under the regular budget at the end of the fiscal period be retained, and invites the competent bodies
to consider the implications of such retention, as well as the appropriate use of such balances, including
possible allocation to development programmes, on the basis of a report to be submitted by the SecretaryGeneral to the General Assembly, before the end of its fifty-second session;
H. Management
22. Decides to examine the recommendation of the Secretary-General on initiating a review of the
International Civil Service Commission, and, on the basis of information to be provided by the
Secretary-General, requests the competent intergovernmental bodies to consider the modalities for such a
review and to report to the General Assembly before the end of its fifty-second session;
23. Notes that the Secretary-General has submitted the draft Code of Conduct for United Nations Staff4
to the General Assembly, and agrees to expedite its consideration;
24. Decides to establish, in the programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999, a development account
to be funded from savings from possible reductions in administration and other overhead costs, without
affecting full implementation of mandated programmes and activities, and requests the Secretary-General to
submit a detailed report by the end of March 1998 identifying the sustainability of this initiative, as well as
the modalities of implementation, the specific purposes and associated performance criteria for the use of such
resources;

4

A/52/488.
/...

A/RES/52/12 B
Page 5

25. Takes note of the recommendation of the Secretary-General to shift United Nations programme
budgeting towards a system of results-based budgeting, and requests him to submit, through the competent
bodies, a more detailed report that will include a full explanation for the proposed change, and the
methodology to be used, as well as a mock-up of one or more sections of the budget for consideration before
the end of the fifty-second session of the General Assembly;
I. Longer-term changes
26. Recognizes that reform of the United Nations will be an ongoing process and that there is a need
for the United Nations to consider changes of a more fundamental nature and other broader issues, and invites
the Secretary-General to elaborate further his proposals, taking into account the views of Governments, and
to present them to the General Assembly by the end of March 1998 on:
(a) A new concept of trusteeship;
(b) A Millennium Assembly;
(c) A Millennium Forum;
(d) The United Nations system (a Special Commission at the ministerial level to examine the need for
possible amendments to the Charter of the United Nations and the treaties from which the specialized
agencies derive their mandates);
(e) Provisions whereby initiatives that involve new mandates and institutional machinery would be
subject to specific time limits that would require explicit review and renewal by the General Assembly (sunset
provisions);
27. Looks forward to the convening of the United Nations Conference of Plenipotentiaries to finalize
and adopt a convention to establish an international criminal court as a step that would strengthen
significantly the rule of law in the century ahead;
28. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-third session the item entitled "United
Nations reform: measures and proposals".
78th plenary meeting
19 December 1997
