S/2021/246

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
15 March 2021
Original: English

Letter dated 11 March 2021 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefings provided by
Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Sudan
and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan; Mr. Atul Khare, Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support; and
Ms. Kholood Khair, Managing Partner of Insight Strategy Partners, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of China, Estonia, France, India,
Ireland, Mexico, the Russian Federation, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam in connection with the
video-teleconference on “Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South
Sudan” convened on Tuesday, 9 March 2021. A statement was also delivered by the
representative of the Sudan.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of the members of
the Council dated 7 May 2020 (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, these
briefings and statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Linda Thomas-Greenfield
President of the Security Council

21-03490 (E) 170321 080421

*2103490*

S/2021/246

Annex I
Briefing by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
the Sudan and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan, Volker Perthes
I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to brief the Security
Council. This is my first briefing to the Council. I am grateful for the confidence the
Secretary-General and the Council have placed in me, and I hope I can count on your
partnership in supporting the Sudan’s transition.
I have been in the Sudan for five weeks. I have met with the transitional
Government and the Sovereign Council and listened to a wide range of Sudanese
on their aspirations and the challenges facing the Sudan’s transition. I have also
explained the mandate of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and discussed how we can best support the Sudan
on the basis of resolution 2524 (2020).
We continue to make clear that the four strategic objectives of our mandate —
namely, support for the political transition, for the peace processes and the
implementation of peace agreements, for peacebuilding and for the mobilization
of external resources — are interdependent. Advancing the political transition,
peacebuilding and the protection of civilians requires economic resources, and
vice versa.
The political transition process is moving forward. The Sovereign Council was
expanded on 4 February to include three signatories to the Juba Peace Agreement,
and a new a Cabinet, under the leadership of Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok,
was formed on 8 February. The Cabinet has a political, as opposed to technocratic,
character. It is a broad coalition built on power-sharing among civilians, the military
and armed movements. There are diverging views on the capability of this political
Government, and it does not include all political forces. However, the representation
of different political currents and movements, with their respective constituencies,
has already made it possible for this Government to take and implement difficult
decisions. Notably, this was demonstrated with the recent decision to float the
exchange rate of the Sudanese currency.
This new Government has also agreed on five national priorities, that is,
addressing the socioeconomic conditions; implementing the Juba Peace Agreement
and resuming negotiations with the two non-signatories; security sector reform
and the protection of civilians; international relations; and advancing the Sudan’s
democratic transition.
At the same time, important milestones foreseen in the Constitutional Document
and the Juba Peace Agreement have yet to be reached, notably, the formation of the
Transitional Legislative Council, with at least 40 per cent representation for women.
The swift formation of a diverse, inclusive and representative Legislative Council is
critical to broadening the support for the political transition.
There are fears that the gains achieved for women’s rights in the Constitutional
Document and the Juba Peace Agreement, such as the Gender Commission and the
40 per cent representation of women in the Transitional Legislative Council, might
not be realized.
Sudanese youth have also expressed frustration over their lack of participation
in transitional institutions. I can only underscore that an inclusive political process,
including all segments of the Sudan’s diverse society throughout the political
transition, is essential for its success.
2/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

There has been recent progress on the economic reform agenda, and Prime
Minister Hamdok’s message is that the Sudan is becoming a country open for
investment. The Government’s decision to float the Sudanese pound was a courageous
step that will unlock financial assistance, paving the way for debt relief and fostering
private sector engagement. The investors’ conference that will take place in May
in Paris can help mobilize private foreign investment and partnerships, driving job
creation and development. It is important that the international community support
this and similar initiatives.
However, we cannot ignore that economic hardships are posing a risk to the
Sudan’s stability. Inflation stood at 304 per cent in January. The Sudan also suffers
from large trade and fiscal deficits, high rates of unemployment and poverty. A
quarter of the country’s population — 13.4 million people — is projected to require
humanitarian assistance, including 2.5 million internally displaced persons.
The Sudan generously hosts 1 million refugees, including 70,000 recent arrivals
from Ethiopia.
While the transitional Government launched the Family Support Programme
on 24 February to ease the strain on large segments of the Sudanese population, the
need for sustained financial and economic support to the Sudan cannot be overstated.
I therefore urge the international community to step up its assistance to the Sudan.
The Sudan’s Government has given priority to advancing the peace process
with the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement-North Abdelaziz Al-Hilu faction and
the Sudan Liberation Movement Abdul Wahid Al-Nur faction. The recent meeting of
the Chairperson of the Sovereign Council, Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Burhan,
with Mr. Al-Hilu and the declaration of the latter to unilaterally extend the cessation
of hostilities for five months are clear signals of a common interest in resuming the
peace process. I will continue to engage Sudanese stakeholders and parties to the
peace process, and UNITAMS stands ready to assist ongoing efforts to realize a
comprehensive peace settlement.
The protection of civilians remains one of our main priorities. In January,
intercommunal clashes in El Geneina, West Darfur, left 165 people dead and over
100,000 displaced. Subsequent clashes in South and West Darfur underscore the
risks of more intercommunal violence. During my team’s recent visit to Darfur,
displaced men and women expressed their fears of further violence and insecurity,
including gender-based violence.
In this regard, the United Nations is working to support the new Government
to strengthen the protection of civilians. The Minister of the Interior and Head of
the National Committee for the Protection of Civilians requested the United Nations
assistance to strengthen policing capacity and early warning, and we are responding
with technical advice and capacity building support.
Progress in the protection of civilians also requires strengthened legal
frameworks for human rights and the rule of law. I welcome the Sudan’s decision to
adopt legislation to ratify the Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, and the International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Orders from the Sudan’s
Attorney General prohibiting arrest and detention by non-police forces is also a step
in the right direction. Protecting the space for peaceful protests and civic activity
will remain critical.
Peace will be sustainable only if the root causes and ramifications of the
conflicts are addressed. The United Nations and its partners are implementing
prevention and peacebuilding projects in Darfur and elsewhere, including projects
started by UNAMID. The United Nations Mine Action Service and partners are
21-034903/31

S/2021/246

clearing unexploded ordinance and conducting demining in Darfur, and now in the
Blue Nile state in the aftermath of Juba Peace Agreement.
UNITAMS is a small Mission with a broad mandate. Together with the United
Nations country team, we are adopting an integrated approach to maximize our efforts
and resources. We will shortly be launching the Sudan Peacemaking, Peacebuilding
and Stabilization Programme, which is a framework between UNITAMS and the
United Nations country team to jointly implement resolution 2524 (2020). We are
grateful to Member States that contributed to the peacebuilding and stabilization
window of the multi-partner trust fund.
Turning to regional engagement, I have had constructive discussions with the
African Union (AU) representative in Khartoum on United Nations-AU cooperation.
I will be briefing the African Union Peace and Security Council later this month.
The increasingly complex geopolitical environment is another challenge for the
Sudan, notably, the tensions along the border with Ethiopia, including intermittent
clashes and exchanges of heated rhetoric between Ethiopia and the Sudan. Reports of
the intensification of military operations in the border region are deeply concerning.
There is a serious risk for miscalculation and escalation. It is imperative that the
international community build on the Sudan’s and Ethiopia’s stated commitment for
a diplomatic solution to support de-escalation and a peaceful resolution.
The Sudan is making significant advances in its transition. However,
the remaining challenges are staggering. It is urgent to respond to the needs of
communities across the country. UNITAMS, with an integrated country team, is
committed to working closely with all components of the transitional authorities and
other stakeholders to address these challenges and help realize the Sudanese people’s
aspirations and priorities. We are here for all of the Sudan. I am confident that, with
the unified support of the Security Council, we will be able to make a difference.

4/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex II
Briefing by the Under-Secretary-General for Operational Support,
Atul Khare
I thank you, Madam President, for this opportunity to report on the progress
in the drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID).
I visited the Sudan from 26 February to 7 March. I had the pleasure to
engage with Lieutenant General Abdel Fattah Burhan, Chairperson of the Sovereign
Council; His Excellency Mr. Abdalla Adam Hamdok, Prime Minister; as well as
with the Ministers for Foreign Affairs, Cabinet Affairs and the Interior. I also
met the Governors — Walis — of the Central and North Darfur states. These
engagements took stock of the progress made thus far, discussed ways to resolve
outstanding issues on the drawdown/closure of UNAMID and reflected on the
post-UNAMID transition.
I wish to commend the efforts of the Government of the Sudan on its transitional
path for assuming full responsibility for the protection of civilians, in line with
its national plan for civilian protection. In particular, I applaud the high level of
coordination between the joint task force and UNAMID to facilitate the drawdown
process; the commitment from the Government on civilian end-use of sites handed
over; the security arrangements to ensure the safe and dignified exit of UNAMID;
and the facilitation of the administrative processes required. In this connection,
I am particularly pleased to report that ,during my visit, I signed the framework
agreement requested by the Council formalizing this collaborative partnership with
the Permanent Under-Secretary of the Ministry for Foreign Affairs.
The mission is on-track in meeting the request of the Council to complete the
withdrawal of all uniformed and civilian personnel by 30 June 2021, other than those
required for the mission’s liquidation. Three of 18 contingents not being considered
for a guard unit have been repatriated. An accelerated drawdown schedule will
ensure the departure of all uniformed personnel by the end of May, allowing June as
buffer for any unexpected contingencies and avoiding the onset of the rainy season.
In addition, 24 per cent of 1,088 civilian personnel who will not be required for
the mission’s liquidation have already been separated/repatriated. The international
staff footprint is kept to a minimum, with nearly 70 per cent of the remaining 825
civilian personnel being national staff. We seek the cooperation of the Government
of the Sudan in the timely processing of all administrative requirements, such
as the issuance of visas or customs/export approvals, to meet this aggressive
drawdown timeline.
Turning to the Council’s decision to retain a guard unit, the proposal for two
formed police units takes into consideration the Government’s primary responsibility
for the protection of the United Nations premises in the post-mandate environment
and envisages the deployment of complementary Sudanese security forces. The
guard unit will be responsible for the protection of UNAMID’s personnel, facilities
and assets, strictly within the parameters of its sites. The Secretariat is preparing
a detailed concept of operations and costing requirements, along with outreach to
relevant police-contributing countries.
Five of the 15 team sites have been handed over to their rightful owners. All
team sites — except at El Fasher, the Khartoum Liaison Office and Port Sudan —
will be handed over by end of May. During my visit, I took the opportunity to tour
Sortony, North Darfur, and observed preparations for its handover. I also participated
in a round table discussion on the future civilian end-use of the Zalengei site with
the state authorities, local communities and the United Nations family in Central
21-034905/31

S/2021/246

Darfur. I witnessed how all the necessary clean-up, refurbishment and environmental
restoration had been completed and jointly inspected with the Government authorities
before handover. Sites are handed over in working condition and transferred with
appropriate functional assets for the benefit of civilian end-use.
I wish to highlight the bioremediation and site restoration efforts of the
Chinese Engineering Company, first deployed during the peak of the coronavirus
crisis in May 2020. I applaud our troop-contributing country, the People’s Republic
of China, in the deployment of well-resourced engineers, who were further guided
by the mission and have been instrumental in the environmental work. I commend
the consultative process in identifying civilian end-use and the Sudanese authorities’
firm commitment in such usage.
I join the Secretary-General in condemning the looting of Saraf Umrah,
the first site handed over after the adoption of resolution 2559 (2020). It is with
regret that I note that unknown assailants have dashed the opportunity for the site’s
intended usage as a vocational training centre. We call on the Sudanese authorities
to investigate the incident, and similar incidents at Nyala and El Geneina, and ensure
security and the preservation of facilities handed over for civilian end-use. I have
been assured by the leadership of the Sudan that such incidents will not be allowed
to recur in future.
Closing 14 team sites and separating and repatriating more than 7,000
uniformed and civilian personnel within the drawdown period of six months is
in itself a complex task. It is made even more challenging by having to respond
to unpredictable, unforeseen developments. For example, we have just received a
request from the Government of the Sudan to delay the closure and handover of team
sites in Kalma and Sortony, which were planned, respectively, for 11 and 28 March.
We intend to respond positively to the Government’s request, particularly in order to
facilitate a smooth handover. Nevertheless, I remain concerned about the continued
presence of uniformed personnel, a formed police unit in Kalma and a military
contingent in Sortony, both from Pakistan.
Looking beyond the drawdown period, after 30 June 2021, the outstanding
liquidation tasks will not be any less challenging. In the liquidation period, the
skeletal liquidation team will need to clean up and environmentally restore El Fasher,
dispose of any remaining United Nations-owned equipment, close out outstanding
contracts and financial commitments and enable the administrative closure of
the mission.
During my meetings with Sudanese authorities, I stressed the distinct
drawdown and liquidation periods. I recall and underscore that resolution 2559
(2020) stipulates a six-month drawdown, followed by an undefined liquidation
period, which we estimate to be 12 to 18 months in length, to reasonably perform all
the liquidation tasks for a mission the size and scale of UNAMID. I was assured by
the leadership of the Sudan, both at the central and state levels, that all efforts will
be deployed by them to make this drawdown and liquidation an example of effective
collaboration between the United Nations and the Sudan.
Lastly, I would like to express my gratitude to the African Union, which
is our partner in this endeavour. One of my first meetings in Khartoum was with
the representative of the African Union (AU). Both our organizations attach high
importance to the responsible and accountable drawdown and closure of UNAMID.
His Excellency Mr. Smaïl Chergui, Commissioner for Peace and Security of the
African Union, will be visiting the Sudan, including Darfur, with the AU Peace and
Security Council from 30 March to 1 April, and a visit by the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission is also being planned. I have assured the African Union
that, within its limited resources, UNAMID will support these visits.
6/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex III
Briefing by the Managing Partner of Insight Strategy Partners,
Kholood Khair
My name is Kholood Khair, and I am a researcher and analyst running a think
tank in Khartoum and a broadcaster on a political talk show. Although civil society
is not homogenous, I hope to shed some light on the possible implications of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS)
on the civil society space in my country and the importance of civil society buy-in
during the transition period.
First, I must thank the organizers for giving a voice from Sudanese civil
society the space to be heard at a meeting like this one. It is a very welcome and
necessary affirmation of the role of civil society in “civilianizing” the Sudan and
helping the country make the transition into democratic governance. It is also a
recognition of the leading role that Sudanese civil society continuously played in the
run-up to the 2018 revolution and continues to play throughout the fragile transition.
This transition is not merely about the mechanics of civilian democratization;
it is also about engendering the governance practices necessary for a vibrant
democracy. The past 30 years saw a tireless and sustained attempt to limit civil space
in order to control and coerce the Sudanese people. Undoing this will necessitate
similarly tireless and sustained engagement with civil society actors in order to
expand the civic space. Only then will the national projects of “civilianizing” and
democratizing the Sudan stand a chance of success.
Previous experience with transition — and the Sudan has been here before,
after all — tells us that transitions live and die by the space that diverse civil society
actors are able to carve out at the national, subnational and local levels. We are
learning from the past. This time around, a more concerted effort by transition
partners aimed at engaging civil society consistently and intentionally across
governance structures — from supporting the Federal Government to maintaining
momentum in neighbourhoods — is the best chance that we have. Let us hope that
the third time is the charm, as we may not get another opportunity such as this one
anytime soon.
Sudanese civil society is a broad umbrella, and that is its strength. From women’s
rights groups, resistance committees and research centres to women’s community
initiatives and organizations fighting for justice, the reach of civil society is often
vastly wider than the State’s, and significantly deeper than that of international
actors. Over the past few years, the country’s civil society has responded to local
demands for change and created more space for meaningful grass-roots engagement
outside of the aid space.
After decades of resistance against autocracy and of heavy suppression under
the previous regime, civil society, in many of its guises, must now be given the room
to function as is absolutely necessary: as a key partner in the civilian transition. In
order to do that, there are several issues related to the operationalization of a mission
such as UNITAMS that will need to be addressed so as to ensure civil society buy-in.
The Mission itself has been up and running for just over two months, and the
eventual start of its activities is welcome. However, since the Mission’s inception,
some challenges have been apparent. Most of these challenges are related to potential
difficulties in navigating the Sudan’s enduring power imbalance at the heart of
Government, between, broadly, armed components and civilian components.
In addition, there are some not insignificant concerns on the impact of this
tumult on the civil society space as the foundation of the democratic transition.
21-034907/31

S/2021/246

Within the as-yet unclear terms of engagement between the civilian Government
and UNITAMS, a mission upon which civilians may increasingly heavily rely,
there must be due consideration of what the impact on civil society space might
be and consequently the building of a burgeoning social contract. In this regard,
chiefly, UNITAMS must learn the lessons of the missions that came before it, the
United Nations Mission in the Sudan and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID).
The challenges specifically related to these governance dynamics are, broadly
speaking, how UNITAMS will be both the follow-on mission to UNAMID as
well as a mission with a wholly different mandate — one that, crucially, does not
contain as many provisions for the protection of civilians as the previous missions
did, which is nevertheless an increasingly urgent priority in Darfur and elsewhere;
how UNITAMS will build consensus across its broad mandate with the different
strands and structures of Government as well as with such alternative governance
structures as the native administrations and resistance committees, both at the
national and subnational levels; how the Mission, as a political mission, will resist
co-optation by different political interests both within Government and outside of
it; how UNITAMS will manage the very great expectations of both the Government
and the public; how UNITAMS will balance role assignments: without a strong
governmental counterpart, and a reliance instead on the Cabinet as a counterpart,
the Sudanese public may not know where the Government starts and UNITAMS
ends, which will not help the Government to build the relationship it wants and needs
to build with the public; and lastly, how UNITAMS will work to fulfil its objectives
beyond directly supporting the Government, such as through highly specialized
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration programming.
If the fate of the success of UNITAMS is directly tied to the Government’s
ability to implement — an ability that is impeded by several factors, not least
competing interests within the broader Government for capacity and funding —
then UNITAMS will not be able to play as supportive a role as it would like. And
therein lies the contradiction of an integrated mission intended to support a lessthan-integrated Government — in fact a divided one, and not only along civilian and
military lines but also along rebel lines.
Civil society actors can bolster and even lead coordinated efforts in the
difficult work of ensuring the protection of civilians, a key priority in parts of Darfur
right now, and make use of over a decade of civil society engagement on protection
of civilians, peacebuilding initiatives and conflict prevention across the country.
Engaging civil society actors is also crucial ahead of elections, and it needs to start
now, preferably at the local level, in order to demonstrate the value of a process that
has suffered much public disparagement from its nominal implementation during the
Al-Bashir regime.
Crucial State-building exercises that finally have some hope of being credible —
for example, the constitution-drafting processes, election-related initiatives and
making the peace deal viable — are all currently led by international actors, with
civil society playing a supporting role. This should be the reverse. Sustainability is
an ever-present concern, and only increased and broad civil society engagement with
both the Government and the United Nations can facilitate enhanced GovernmentUnited Nations cooperation.
For its part, the civilian Government should recognize that a broad and
varied civil society is its army and its domestic support system in the fight against
autocracy; expand its transition priorities and mitigate its capacity issues by working
with civil society, particularly outside of Khartoum; learn the lessons of previous
transitions and broaden the political space to a more diverse range of constituencies
8/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

and avoid redrawing the fault lines between political groups based on competition
for power and resources; and rely less on personal politics and institutionalize some
of its engagement with civil society.
The foregoing will allow the Government, for example, to increase the level
of representation of women in line with its own quotas and catalyse some of the slow
progress that has been observed on such key issues as justice. It will also allow for
better feedback from the public. Currently, mass protest against specific issues is
the only form of communication that much of civil society has with the Government,
which can give the impression that the Government is failing across the board,
thereby emboldening factions of the ancien régime.
I believe that, to be effective to aptly support the transition and get the buy-in
of civil society as a key transition partner, UNITAMS should consult regularly and
meaningfully with different and diverse civil society actors across the country in its
planning and strategizing for its work during the transition; work with what is left
of UNAMID while it can and enlist its on-the-ground civil society partners to look
into how it will prioritize protection of civilians, while conflict flares up in Darfur
and matters look increasingly bellicose in the east; be agile enough to respond to
ad hoc issues while planning a phased approach in a holistic strategy of transition
priorities, from, for example, the protection of civilians to access to justice and rule
of law, elections and then the credible transition of power; be a mission for the entire
country, with context-specific strategies for the different political realities across
the Sudan drafted in close collaboration with civil society actors from research- and
area-specific communities, including rural communities pastoralists.
UNITAMS should also work with a dedicated governmental counterpart that
is answerable to the Cabinet, not a committee that functions as a secretariat, which
will act as a platform to build consensus within the Government, absorb international
support, encourage joined-up policymaking through the Cabinet, and later with the
Parliament, while providing a liaising body for efficient coordination; coordinate
with parallel processes outside of its mandate but whose success is interlinked with
its own, such as transitional justice and reforms; be better funded, and channel that
funding wisely, to allow for a better and more meaningfully integrated response
to transition needs; seize the opportunity to refine and focus its broad mandate in
May of this year; and lastly, and importantly, recruit more senior national staff,
particularly from the peripheries.
Ultimately UNITAM’s success will be the Sudan’s success, if the Mission is
cognizant and inclusive of civil society as the bedrock of the democratic project.
This inclusion of civil society must be done in such a way that it increases, not limits,
civic space, and efforts must be made not to undermine the fragile and inchoate
social contract between the civilian Government and the public.

21-034909/31

S/2021/246

Annex IV
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of China to the
United Nations, Dai Bing
[Original: Chinese]
I would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Khare and Mr. Perthes for their
briefings. I also listened attentively to the briefing by Ms. Khair, the civil society
representative. I also wish to welcome the Sudanese representative to the meeting.
The Sudan is undergoing major transformations. The United Nations presence
in the country is in a stage of transition. I wish to emphasize the following points.
First, the positive political momentum must be maintained. The Juba Agreement
for Peace in the Sudan is only the beginning, not the end. China welcomes important
gains such as the expansion of the Sovereignty Council and the reshuffling of the
transitional Government. China urges continued efforts to advance processes such
as the formation of a Transitional Legislative Council and preparation of elections.
Armed groups that have not signed the Agreement should join the peace process as
soon as possible. The report of the Secretary-General (S/2021/199) mentions that
financial support is needed for implementing the Peace Agreement. We therefore
call on international partners to help the Sudan in this regard.
Secondly, improvement in the security situation needs to be sustained. Despite
overall stability in the Sudan, intercommunal clashes are still causing civilian
casualties. The Sudanese Government has continued the implementation of its State
strategy of civilian protection, responded rapidly to the clashes and quickly deployed
security forces, which China welcomes. We call for urgent efforts to remove the
negative impacts of Security Council arms embargo on the Government’s efforts
to protect civilians in Darfur and to upgrade its security capabilities. Military
means alone cannot eliminate intercommunal clashes. It takes a holistic approach,
integrating mediation, reconciliation and the rule of law, coupled with measures
to develop the economy and improve people’s lives, in order to eradicate the
root causes.
Thirdly, the international community should help the Sudan deal with economic
challenges. Owing to such factors as the coronavirus disease pandemic, the Sudan’s
economy is deteriorating, and the humanitarian situation is dire. Over 13 million
people may need humanitarian assistance this year. The Sudanese Government is
working to make progress on economic reform, reduce the fiscal deficit and mitigate
shortages of goods. China welcomes its efforts. The international community should
step up assistance to help the Sudan overcome its difficulties. China calls for early
lifting of unilateral coercive measures against the Sudan.
Fourthly, there must be a smooth transition from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding. The African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has completed its mission. I wish to salute and thank its peacekeepers.
The process to close UNAMID should be steady and orderly. Parties should work
to ensure the safety of UNAMID personnel and property. China welcomes progress
in the deployment of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission
in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and its active efforts. In the light of the actual needs
of the Sudan at present, UNITAMS should focus on helping to advance the peace
process and on mobilizing greater economic assistance in order to achieve sustained
improvement in the Sudan’s situation. In doing so, UNITAMS should fully respect
the views of the Sudanese Government and strengthen its coordination with other
United Nations bodies there.
10/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex V
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Estonia to the
United Nations, Sven Jürgenson
I join others in thanking the briefers for their insightful overviews. Allow
me also to extend a very warm welcome to the new Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Perthes. I look forward to working with him, and he can
count on Estonia’s support.
It is commendable that, despite multiple challenges, the Sudan has continued
to make progress in its historic transition. Estonia recognizes the many important
milestones that the Sudan has achieved since the last Security Council briefing (see
S/2020/1183), ranging from governance and human rights to economic reforms.
We welcome the announcement by the Sudan of its accession to United Nations
human rights instruments, namely, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment and the International Convention
for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance. Since institutions
form the backbone of democracy, Estonia encourages the Sudan to continue with
institution-building, as set out in the Constitutional Document, especially the
Transitional Legislative Council. We also urge the Sudan to enhance women’s
meaningful participation in the transitional decision-making bodies.
Estonia also welcomes the continued efforts made by the Sudanese to
implement the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. In particular, the formation of
the new transitional Government and the expanded Sovereign Council are important
milestones. We further recognize the Government’s latest cooperation with the
International Criminal Court, as the restoration of justice and accountability remain
crucial. However, it is also important to acknowledge the significant challenges that
lie ahead related to the implementation of the Agreement. Estonia underscores the
importance of the inclusion of women in the implementation of the peace agreement.
In addition, we call on the parties that have not yet joined the peace agreement to do
so urgently.
Unfortunately, the socioeconomic situation continues to impose significant
hardship on the Sudanese people, but we commend the important steps that the
transitional Government has taken to put the country on the path towards economic
recovery. Estonia welcomes the exchange rate reform and encourages the transitional
Government to continue implementing its critical reform agenda.
The continued reports of intercommunal violence in Darfur are very
concerning. We urge the transitional Government to accelerate the implementation
of its national strategy for civilian protection. We are also concerned about the
destruction of a former site of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur on 23 February. Extending State authority to all of Darfur will have to
remain an important goal.
In all those efforts that I just mentioned, the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) can support the Sudan. I
urge the Sudanese to tap into that resource. In order to have a systematic approach,
we encourage the Sudan to articulate the priority areas where they will need help
from UNITAMS. I further urge the transitional Government to finalize the statusof-mission agreement as soon as possible in order to enable the effective operation
of UNITAMS.
Estonia is concerned about the recent escalation of tensions between the Sudan
and Ethiopia over the Fashaqah border area. We urge the leaders of Ethiopia and the
Sudan to de-escalate the situation and work towards a peaceful solution. Finally, I
21-0349011/31

S/2021/246

would like to reiterate our deep appreciation to the Sudan for offering its generous
support to the Ethiopian refugees who have fled from Tigray.
In conclusion, the Sudan has made significant progress, but much remains to
be done. We hope that the good cooperation between the Sudan and UNITAMS will
help the country to rise to the challenge so that it can complete its historic transition.
The international community must spare no effort in supporting the aspirations of
the Sudanese people to achieve democracy, peace and prosperity.

12/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex VI
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of France to
the United Nations, Nathalie Broadhurst Estival
[Original: English and French]
I would like to thank the briefers for their comprehensive and interesting
presentations.
I would like to stress four points.
France’s priority remains support for the democratic transition in the Sudan.
The progress made over the past three months is very encouraging. I have in mind the
formation of a new Government and the extension of the Sovereign Council, which
includes representatives of former armed groups signatories to the Juba Agreement
for Peace in the Sudan. The Government adopted its programme of work, with
very ambitious goals, including consolidating the peace process. The unification
of exchange rates, which was eagerly awaited by France and numerous partners,
provided a first sign of the political will of the new team.
Important steps have also been taken in the area of human rights. We welcome
the authorities’ decision to ratify the Convention for the Protection of All Persons
from Enforced Disappearance and the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. We also encourage the authorities
to continue their good cooperation with the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights. As we commemorated International Women’s Day
yesterday, allow us to reiterate our support for the elimination of all discrimination
and violence against women and the promotion of gender parity in the Sudan
as elsewhere.
Following the commitment made by President Emmanuel Macron, France will
organize a high-level conference in support of the Sudanese transition in Paris on
17 May. That event will be an opportunity to solemnly mark the return of the Sudan
to the concert of nations, encourage private investors to come back to the Sudan and
renew the commitment of partners to the Sudan’s foreign debt relief. The transition
should contribute to genuine equality between women and men.
Efforts must continue, and even broaden, with regard to the peace process and
the protection of civilians, which is my second point. We encourage the Sudanese
authorities to move ahead with the formation of the Transitional Legislative Council.
The participation of women must also progress, as the new Council of Ministers
has not reached the 40 per cent threshold set by the Constitutional Document and
the Juba peace agreement. The fight against impunity must also continue, with the
establishment of the Transitional Justice Commission, the reform of the National
Human Rights Commission and continued cooperation with the International
Criminal Court.
In Darfur, the violence that occurred on 16 and 18 January and since then,
as well as the looting of the Saraf Umrah site, which was handed over just one
month earlier by the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, is
extremely worrisome. France recognizes the willingness of the Sudanese authorities
to take full responsibility for the protection of civilians in Darfur and encourages
the Government to continue to fully implement its national plan for the protection of
civilians, with the assistance of the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), of course. We further encourage the parties that
remain outside the peace process to join it as soon as possible.

21-0349013/31

S/2021/246

Those efforts take place in a fragile regional context, as many speakers
pointed out.
We welcome the Sudan’s efforts to host and provide protection to more
than 61,000 Ethiopian refugees in the east, with the support of all its international
partners, including France and the United Nations. We must jointly sustain those
efforts to prevent any deterioration in the humanitarian situation. We support the
regional and subregional initiatives to ease rising tensions, particularly with regard
to the land dispute on the border between the Sudan and Ethiopia, where the risk of
escalation is very worrisome. We call on all parties to engage in dialogue, but also
to exercise restraint.
In that context, and this is my last point, France supports the rapid
operationalization of UNITAMS in order to continue United Nations support for
the Sudanese transition. That requires first of all that the Sudan rapidly finalize the
status-of-mission agreement, which is the legal framework required for the Mission’s
action. UNITAMS has a broad mandate that enables it to support the efforts of all
Sudanese authorities to address the challenges posed by the transition: support for
governance and human rights, including the protection of children, support for
the peace process, peacebuilding and, of course, the engagement of economic and
humanitarian actors. We therefore call on the Sudan to make full use of the potential
of that mandate, including in terms of capacity-building.

14/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations, T.S. Tirumurti
Let me begin by thanking Mr. Volker Perthes, Head of the United Nations
Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), and UnderSecretary-General Atul Khare for their briefings on the activities of UNITAMS,
centred around the Mission’s four strategic and interrelated pillars. I would also like
to thank Ms. Kholood Khair, Managing Partner of Insight Strategy Partners, for
her remarks.
First, with regard to the political transition and peace processes, the Sudan
continues to make progress in its democratic transition. The recent developments are
a testimony to the determination and commitment of the Sudanese leadership to lead
the Sudan towards the path of development, peace and prosperity. The measures taken
to implement the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, including expanding the
Sovereign Council, establishing the Council of Partners for the Transitional Period
and the formation of the new Cabinet to include the signatories to the Agreement,
are steps in the right direction. The removal of the Sudan from the United States
list of State sponsors of terrorism is another important milestone in the transition
process, as is the normalization of bilateral relations with Israel. We welcome those
positive developments.
The Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan is a comprehensive, but ambitious
and complex document. The implementation process may therefore face several
challenges. The transition process to a federal and democratic system will not be an
easy one. While the initial steps towards implementation have been taken, a trust
deficit among the parties, outstanding security concerns and a lack of financial
resources have the potential to undermine such efforts. It is therefore important
that the Sudanese stakeholders continue to demonstrate their commitment to the
Agreement and engage constructively to resolve their differences. They must ensure
that the transitional institutions have clearly defined mandates and are inclusive and
effective. To that end, the early formation of the Transitional Legislative Council
and the establishment of the Commissions will be important. It is imperative for the
international community, particularly the United Nations, the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, to support national efforts and extend
all possible help to the Sudan in the implementation of the Agreement.
With regard to the third pillar, it is encouraging to note that the transitional
Government has continued with its institutional and legal reforms. The draft laws
concerning various commissions, including the Transitional Justice Commission,
have been finalized. Again, those are positive developments.
The intercommunal violence in Darfur in the past few months demonstrates
the complex challenges faced by the transitional Government. We commend efforts
to bring the situation back to normalcy in Darfur. We welcome the formulation of
a national plan for civilian protection and the announcement of a 12,000-member
protection force, which is currently in the process of deployment to Darfur. We
also call on the armed movements that remain outside the peace process to join the
negotiating table.
Regarding the fourth pillar, the difficult economic situation is one of the major
impediments in the transition process. The transitional Government has engaged
positively with the international financial institutions and the Friends of the Sudan
grouping, which will help in the mobilization of much-needed financial resources. It
is critical that the international community continue to support the Sudan’s economic
recovery and the transitional Government’s economic reform agenda.
21-0349015/31

S/2021/246

We fully support the Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
in developing an integrated strategic framework and structures to maximize
international support for enhancing the effectiveness of UNITAMS with the
objective of advancing the Sudan’s political transition. We also appreciate the
efforts of Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare and his team at the Department of
Operational Support towards the smooth drawdown of the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). We also encourage UNITAMS
to continue working closely with the transitional Government to ensure a smooth
drawdown of UNAMID, while taking care to bridge any ensuing gaps.
Lastly, India remains committed to supporting all efforts of the transitional
Government of the Sudan towards a successful transition. In that context, we have
bilaterally implemented 49 projects in the energy, transport and agro-industry
sectors in the Sudan through concessional lines of credit worth $612 million. More
than 290 scholarships have been extended annually for capacity-building under
our Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation Programme and other scholarship
programmes. Most recently, India delivered 100 metric tons of food supplies last
November as humanitarian assistance to the Sudan. I am also happy that, under
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access Facility, 820,000 doses of Made-in-India
coronavirus disease vaccines have been supplied to the Sudan. In addition, we are
in the process of delivering 10 metric tons of life-saving drugs to the Sudan in the
coming weeks as a part of our bilateral humanitarian assistance programme.
Let me reiterate that India remains committed to the all-round progress and
inclusive development of the Sudan.

16/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Ireland to the
United Nations, Geraldine Byrne Nason
I want to thank both Special Representative of the Secretary-General Perthes
and Under-Secretary-General Khare, as well as Ms. Khair, for their really insightful
briefings this morning. As this is the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral’s first meeting since assuming his role, I want to congratulate him and
welcome him among us. Of course, I also want to wish him luck. He has a challenging
and ambitious mandate to implement. The timing is critical. He comes in at a really
important moment as the United Nations continues to grapple with the implications
of what, I think by any standards, is a complex transition. On the other hand, we
believe that the scale of his challenge is matched only by the opportunity for the
people of the Sudan.
As we already heard from many speakers, the Sudan is clearly making strong
efforts to advance the transition and implement the Juba Agreement for Peace in
the Sudan. Nevertheless, we of course know that peace processes are at their most
fragile in their infancy.
A comprehensive, civilian-led approach, with the full inclusion of civil
society, will be needed to bring all parties into closer political agreement. At the
same time, the challenge is to move beyond the existing power-sharing arrangements
to actually implementing the Agreement’s substantive components, and to do that as
swiftly as possible.
The next steps must include the formation of the Transitional Legislative
Council and the commissions envisaged under the Agreement. The people of the
Sudan have demanded transparent, civilian-led democratic governance in the Sudan.
That is the least that they deserve. We believe their call must be heeded.
Seeing the benefits of the Agreement materialize on the ground will actually
be the most effective way of maintaining support and attracting those forces outside
the Agreement to join it. We welcome the launch last month of the Samarat Family
Support Programme, to which Ireland was one of the first contributors.
Women, such as the 22-year-old student Alaa Salah, were clearly instrumental
in bringing about the transition in the Sudan. They must not be shut out of the
political process. Barriers to their full, equal and meaningful participation simply
must be addressed. Women in the Sudan also urgently require better protection
against sexual and gender-based violence. In that regard, the Personal Status Law
needs to be reviewed. We also believe that the new draft law to combat violence
against women is welcome, but it will need to be implemented.
We heard that the security situation in Darfur remains very concerning. There
is ongoing fighting and recruitment of fighters in Darfur, including, tragically,
the recruitment of children, by signatory and non-signatory parties to the Juba
Agreement for Peace. In January alone, attacks in Darfur forced more people to
flee their homes in three days than in the whole of 2020 in the Sudan as a whole.
As the protection-of-civilian mandate of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) ends, the Sudanese Government must step up to its
responsibility. The Government’s strong response to recent violence in North Darfur
has been encouraging and should be sustained. The perpetrators of that violence
must also be held accountable. That is critical to breaking the cycle of impunity,
which is fuelling repeated attacks on civilians in the same locations.
There is now an urgent need for the swift implementation of the national plan
for the protection of civilians and the implementation of the security pillar of the
21-0349017/31

S/2021/246

Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan. We believe that the civilian protection force
needs the scale and capacity to do its job effectively. The Security Council, the United
Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan and the Sudan’s
international partners can offer technical support and capacity-building, including on
post-conflict and community police training. I call on the Government of the Sudan
to set out concretely what is needed and how the Sudan’s partners can help.
The recent looting of the former UNAMID site Saraf Umrah in Darfur is
shameful. This former UNAMID site was due to be used as a vocational training
centre for the benefit of the Sudanese people. Such looting, which is unfortunately
part of a historic pattern in Darfur, robs the community locally of a long-term asset.
We welcome the steps taken by the Government to address the challenges associated
with the drawing down of UNAMID, including the creation of a new department at
the Ministry for Foreign Affairs to support both United Nations missions in a more
integrated manner. However, as we have heard, it is of vital importance that the
Sudanese authorities immediately finalize the status-of-mission agreement with the
United Nations.
We do not underestimate it — the challenges facing the transitional Government
and the Sudanese people are immense, not least in terms of humanitarian challenges.
An estimated 13.4 million people will need humanitarian assistance in 2021. The food
security situation is worrisome and is being exacerbated by the Sudan’s economic
difficulties. In this context, I want to commend the solidarity shown by the Sudanese
people to the more than 60,000 refugees who have arrived in eastern Sudan from the
Tigray region of Ethiopia. This needs to be recognized.
Finally, tensions around the border in the Fashaqah region are worrisome.
This weekend’s developments have highlighted how continued tensions can have a
detrimental impact on an already fragile region. We must do our utmost to avoid this.
This dispute must be settled through diplomacy. And the engagement of regional
organizations, particularly the African Union, including its leadership on mediation
efforts, is vital.

18/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex IX
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico to the
United Nations, Juan Ramón de la Fuente Ramírez
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I would like to welcome Special Representative Perthes. We
thank him for his briefing on the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance
Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS) and the situation in the Sudan, a little more than a
month after his arrival in the country. We have also taken note of and appreciate the
information provided by Under-Secretary-General Khare and Ms. Khair.
The transitional Government of the Sudan is at a critical juncture, and we
welcome its efforts to implement the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, which
has three new signatories. We call on those armed groups that have not yet done
so to sign the agreement urgently and without preconditions. Coordination for the
implementation of the agreement is paramount, and we welcome the establishment
of the Council of Partners of the Transitional Period, although it is regrettable that
only one of the 29 members is a woman.
We welcome the appointment of the new Cabinet and the approval of the
budget, but also note the need to improve the transparency of the processes, in
particular those related to the budget.
We urge the formation of the Transitional Legislative Council and the
appointment of state governors, while reiterating the importance of fulfilling the
provisions of the Constitutional Document on achieving the minimum of 40 per
cent representation of women. Only four of the 26 Cabinet ministers are women. We
recognize and support the leadership of Sudanese women in their mobilization and
their struggle for full participation in decision-making bodies.
We are following with concern the escalation of tensions in the Fashaqah area
and the increased military presence on both sides of the border with Ethiopia. We
urge the parties to exercise restraint, seek a peaceful solution to their differences and
ensure the protection of civilians in the area. That will also help to prevent wider
destabilization in the region.
Mexico is closely following the updates regarding the withdrawal of the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur and the full establishment
of UNITAMS. We commend the United Nations country team and the transitional
Government for cementing the benchmarks that will allow further progress on
strategic objectives. Notwithstanding the transition, we express our concern at the
increase in tensions and violence in the Darfur region.
The violence last January in West Darfur, which left 162 people dead and
more than 100,000 internally displaced, is deplorable, and we are following with
concern the consequences of the violent clashes in South Darfur, which resulted
in the displacement of at least another 20,000 people. We look forward to the early
formation of the joint security-keeping force envisaged in the Juba agreement
between Government forces and signatory armed groups.
We urge the Government of the Sudan to continue with the implementation
of the national plan for the protection of civilians. We recognize the challenge
of establishing a protection-of-civilians force. However, efforts relating to
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration in the regular progress reports for
the implementation of the plan are still very limited.

21-0349019/31

S/2021/246

Mexico reiterates its deep concern about illicit arms flows to and from the
Sudan. We reiterate that, as long as there is access to firearms, it will be impossible
to effectively tackle the cycles of violence that have regrettable consequences for the
entire region.
The impact of the conflict on women and children is irrefutable. The reports
of the recruitment of children in Kabkabiyah and Nertiti by some armed groups
signatories to the Juba agreement are simply unacceptable. Moreover, incidents
of sexual violence against women and girls, who are mostly internally displaced,
continue to be reported.
The progress and challenges in the strengthening of the transitional
Government and the multifaceted adjustment that the establishment of UNITAMS
involves should not detract attention from the humanitarian crisis in the country.
By 2021, it is estimated that 13.4 million people will be in need of humanitarian
assistance, and more than 7 million people will be food insecure. We therefore
call for unhindered and safe access for humanitarian personnel to attend to the
most basic needs of a people who have been severely affected by the scourge of
armed conflict.

20/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex X
Statement by the Deputy Permanent Representative of the Russian
Federation to the United Nations, Anna Evstigneeva
[Original: Russian]
We thank our briefers, Special Representative Perthes and Under-SecretaryGeneral Khare, for the information provided on the situation in the Sudan. We
listened carefully to the statement by Ms. Khair.
We consider the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan, signed on 3 October
2020, by the transitional Government of the Sudan and the Sudanese Revolutionary
Front, an important step towards achieving national harmony in the country and
solving the country’s urgent socioeconomic problems. We hope that the armed
groups that remain outside the agreement will also join it. We were pleased to note
that Prime Minister Abdalla Hamdok and the Head of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement-North Abdelaziz Al-Hilu signed the joint agreement on principles on
3 September 2020.
Unfortunately, some Sudanese stakeholders continue to act as spoilers of
the peace process. Therefore, Abdul Wahid Al-Nur, who refused to join the peace
agreements and engage in dialogue with Khartoum, is one of the perpetrators of
antagonism against the Sudan Liberation Army in Jebel Marra. We call on those who
can influence the opposition to bring the necessary pressure to bear on him.
We are encouraged by the fact that the Sudanese authorities have shown that
they are ready to thoroughly address the underlying causes of conflicts, including
in Darfur. Tangible progress in the implementation of the peace agreements
demonstrates that. In that regard, we note the expansion of the Sovereign Council
and the formation of a new ministerial Cabinet.
At the same time, we cannot fail to mention that the Sudan faces many
challenges that have worsened during the coronavirus disease pandemic. The
developments in Libya and the growing number of internally displaced persons and
refugees from the neighbouring States negatively impact the situation in the Sudan.
Against that backdrop, the economic crisis is worsening and social tensions are
increasing. That is why it is crucial not to delay the implementation of initiatives
aimed at economic recovery and peacebuilding.
We are convinced that the Sudan is at a critical stage in the implementation of
the peace agreements and in confronting the challenges I mentioned. To do so, the
Sudan will need broad international support, and Khartoum is entitled to count on
such support.
We welcome the appointment and assumption of office of a new Head of the
United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS).
We wish you, Mr. Volker Perthes, every success and count on your good offices to
bring all Sudanese stakeholders under the umbrella of the Juba Peace Agreement.
We also welcome your first steps towards maintaining balanced contacts
with both branches of Sudanese authorities. It is of the utmost importance that you
support their efforts aimed at ensuring national stabilization and implementing the
constitutional decree of 17 August 2019.
We trust that the work of UNITAMS will strengthen Khartoum’s capacity
in key areas, the first of which are peacebuilding, promoting economic reforms,
implementing sustainable security sector reform and the maintaining peace and the
rule of law. It is important to not only remain united in the face of political signals,
21-0349021/31

S/2021/246

but also to increase economic support for the Sudan to allow the country to resolve
key outstanding issues. Providing assistance with the mobilization of resources
and coordinating humanitarian assistance are also important tasks in the mandate
of UNITAMS.
We believe that removing the Sudan from the United States list of State
sponsors of terrorism in December 2020 will contribute to that. We look forward
to an early review to adapt Security Council sanctions concerning the Sudan to the
reality on the ground.
With regard to Darfur, the dynamic in that region has not undergone any
significant negative changes. Sporadic intercommunal clashes in some states do
not change the overall situation. The authorities’ timely and coordinated response
to incidents and the development and implementation of the national plan for the
protection of civilians are testament to Khartoum’s commitment to a comprehensive
approach to stabilization. The time has come to prioritize the economic recovery and
development of the region, something that the new mission is designed to support.
We believe that the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) has successfully met its objectives. We proceed from the assumption
that UNAMID personnel will be completely withdrawn by 30 June, in line with
resolution 2559 (2020). We commend the work of the Secretariat’s leadership on
the ground, in particular the work by Under-Secretary-General Khare, in terms of
establishing dialogue with the local authorities in order to ensure a smooth and safe
drawdown of UNAMID.

22/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex XI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to the United Nations,
Barbara Woodward
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative Perthes, UndersecretaryGeneral Khare and Ms. Khair for their briefings.
Prime Minister Hamdok and his Government have continued to make progress
on the path towards peace, prosperity and democracy. The formation of a new Council
of Ministers to include signatories of the Juba Agreement for Peace in the Sudan; the
exchange rate reform; the ratification of the Convention against Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment; and the Government’s
cooperation with the International Criminal Court are all noteworthy. As we heard
from Ms. Khair today, civil society, women and youth have a vital role to play in all
aspects of the transition process. And we look forward to the establishment of the
Transitional Legislative Council with a quota of 40 per cent women in this context.
The United Kingdom stands ready to work with the Government of the Sudan
as it continues its transition to democracy. During his visit to Khartoum in January,
Foreign Secretary Dominic Raab announced the United Kingdom’s intention to
provide a $456 million bridging loan to help clear the Sudan’s arrears with the African
Development Bank. This is in addition to the $55 million already contributed to the
Sudan Family Support Programme.
After months of delay, the United Kingdom welcomes the deployment of Special
Representative Perthes and Deputy Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Lo N’Diaye. We also welcome the initial cooperation between the Government of
the Sudan and the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in the
Sudan (UNITAMS).
We recognize that the success of the Sudan’s transition requires sustained
efforts in a number of areas. It is therefore vital for the Government to work with
UNITAMS, including its integrated country team, to identify priority areas for
UNITAMS to provide support in line with its mandate. In order to harness the full
potential of the support of UNITAMS, we urge the Government of the Sudan to work
with the United Nations swiftly to finalize the status-of-mission agreement.
The United Kingdom has provided $500,000 in voluntary contributions
to UNITAMS. We are the first Member State to do so, and we encourage others
to provide support for UNITAMS efforts to support the Government of the
Sudan’s work.
While the Government of the Sudan has taken many steps to overcome the
challenges facing its country, significant obstacles lie ahead. We cannot ignore the
escalation of intercommunal violence in Darfur in recent months. More people have
been displaced in Darfur in 2021 than in all of 2020. We are also concerned by the
destruction of yet another former site of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur, on 23 February, after it was handed over to the Government of
the Sudan.
We echo the Secretary-General’s call for the Government to expedite the
implementation of the national plan for civilian protection, the Juba Agreement for
Peace in the Sudan and other efforts aimed at preventing and reducing violence at
the community level. We also call on the Government of the Sudan to secure the sites
handed over to them by the United Nations so that they can be used to consolidate
peace across Darfur.
21-0349023/31

S/2021/246

I also reiterate our call for those who remain outside the peace process to
engage without preconditions to conclude swiftly negotiations on a comprehensive
peace agreement.
Finally, the United Kingdom continues to closely monitor the situation on
the Sudan-Ethiopia border. We call on both sides to engage in dialogue to prevent
further escalation, which could have significant ramifications for regional peace
and security.

24/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex XII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the United States of
America to the United Nations, Linda Thomas-Greenfield
I would like to welcome Special Representative Perthes to your first Security
Council briefing in your new role. The United States is committed to the success of
the United Nations Integrated Transition Assistance Mission in Sudan (UNITAMS)
and the efforts of the United Nations in the Sudan. We look forward to working
closely with you and your team in the months and years ahead.
Under-Secretary-General Khare, thank you as well for your time today and
for your efforts over the last several months to draw down the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) and carry out the transition of
United Nations responsibilities from UNAMID to UNITAMS. Drawing down a
mission of 7,000 in six short months is a demanding task.
And thank you to Ms. Kholood Khair for your informative briefing today.
Your voice and the voices of other members of civil society are vital to the future of
your country.
And I welcome the representative from the Sudan who is here with us today.
I have followed the Sudan’s evolution for many years, dating back to my time as
Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs. Today it is clear that the Sudan finds
itself at a pivotal moment. After decades of autocratic rule, the Sudanese people —
notably many strong, courageous Sudanese women — have opened a new door for
the country.
The time is now ripe for inclusive, representative government. This a moment
to build a comprehensive and sustainable peace. And it is an opportunity to support
those on the margins and to help those who have suffered achieve justice.
One such specific opportunity is the implementation of the Juba Peace
Agreement. Six months have passed since the signing of this historic agreement
between the civilian-led transitional Government and the rebel groups. And yet the
Sudanese people have not seen the commitment and engagement by signatory parties
necessary for progress. It is time for the Sudan to take basic steps to make it clear
that it is committed to the long-term stability of the country.
The Sudan should complete the formation of an inclusive Transitional
Legislative Council, including at least 40 per cent women representatives. It should
establish the necessary security forces in Darfur and implement the Juba Peace
Agreement security arrangement in the Two Areas. It should create the rule of law
and other transitional justice mechanisms, including the Special Court for Crimes
Committed in Darfur. And it should finalize the mechanisms for monitoring and
evaluating the Juba Peace Agreement. In this moment of transition, the Sudan’s
Government must now assume full responsibility for protecting civilians. The Sudan
does have a comprehensive plan for protecting all civilians in the country. But a plan
is just a piece of paper. It is only useful or good if it is enacted.
The shocking attack in West Darfur in January is a tragic reminder of the
ongoing threats that civilians face in the Sudan. The attack reportedly killed 163
people and displaced 50,000 more. The Government must do more to ensure that
its protection plan will prevent future violence and to hold the perpetrators of this
terrible attack accountable.
We strongly encourage national-level authorities to coordinate with local
authorities and cooperate fully with UNITAMS and the United Nations country team.
They should especially coordinate to build capacity and support to implement the
21-0349025/31

S/2021/246

plan to protect civilians. We are dismayed that the Sudan has yet to sign the status of
mission agreement, an essential document to ensure the safety of UNITAMS staff.
Furthermore, mobile monitoring teams, early-warning systems and local
crisis mediation are essential mechanisms to protect civilians. They promote human
rights and ensure appropriate oversight and accountability for alleged abuses. The
Government must work with UNITAMS to establish these mechanisms as soon
as possible.
The United States was also very concerned to see a former UNAMID team
site looted on 17 February, and you have heard this from other Council members as
well. We call on the Sudanese authorities to hold the perpetrators accountable and
to step up security to prevent looting of the remaining team sites once handed over.
Finally, we are deeply concerned about rising tensions between the Sudan
and Ethiopia around their border, including the recent bellicose rhetoric and
the positioning of additional forces around the el-Fashaga area. We have seen
frequent skirmishes, which have resulted in displacement and casualties, and
the risk of miscalculation is high. So, we call on both sides to expand direct
communications to prevent any further military escalation and commit to discussions
without preconditions.
The United States stands willing to work with partners in the region to support
efforts to de-escalate and find solutions. We stand with the people of the Sudan. We
will continue to work closely with them and the international community to help
create the peaceful, prosperous future they deserve.

26/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex XIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam to the
United Nations, Dang Dinh Quy
I would like to start by thanking Under-Secretary-General Atul Khare, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Volker Perthes and Ms. Kholood Khair for
their statements.
I welcome the representative of the Sudan to our meeting today.
Viet Nam welcomes the continued positive developments in the Sudan in
the past few months. We commend the efforts of the Government of the Sudan in
promoting peace, stability and development in the country, as well as in responding
to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
We applaud the efforts of the United Nations, the United Nations Integrated
Transition Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), the African Union, the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, South Sudan and other international
partners in facilitating the peace process in the Sudan. In the light of the recent
developments, I wish to highlight the following three points.
First, it is imperative to further advance the transitional process in line with
the Juba Peace Agreement. We call for the swift appointment of the state governors
to ensure the effective functioning of the Government at local levels. We hope that
the Sudanese parties can continue to resolve their differences and facilitate the
implementation of the remaining provisions of the Peace Agreement.
Moreover, we urge the remaining armed groups in Darfur to join the peace
negotiations as soon as possible. In this regard, more confidence-building measures
and dialogue opportunities should be promoted, with the support of the United
Nations, regional organizations and neighbouring countries.
We welcome the initial efforts by UNITAMS in assisting the transitional
process, in close cooperation with the Government of the Sudan. We hope that the
Mission will soon reach its full operational capacity. We also reiterate our strong
support for the active role and participation of women in all stages of the transitional
period and beyond.
Secondly, we take positive note of the fact that the security situation in Darfur
has become more stable. We commend the commitment of the Government of the
Sudan to implement the national plan for the protection of civilians, as well as the
Tripartite Coordination Mechanism to ensure a smooth drawdown of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
However, as stated in the latest report (S/2021199) of the Secretary-General,
inter-communal violence and attacks by armed groups in Darfur continue to take
place, resulting in a high number of civilian casualties and displaced persons. We
call for further efforts to strengthen the Government’s capacity for the protection
of civilians, including though cooperation with, and assistance from, international
organizations and Member States.
While we note the efforts of the Government in addressing the recent incidents,
it is also vital that the Government continue to find comprehensive and sustainable
solutions to address the root causes of the security issues in Darfur. This should
include measures to promote dialogue and reconciliation among different tribes
and communities.

21-0349027/31

S/2021/246

Furthermore, we call on the Government to ensure a safe and orderly
withdrawal of UNAMID personnel and the Mission’s assets, in line with resolution
2559 (2020).
Thirdly, it is essential to further address the critical economic and humanitarian
challenges in the Sudan. The international community should continue to support
the Sudanese Government in addressing the COVID-19 pandemic as well as the
current socioeconomic challenges. In this regard, we call for further facilitation of
the country’s access to international financial institutions. As the Secretary-General
notes in his report, the Sudan’s debt relief and access to foreign loans are seen as its
gateway to economic recovery.
In conclusion, Viet Nam re-emphasizes our firm commitment in supporting the
Sudan in this transitional chapter towards long-term peace, security, and prosperity.

28/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

Annex XIV
Statement by the Permanent Mission of the Sudan to the
United Nations
[Original: Arabic]
At the outset, allow me to extend my warm congratulations to you, Madame,
on your appointment as Permanent Representative of the United States of America
to the United Nations and on your presidency of the Security Council for the month
of March. We look forward to working with you on issues related to the Sudan in
the Security Council in the coming period. I also wish to express my appreciation
for the efforts of the Permanent Representative of the United Kingdom during her
presidency of the Security Council last month.
I would like to thank Mr. Volker Perthes, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General for Sudan and Head of the United Nations Integrated Transition
Assistance Mission in the Sudan (UNITAMS), as well as Mr. Atul Khare, UnderSecretary-General for Operational Support, for their briefings today.
The transitional Government of the Sudan continues to implement its policies,
the aim of which is to achieve a democratic transition, institute the rule of law and
improve human rights conditions. In addition, the Government is working to address
the Sudanese economy’s inherited structural deficiencies. The purpose of these
programmes and policies is to build a secure and stable Sudan in which peace and
prosperity reign and in which citizens enjoy freedom and justice, as expressed and
embodied by the slogans of the glorious December revolution in the Sudan.
In order to achieve those goals, during this important stage of the country’s
political, constitutional, economic and social development, the transitional
Government is working to mobilize all national actors and involve them in the
development of comprehensive policies that are suited to the nature, needs and
aspirations of today. To that end, we will work to overcome the obstacles of previous
decades and lay the foundations of a democratic, development-oriented State whose
central concern is the human being, a State that reinforces the pillars of social justice
and comprehensive peace.
In recent weeks, significant efforts have been made in the Sudan to put in
place the institutions of the transitional authority. The Sovereign Council and the
Council of Ministers have been reconfigured to include representatives of the
armed resistance movements that are signatories to the Juba Agreement for Peace
in the Sudan. The Government and all of the parties to the Agreement have been
working closely to implement it, with a view to achieving stability and establishing
comprehensive and sustainable peace. The Prime Minister has declared that the
Government is determined to see through the peace process by pursuing dialogue
with the Sudan People’s Liberation Movement, led by Abdelaziz al-Hilu, and the
Sudan Liberation Movement, led by Abdul Wahid Nur, without any conditions apart
from that of defending the national interest. To that end, an important meeting took
place between Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, Chair of the Sudanese Sovereign Council,
and Abdelaziz al-Hilu in Juba last week.
In the meantime, my Government and the other members of the transitional
authority are continuing their efforts to finish shaping the structures of governance.
The Council of Partners of the Transitional Period, which is currently being formed,
will serve as a coordinating body that brings together the Sovereign Council, the
Council of Ministers and partners from political entities and armed resistance
movements, in order to promote cooperation and partnership among them as they
implement the transitional Government’s programme. Consultations are under
21-0349029/31

S/2021/246

way ahead of the forthcoming announcement concerning the commissions and the
composition of the Transitional Legislative Council, the membership of which will
be representative of all sectors and groups that comprise the Sudanese people and be
responsible for carrying out the legislative and oversight functions that will guide
the transitional process.
The dire economic situation in the Sudan is the product of decades of
mismanagement and poor governance. In addition, the impact of the coronavirus
disease pandemic has compounded the country’s economic challenges. The
Government is making efforts to remedy its structural deficiencies in order to spur
economic growth and achieve economic stability. It intends to lift subsidies for
certain commodities and allow the Sudanese pound to float in relation to foreign
currencies, in order to attract savings from Sudanese citizens abroad, supply banks
with foreign currency and combat currency exchange outside the banking system.
Those economic reforms have certainly affected the most disadvantaged
groups in society. To mitigate that impact, the transitional Government launched
the Thamarat (Fruits) programme. The purpose of the programme is to establish a
social safety net by providing support to the poor, with the assistance of regional and
international partners.
The measures that the transitional Government is taking to remedy the
Sudanese economy’s structural deficiencies will require it to work closely with the
international community, so as to enable the Sudan to benefit from the assistance
of international financial institutions. We call on the international community to
help extend debt relief to the Sudan by taking advantage of the Heavily Indebted
Poor Countries Initiative and channelling capital to the country for the purposes of
investment and providing development support. UNITAMS is expected to play an
important role in that regard.
With respect to the protection of civilians, the promotion of human rights and
the rule of law, the transitional Government continues to undertake institutional
and legal reforms and strengthen frameworks for the protection of human rights and
achieving justice. A national human rights mechanism has been established that is
modelled on international and regional human rights mechanisms and institutions,
and its membership comprises all national stakeholders that are involved in
promoting and protecting human rights. Furthermore, in order to bring justice to
the victims of the Darfur war, an International Criminal Court (ICC) delegation is
currently visiting the Sudan. The delegation is assessing the implementation of the
memorandum of understanding on cooperation that the Sudan and ICC concluded in
February. Arrangements are being made for the ICC Prosecutor to visit the Sudan a
second time in April.
The Sudan recently ratified the International Convention for the Protection
of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance and the Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Ratifying both
conventions constitutes a positive step towards engaging with human rights issues
domestically and establishing and strengthening legal frameworks and mechanisms
that criminalize enforced disappearance and torture and impose the harshest
penalties on the perpetrators. The ratification of those conventions also attests to
the earnest desire of the Sudan to fulfil its international obligations and strengthen
its cooperation with the international community and all partners to protect and
promote human rights.
Since the transitional Government took power in the Sudan, it has committed
to pursuing a foreign policy that is based on mutual respect and cooperation, and
whose central aim is to realize the supreme interest of the Sudan and uphold the
principles of good-neighbourliness and regional cooperation. In so doing, it has been
30/31

21-03490

S/2021/246

guided by the principles of its peaceful revolution and the Constitutional Document.
One of the most significant challenges carried over from the previous era was the
inclusion of the Sudan on the list of State sponsors of terrorism. For that reason,
removing the Sudan from that list and the decisions taken subsequently constitute an
achievement, one that was made possible by the collective efforts of all transitional
Government entities, the people and international friends, chief among them the
United States of America.
The delisting of the Sudan and the country’s return to the international
community herald a new reality, opening broad new political, economic and
diplomatic horizons that will enable the Sudan to play the role that it expects to play
in the region.
I must note that what is happening in the eastern region of the country, along
our border with Ethiopia, is that the Sudanese Armed Forces have retaken our
territory and are redeploying there. The Sudanese forces have not and will not cross
international borders or attack Ethiopia, our neighbour. The Sudan is always mindful
of the abiding and special relationship between the Sudanese and Ethiopian peoples.
That is why it is hosting tens of thousands of Ethiopian refugees who have arrived
in the country since last November. The Government has taken several measures
to respond to this humanitarian situation and opened its borders unconditionally.
A high-level national emergency commission was established in response to the
Ethiopian refugee crisis. The Government has also provided emergency humanitarian
assistance, offering housing, food, health care and drinking water in camps that have
been set up specifically for Ethiopian refugees, and it facilitated the visit of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, Filippo Grandi, to the refugee
camps in eastern Sudan. He expressed his gratitude and appreciation for the role
that the Sudan has continued to play in hosting refugees over the years and for the
Sudanese people’s warm welcome.
The Sudan affirms that it stands ready to cooperate fully with UNITAMS to
achieve the four strategic objectives set out in Security Council resolution 2524 (2020),
namely, to support the political transition, progress towards democratic governance,
embed human rights concepts, provide technical assistance with electoral processes
and constitution drafting, help to establish and build a comprehensive peace, and
mobilize economic and development assistance to achieve those objectives. We also
affirm our full cooperation with the United Nations Secretariat to ensure the safe and
orderly drawdown of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur
(UNAMID) during its exit and liquidation. Atul Khare, Under-Secretary-General
for Operational Support, concluded his successful visit to the Sudan, which took
place from 27 February to 7 March 2021. During that visit, he met with the Chair of
the Sovereign Council, the Prime Minister, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and the
Minister of the Interior. He concluded his visit by signing a framework agreement
on behalf of the United Nations that governs the liquidation of UNAMID and its exit
from the Sudan. The Government is committed to continuing to improve the security
situation in Darfur by implementing the Juba Peace Agreement and collecting
unauthorized weapons, achieving justice, ensuring accountability, implementing the
National Plan for Civilian Protection with the participation of the parties to the Juba
Peace Agreement, and involving the Abdul Wahid movement in the peace process.
Darfur is currently undergoing an important transition from peacekeeping
to peacebuilding. It is our hope that the international community will support the
transitional Government’s efforts to foster sustainable security, peace and stability
in the region.

21-0349031/31
