V. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

or during such session as the case may be, shall announce the membership of the Board. Membership
of the Board shall be for an indefinite period, subject
to the provisions of paragraph 8 below.
"8. Any member of the Board wishing to relinquish its membership shall inform the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference, in writing, of its intention
to do so. The Secretary-General of the Conference
shall bring such communications to the attention of
the President of the Board who, at the commencement of the following regular, special or resumed
session, or during such session as the case may
be, shall announce the revised membership of the
Board.";
2. Further decides that the present members of
the Trade and Development Board shall remain in
office until the new membership of the Board is established in accordance with paragraphs 5 and 7 of resolution 1995 (XIX) as amended by the present resolution.
10th plenary meeting
29 September 1976
B
TERMINATION OF THE INTERIM CO-ORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR INTERNATIONAL COMMODITY ARRANGEMENTS

The General Assembly,
Having considered Trade and Development Board
decision 145 (XVI) of 23 October 1976 on the question of the terms of reference of the Advisory Committee to the Board and to the Committee on Commodities, 3
Decides to terminate the Interim Co-ordinating Committee for International Commodity Arrangements and,
accordingly, to delete the second sentence of paragraph 23 (a) of section II of General Assembly resolution 1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964 on the
establishment of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, as amended by resolution 2904 (XXVII) of 26 September 1972 and by
resolution A above, so that paragraph 23 (a) will read
as follows:
"(a) A committee on commodities which, inter
alia, will carry out the functions which are now performed by the Commission on International Commodity Trade and the Interim Co-ordinating Committee for International Commodity Arrangements;".
106th plenary meeting
21 December 1976
31/14.

Conference on International Economic
Co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII)
of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling further its resolution 3515 (XXX) of 15
December 1975 on the Conference on International
Economic Co-operation,

Taking note of the interim report of the Conference
on International Economic Co-operation on its activities as at mid-September 1976, 4
Noting with growing concern that most of the developed countries participating in the Conference on
International Economic Co-operation have yet to demonstrate the necessary political will to achieve concrete
results,
Considering that the achievement of concrete and
substantial results in all areas under consideration at
the Conference on International Economic Co-operation
is a prerequisite for the success of the Conference and
should make a substantial contribution to the economic
development of developing countries and constitute
a significant advance in international economic cooperation,
I. Expresses its deep concern and disappointment
at the failure of the Conference on International Economic Co-operation to achieve any concrete results
so far and its profound concern at the adverse effect
which the failure of the Conference will have on international economic co-operation;
2. Urges all the countries participating in the Conference on International Economic Co-operation to
make all the necessary efforts to ensure the success
of the Conference;
3. Further urges the developed countries participating in the Conference on International Economic Cooperation to respond positively to the proposals put
forward by the developing countries so as to reach
concrete results in all areas at the concluding Ministerial
Meeting in December 1976;
4. Affirms the interrelationship of the work of the
four Commissions of the Conference, which should
proceed in a parallel manner and should achieve an
interrelated set of positive and concrete results;
5. Decides to consider during its current session the
results of the concluding Ministerial Meeting of the
Conference on International Economic Co-operation,
which will take place from 15 to 17 December 1976.
72nd plenary meeting
19 November 1976
31/17.

Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 15 (A/31/15), vol. II, annex I.

Assistance to Cape Verde

The General Assembly,
Deeply concerned at the serious economic situation
in Cape Verde as a result of eight successive years of
drought, the return of large numbers of refugees and
the total lack of infrastructures for development inherited from the colonial period,
Noting that Cape Verde, in December 1975, shortly
after independence, joined the Permanent Inter-State
Committee on Drought Control in the Sabel,
Recalling its resolutions 3054 (XXVIII) of 17
October 1973 and 3512 (XXX) of 15 December 1975
on the economic and social situation in the SudanoSahelian region, victim of the drought, and measures
to be taken on its behalf,
Recalling further that Cape Verde is included in the
list of the most seriously affected countries, 5
4 A/311282,

3 See

55

annex.
Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first
Session, Supplement No. 21 (A/31/21), annex IV.
5 See
