S/2014/365

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
22 May 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
Security Council resolution 2139 (2014)
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is the third submitted pursuant to paragraph 17 of Security
Council resolution 2139 (2014), in which the Security Council requested the
Secretary-General to report, every 30 days, on the implementation of the resolution
by all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic.
2.
The report covers the period from 22 April to 19 May 2014. The information
contained in the report is based on the data available to the United Nations actors on
the ground and reports from open sources and sources of the Government of the
Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Major developments
A.

Political/military
3.
Violence continued unabated across the Syrian Arab Republic during the
reporting period, including but not limited to Aleppo, Hama, Deir-ez-Zor, Homs,
Damascus, Rural Damascus and Dar’a governorates. Indiscriminate aerial strikes
and shelling by government forces resulted in deaths, injuries and large -scale
displacement of civilians, while armed opposition groups also continued
indiscriminate shelling and the use of car bombs in populated civilian areas.
4.
In Aleppo, indiscriminate air strikes by government forces continued in the
city and surrounding countryside. Reports indicate that hundreds of people,
including civilians, have been killed or injured and tens of thousands have continued
to flee the city. Human Rights Watch, which conducted an analysis of satellite
imagery from late April to early May, concluded that over 140 major damage sites
were strongly consistent with the impact of air strikes. They refer specifically to the
continued indiscriminate use of barrel bombs targeting predominately residential
buildings and neighbourhoods in opposition-controlled areas. Data on 50 impact
sites collected between 26 April and 7 May indicate that the Government had
significantly increased its bombardment over the preceding weeks.

14-53735 (E)

230514

*1453735*

S/2014/365

5.
Also according to Human Rights Watch, during the reporting period,
opposition forces have detonated at least three and possibly four large tunnel bombs
underneath government military positions in the centre of Alepp o city. These tunnel
bombs have destroyed dozens of buildings, leaving blast craters upwards of 50
metres in diameter. On 8 May, the Islamic Front announced that it was responsible
for a tunnel bomb detonated under the historic Carlton Hotel, which had bee n used
as a base by Syrian government forces. Tunnel bombs can be indiscriminate in their
impact across large areas.
6.
The city of Aleppo experienced significant cuts in its water supply from 5 to
13 May. The city’s main pumping station was deliberately shut down by opposition
groups surrounding the city, leaving at least 2.5 million people in the city without
access to water for drinking or sanitation. The water supply was restored to Aleppo
city on 13 May, following negotiations between the Sharia Commi ttee and the
Division of Public Services (affiliated with opposition groups) in eastern Aleppo.
7.
Over the reporting period, clashes between Jabhat al-Nusra, Free Syrian Army
groups and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS) led to the displacement of
at least 115,000 people in Deir-ez-Zor and Dar’a governorates. Displacement
occurred following clashes for control of gas and oil resources around the Koniko
gas station in Deir-ez-Zor governorate and after Jabhat al-Nusra gained control of
Kerba village in Dar’a governorate.
8.
Intensified clashes were reported in Damascus, particularly in the Jobar
neighbourhood of the city, which resulted in the displacement of the remaining
residents. The neighbourhood is now almost deserted. Clashes were also repor ted in
several locations in eastern Ghouta (Rural Damascus), such as Douma, Mileha and
Harasta.
9.
While the United Nations remains unable to provide a verified assessment of
the presence and activity of non-Syrian fighters on a nationwide scale, non-Syrian
fighters continue to support both opposition groups and government forces in the
Syrian Arab Republic. Messages designed to recruit non-Syrian fighters continue to
circulate on various social networking sites. On 8 May, the ministers of the interior
or home affairs of France, Germany, Jordan, Morocco, Spain, Sweden, the
Netherlands, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland and the United States of America met in Brussels to discuss the issue and
measures to improve cooperation among their countries to prevent the travel of their
nationals to the Syrian Arab Republic to join the fighting.

B.

Human rights
10. Children continue to bear the brunt of the impact of the conflict. Three major
incidents occurred on 29 April: mortar shells in the Damascus suburb of
Al-Shaghour killed 14 children and injured 81 others at the Badr al -Din al-Hussein
technical institute; a mortar attack in the Adra area of Rural Damascus reportedly
killed three children at a shelter for internally displaced families; and the explosion
of a car bomb in a busy part of the city of Homs reportedly caused the deaths of at
least 100 people, including many women and children. More than 100 people were
also injured. An air strike that hit Ain Jalout School in the Al-Ansari neighbourhood
of eastern Aleppo city on 30 April is reported to have killed 30 children and injured
dozens during a students’ art exhibition. On 3 May, three mortars landed on the

2/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

Faculty of Economy and Trading, University of Aleppo, repor tedly killing
12 students and injuring 16 others.
11. Reports of the recruitment and use of children in hostilities, child labour and
the detention of children continue to be received through different credible sources.
The presence of young people during the recent negotiated withdrawal of opposition
fighters from the old city of Homs was also observed, confirming earlier,
documented patterns of recruitment and use of children in hostilities.
12. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Hu man Rights
(OHCHR) has received reports of several incidents of alleged use of toxic gas,
including during the reporting period. Targeted areas include Telmans in Idlib
governorate and Kafr Zita in Hama governorate. Suffocation as a result of the
attacks was reported to have caused dozens of deaths and injuries. These allegations
have not been confirmed. On 29 April, the Director General of the Organi zation for
the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) announced the creation of an OPCW
mission to establish the facts surrounding allegations of the use of chlorine in the
Syrian Arab Republic. The Syrian Government has agreed to the mission.
13. Humanitarian conditions inside Aleppo Central Prison further deteriorated.
The standoff between government forces inside the prison and Jabhat al-Nusra and
Ahrar al-Sham, which have surrounded the prison since mid-2013, continued to
adversely affect the lives of hundreds of prisoners and detainees, including an
estimated 100 minors. During the reporting period, at least two prisoners died in the
prison. Lack of medical treatment resulting from the siege and the ongoing fighting
in the vicinity led to the death of a female prisoner on 4 May, owing to untreated
tuberculosis. On 6 May, a male prisoner was killed when a gua rd opened fire on a
group of prisoners. The body of this prisoner remained in a cell for two days, before
being removed on 8 May. During the reporting period, OHCHR received an analysis
of satellite imagery purporting to show the existence of a burial site in the prison
complex where hundreds of prisoners have reportedly been buried since 2011. The
causes of death reportedly include lack of medical attention for injuries and
untreated diseases, some of which are caused by unhygienic prison conditions;
starvation; being caught in the middle of fighting between the parties to the conflict;
and the shooting of prisoners by guards in retaliation for opposition attacks against
the prison.
14. On 30 April, the families of at least eight Palestinian refugees from Yarmouk
camp were informed of the deaths of their relatives while in the custody of different
Syrian branches of the security services in Damascus. According to information
collected by OHCHR, all of the victims were arrested in 2014 and were in good
health at the time of their arrest, including two brothers who were arrested on
28 April, two days before they died. Some families have already received the bodies
of their relatives and OHCHR has received information alleging that these detainees
died as a result of torture.
15. Reports received by OHCHR advised that in Ar Raqqah, on 29 April, ISIS
fighters executed seven individuals, apparently in relation to their alleged
participation in an attack on ISIS. Images of the bodies of two of the men attached
to lampposts were widely circulated on the Internet.
16. Members of the independent international commission of inquiry on the
human rights situation in the Syrian Arab Republic, OHCHR and United Nations

14-53735

3/24

S/2014/365

human rights personnel, including special procedures mandate holders, continue to
be denied access to the Syrian Arab Republic. On 13 May, OHCHR addressed a note
verbale to the Syrian Government, requesting access to the country, in particular to
detention sites where torture allegedly had occurred.

C.

Humanitarian access
17. Approximately 9.3 million people, more than 6.5 million of them internally
displaced, continue to be in need of urgent humanitarian assistance within the
Syrian Arab Republic. It is estimated that 3.5 million people reside in areas that are
difficult or impossible for humanitarian actors to reach. This number includes at
least 241,000 people who live in areas besieged by either government or opposition
forces. Figures for the number of people in need of assistance in the Syrian Arab
Republic will be revised at mid-year to reflect developments on the ground.
18. Access to both government-controlled and opposition-controlled areas has
dropped significantly since the previous reporting period. The implementation, on
5 May, of a new transport facilitation mechanism put in place by the Government
has been a major factor in this reduction in access. The procedure requires the
sealing of trucks carrying humanitarian supplies and is intended to facilitate passage
at checkpoints. The lack of understanding of the new procedure by security officials
at checkpoints has resulted in delays. Government security officials at checkpoints
are stopping convoys which do not have additional facilitation letters. In addition,
convoys cannot be loaded because there are insufficient dedicated security
personnel in the warehouses in which the trucks are being sealed. The United
Nations continues to request clarity and consistent implementation of the new
procedure from the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Ministry of Social Affairs.
19. Food deliveries for the May 2014 dispatch cycle have slowed considerably. As
at 12 May, the World Food Programme (WFP) had only been able to dispatch food
rations to assist 942,000 people in 10 of the 14 Syrian governorates, reac hing 22 per
cent of the planned 4.25 million across the Syrian Arab Republic in comparison to
47 per cent achieved at the same time in April. During the reporting period,
assistance reached 33 locations, or 12.6 per cent, of the 262 locations identified as
being hard to reach or besieged. This included the food and nutrition assistance
provided by WFP, the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine
Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) and the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF) to almost 150,000 people (4.3 per cent of 3.5 million), and non-food
items provided to 52,702 people. Of the 3.5 million people in hard-to-reach areas,
2.3 million (64 per cent) received safe water from UNICEF through the provision of
sodium hypochlorite, generators and water tanks. WFP reported a sharp decrease in
the number of people reached in hard-to-reach areas, from the 302,250 people
reached in the previous reporting period to 98,500.
20. Despite these challenges, limited assistance, given the scale of need, continued
to be delivered across the Syrian Arab Republic. In addition to WFP food delivery
for 942,000 people, the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) provided non-food items to 218,694 people in need. UNICEF
delivered 50 metric tons of sodium hypochlorite to the Department of Water
Resources in Deir-ez-Zor governorate, and 20 metric tons to the department in
Al Raqqah governorate for the treatment of potable water. It is estimated that

4/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

1.3 million people living in opposition-controlled areas will benefit from a supply of
safe drinking water as a result of this intervention. The United Nations Population
Fund (UNFPA) provided support for mobile clinics and medical points in Damascus,
Rural Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Deir-ez-Zor, Ar Raqqah and Hama and provided
lifesaving reproductive health services to more than 21,500 women. UNFPA also
provided medicines and other supplies to 300 primary health -care centres and three
referral hospitals of the Ministry of Health, the Syrian Arab Red Cre scent and the
Syrian Family Planning Association. UNICEF, in partnership with the Directorate of
Education and local non-governmental organizations, distributed educational
supplies for more than 54,000 students in Al-Hasakeh and Idlib governorates. The
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) provided
agricultural assistance to over 58,000 people in Idlib, Aleppo and Rural Damascus.
Besieged areas
21. Approximately 241,000 people remain besieged — 196,000 in areas besieged
by government forces in Madamiyet Elsham, eastern Ghouta, Darayya and
Yarmouk, and 45,000 in areas besieged by opposition forces in Nubul and Zahra.
During the reporting period, the siege of the old city of Homs ended.
22. During the reporting period, assistance reached the three besieged
communities of Nubul, Zahra and Yarmouk. Food assistance was delivered to
16,576 people, or 6.9 per cent of the 241,000 people in besieged areas (to 9,000 in
Nubul and Zahra by WFP, and to 7,576 in Yarmouk by UNRWA); non-food items
were delivered to 5,000, or 2.1 per cent, of the besieged. Water and sanitation items
were distributed to cover the needs of 10,000 people, or 4.1 per cent. Medicines,
including those for chronic diseases, were provided to cover the needs of more than
15,000 people, or over 6 per cent.
23. Eastern Ghouta. Some 150,000 people remain besieged in eastern Ghouta. A
note verbale was addressed to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs on 16 April,
requesting the deployment of an inter-agency mission with assistance for up to
5,000 people, and medicines for up to 50,000. Clearance from the Ministry was
received on 24 April. However, as no agreement was reached on the inclusion of
medical supplies, the convoy did not proceed. On 13 May, another note verbale was
sent, requesting approval for the travel of an inter-agency convoy to Douma. During
the Joint United Nations/Government Committee meeting held on 15 May, the
Government verbally informed the United Nations that the convoy would be
authorized. Written authorization is awaited. Eastern Ghouta was last reached with
humanitarian assistance on 29 March 2014.
24. Madamiyet Elsham. Some 20,000 people remain besieged in Madamiyet
Elsham. Three inter-agency convoy requests were made during the reporting period
to deliver multi-sectoral assistance for up to 5,000 people, and medicines for up to
37,000 people. All three requests to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs remain
unanswered. Madamiyet Elsham has not been reached with assistance since October
2012, except for polio vaccinations.
25. Yarmouk. Some 18,000 people remain besieged in Yarmouk. UNRWA was
permitted to conduct distributions on 17 days and delivered 5,682 food parcels,
enough for 7,576 people for one month. However, UNRWA was prevented from
conducting distributions on eight days during the reporting period.

14-53735

5/24

S/2014/365

26. Darayya. Approximately 8,000 people remain besieged in Darayya, Rural
Damascus, with no access to assistance during the reporting period. Daily shelling
and the use of barrel bombs have been reported, causing extensive damage and
destruction. Darayya was last assisted in October 2012.
27. Old city of Homs. During the reporting period, a ceasefire led to the
evacuation of fighters and a small number of civilians from the old city of Homs, as
part of an agreement negotiated by the parties. Under the agreement, fighters were
allowed to leave the old city with some small weapons and were transferred by bus
to Al-Dar al-Kabira (an opposition-controlled area of rural Homs governorate). The
safe departure of the fighters was conditional upon the release of 70 governmentaffiliated individuals held by the opposition in Aleppo and the coastal region.
Approximately 2,300 people exited the old city on 7, 8 and 9 May. Of these, around
40 people were identifiable as civilians (women, children, elderly). Twenty-three
Christians chose to remain in the old city. A total of 15 wounded people were
transported by the Syrian Arab Red Crescent ambulance, 14 of them to Al-Dar
al-Kabira and one to Ar Razzi Hospital in Homs.
28. Since the siege of the old city of Homs ended, large numbers of people have
returned to visit the area daily. Large-scale structural damage, a lack of water and
power supplies, risks of unexploded ordnance and health risks from open sewage
prevent a sustainable return in the short term. At least 50 per cent of the
neighbourhoods in the old city are now destroyed or damaged. The Governor has
declared the intention of the authorities to restore essential services.
29. Nubul and Zahra. Around 45,000 people remain besieged by opposition
forces in Nubul and Zahra. On 9 May, a joint United Nations and Syrian Arab Red
Crescent convoy delivered humanitarian assistance to the two towns, including food
for 9,000 people, medicines for 15,000 and non-food items. On the way to Nubul
and Zahra, assistance for 3,000 was also delivered through the Syrian Arab Red
Crescent to the four opposition-held villages of Kfar Hamra, Maaret Elartiq, Hariten
and Hayyan. It was originally agreed that 70 per cent of the assistance would g o to
Nubul and Zahra and the remaining 30 per cent to the other villages. However, this
was subsequently renegotiated by the two sides to a 60:40 ratio. The United Nations
expressed its concerns on 6 May to the Director of the Syrian Arab Red Crescent
Aleppo and the Governor of Aleppo that the agreement between the Government
and the opposition to allocate humanitarian assistance was based on arbitrary
criteria. The United Nations emphasized to the Governor of Aleppo and to the
opposition groups that there should be no conditionality in relation to humanitarian
assistance.
Cross-border assistance
30. During the reporting period, the Syrian and Turkish Governments approved a
second shipment of humanitarian supplies through the Nusaybin/Qamishli border
crossing. A total of 36 WFP trucks transporting 11,471 food rations arrived in
Qamishli on 15 May.
31. In March, the United Nations sought the consent of the Syrian Government to
use additional border crossings identified as vital for reaching over 1 million people
in what have proved to be impossible-to-reach areas. To date, the Government has
refused to agree to the use of these crossing points, restating its long -standing policy
of refusing to use international crossing points not under its control, irres pective of

6/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

the humanitarian imperative. The key border crossings required to scale up
humanitarian operations are Bab al-Salameh and Bab al-Hawa on the border with
Turkey, controlled by the Islamic Front; Al Yaroubiyah crossing point with Iraq,
controlled by the Democratic Union Party; and Tal Shihab crossing point with
Jordan, controlled by the Free Syrian Army.
32. Since January 2014, international non-governmental organizations and Syrian
partners report the delivery of assistance to 65 of the 262 hard -to-reach locations,
comprising 25 per cent of those identified by the United Nations as priority areas for
access where urgent needs should be addressed. Turkish non-governmental
organizations have also been providing much-needed assistance, especially in the
northern part of the Syrian Arab Republic. However, insecurity, fighting, threats to
aid workers and attacks on humanitarian convoys, in addition to administrative
requirements in neighbouring countries and inadequate levels of funding, are among
the obstacles hampering humanitarian access by international non-governmental
organizations to people in need.
Free passage of medical supplies, personnel and equipment
33. Prevention of delivery of essential medical supplies and equipment,
particularly to opposition-controlled areas, continues to lead to civilian loss of life
and lack of access to lifesaving medical assistance. Only medicines for
non-communicable diseases, analgesic tablets and antibiotic pills are generally
allowed into opposition areas. All injectable medicines, antiseptics, serums,
psychotropic medicines and surgical items, or any item that may be used for surgical
interventions (including bandages and gloves) are routinely denied inclusion in
convoys. During the reporting period, 89,652 people were deprived of medical
assistance as a result of lack of approval or removal of medical items from inter agency convoys to hard-to-reach locations. However, thousands more were also
deprived of all types of assistance in areas not considered hard to reach.
34. On 4 May, the World Health Organization (WHO) delivered a shipment of
40 metric tons of lifesaving and chronic disease medicines, and surgical equipment
for 117,000 people, to Ar Raqqah city to support the local health authorities and
non-governmental organizations, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. WHO
was also able to deliver some medical supplies to the two hard -to-reach areas of
Talbiseh and Mashraf, in Homs.
35. The sixth countrywide vaccination campaign for polio took place fro m 4 to
8 May 2014, targeting 2.8 million children. The numbers of children reached are
expected to be available in the third week of May.
36. On 14 May, the non-governmental organization Physicians for Human Rights
reported that systematic attacks on the health-care system in the Syrian Arab
Republic over the past three years had resulted in the deaths of 460 health
professionals and the widespread destruction of hospitals and clinics, particularly in
Rural Damascus and Aleppo governorates. The organization confirmed 150 attacks
on 124 facilities between March 2011 and March 2014. Government forces
committed 90 per cent of the attacks, 7 per cent were committed by opposition
groups and 3 per cent could not be attributed. Of the 10 confirmed attacks by
opposition groups, 9 took place in the past year. Physicians for Human Rights data
also indicate that 20 hospitals were hit repeatedly, 3 of them until they were

14-53735

7/24

S/2014/365

completely destroyed or forced to close. Since January 2014, at least 14 attacks on
medical facilities have taken place and 36 medical workers have been killed.
Administrative procedures
37. The implementation of the new procedure for the clearance of trucks has
slowed down the delivery of humanitarian assistance. By 13 May, at least 150 trucks
were held up at locations throughout the country, in particular at the entrance to
Damascus, with facilitation letters in addition to the ones already required being
demanded by security personnel at checkpoints.
38. The revised visa policy established by the Syrian Government on 4 March
continued to be implemented. From 22 April to 15 May, the United Nations
submitted 38 new requests for visas or visa renewals. Of these, 11 were approved
within the agreed time frame of 15 working days, while 27 remain pending . In
addition, 21 new requests submitted prior to the reporting period remain pending,
including one from the Department of Safety and Security. No progress has been
made in obtaining visas for international non-governmental organizations, with
13 visa requests still pending.
39. During the reporting period, approval was received from the Ministry of
Foreign Affairs for three additional national non-governmental organizations to
work with United Nations agencies in Aleppo, Al-Hasakeh and Damascus
governorates. On 15 May, one national non-governmental organization operating in
Ar Raqqah governorate was officially dissolved by the Government. Several United
Nations agencies relied on this organization to deliver assistance to hard -to-reach
areas, including food, non-food items and vaccinations. International
non-governmental organizations are still not authorized to work with national
non-governmental organizations and their standard memorandum of understanding
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent continues to contain many restrictive clauses.
40. International non-governmental organizations are still unable to conduct
independent (or joint) needs assessments and monitoring of the impact of their work
in government-controlled areas. Where needs assessments have been conducted by
international non-governmental organizations, they have been limited or based on
unverifiable sources, and it remains impossible for such organizations to access
communities openly and directly.
Safety and security of staff and premises
41. Security conditions deteriorated in Damascus during the reporting period. On
6 May, an estimated 20 mortars landed in Damascus city, including several in the
area immediately surrounding the location where many international United Nations
staff reside. Armed opposition groups claimed responsibility for the targeting of a
Parliament building in the area.
42. A total of 26 United Nations national staff members remain detained
(24 employed by UNRWA and 2 employed by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP)). Two UNRWA national staff members are missing.
43. A national staff member of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
and an OPCW and United Nations contractor sustained non-life-threatening injuries
when a mortar landed in a residential area in Al-Shalaan district, Damascus, on

8/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

6 May. On 15 May, an anti-aircraft round hit the UNRWA Area Office in Aleppo and
fell in front of the main gate. No injuries were reported.
44. There is increasing concern for Syrian aid workers in areas such as Aleppo,
Homs and Damascus governorates, where they are threatened and face arrest by the
parties for delivering assistance. International non-governmental organizations have
received unconfirmed reports of humanitarian aid workers, including doctor s, being
arbitrarily arrested while delivering aid.
Observations
45. There has been no reduction in the appalling patterns of violations of
international humanitarian law and human rights abuses, as documented in my
previous reports. Disrespect for human life and dignity remains a defining feature of
the Syrian conflict and is at the root of the continued killing, the enforced
disappearances, the torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment, the
instances of arbitrary arrest and detention, the kidnappings, and the sexual and
gender-based violence.
46. I am shocked by the indiscriminate use of explosive weapons in populated
areas, where children in particular continue to be at the forefront of the casualties.
Barrel bombs, mortars and car bombs have killed and maimed thousands over the
past weeks. I remind parties to the conflict that the deliberate targeting of civilians
is a war crime. I am also gravely concerned for the well-being of the 2.5 million
people in Aleppo city following the intentional disruption of water supplies by a few
armed opposition groups, including Jabhat al Nusra, Al-Tawheed Brigade, Ahrar
al-Sham Islamic Movement, Al-Sham Brigade and some other smaller groups,
although water supply has now gradually resumed in the city. To deprive an entire
city of a lifeline as crucial to survival as water amounts to collective punishment
and is a flagrant violation of the most basic precepts of international humanitarian
law.
47. Once again, I appeal to Governments in the region and be yond to stop the flow
of arms and fighters to all parties in the Syrian Arab Republic. It is having a hugely
destabilizing impact on the region and beyond. Governments with influence need to
do everything they can to stop those from outside the Syrian Arab Republic entering
the country, regardless of whether they are invited or not, and taking up arms , as
well as to prevent terrorist groups from acquiring financial resources, weapons and
other supplies.
48. Humanitarian agencies in the Syrian Arab Republic continue to do their best to
reach the millions of men, women and children in need of lifesaving assistance
throughout the country, despite major obstacles. This assistance is being delivered at
great personal risk as needs continue to grow in government, opposition and
contested areas.
49. In my previous report to the Security Council (S/2014/295), I described as
“shameful” the fact that people were being deliberately forced to live under the
inhumane and illegal conditions of siege warfare. Thirty days later, for
approximately 241,000 people, this situation remains unchanged. For over
3.5 million others, access to humanitarian assistance continues to be unpredictable
and woefully inadequate. Despite the adoption of Security Council resolution 2139
(2014), the situation on the ground has become worse, not better. Parties to the

14-53735

9/24

S/2014/365

conflict, particularly the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, continue to deny
access for humanitarian assistance in a completely arbitrary and unjustifiable
manner. I remind the Council that intentionally using starvation as a weapon of war
is a gross violation of international humanitarian law.
50. The next two weeks are critical in terms of ascertaining whether there is scope
for progress in terms of widening access. It is essential that the significant problems
with the new procedures for the sealing of trucks be immediately resolved without
bureaucratic foot-dragging.
51. The Government of the Syrian Arab Republic is failing in its responsibility to
look after its own people. It is failing in that responsibility through its refusal to
give consent to humanitarian organizations to use all means at their disposal,
including the use of border crossings operated by opposition groups, to deliver
urgently needed lifesaving humanitarian assistance which, by its nature, lies outside
the political and military dimensions of the conflict. Arbitrarily withholding consent
for the opening of all relevant border crossings is a violation of international
humanitarian law, and an act of non-compliance with resolution 2139 (2014).
Meeting the demand of the Security Council that all relevant bord er crossings be
immediately opened for the passage of lifesaving assistance is not an abdication of
sovereignty. On the contrary, it is an affirmation of the sovereign responsibility of
the Government to ensure that its citizens do not suffer in such a tra gic and
unnecessary way.
52. The United Nations has submitted a list of border crossings which must be
opened according to the obligations imposed by resolution 2139 (2014). It is ready
to put in place arrangements at key border and line crossings to facilitate, improve
and monitor access. These arrangements could include a mechanism to ensure that,
even with those border crossings that are currently outside the Government’s
effective control, cross-border operations are conducted in a transparent way. The
United Nations will do all it can to facilitate and enable the provision of assistance
by humanitarian organizations across borders in accordance with resolution 2139
(2014).
53. The Security Council, in resolution 2139 (2014), demands that relevant border
crossings be opened. It demands that sieges be immediately lifted. It demands that
schools and hospitals be respected and protected from attack. It demands that
medical personnel and supplies be immediately allowed to reach all those in need. I
deeply regret to inform the Council that the parties to the conflict are not heeding
these demands. Despite the clearly expressed will of the Council and the best efforts
of humanitarian actors, resolution 2139 (2014) has yet to make a meaningful
difference to the lives of the millions of people in need in the Syrian Arab Republic.
Therefore, I call on the Council urgently to consider what steps it will now take to
secure compliance with its demands.
54. Council members are aware that, following consultations with the Secretary General of the League of Arab States, Nabil El Araby, I have accepted with deep
regret the request of Lakhdar Brahimi to relinquish his duties as Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League of Arab States, effective
31 May 2014. For two years Mr. Brahimi has worked tirelessly to bring an end to
the brutal civil war in the Syrian Arab Republic. I deeply appreciate the tenacity he
has shown and his commitment to the people of the Syrian Arab Republic. While I
regret that the parties, and particularly the Government, ha ve thus far failed to take

10/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

advantage of the opportunities offered to end the country’s misery, I remain
unwavering in my conviction that a genuine political transition is the only way to
end the violence and pull the Syrian Arab Republic back from the brin k. The
Geneva communiqué of 30 June 2012 established important and valuable principles
agreed upon by all participants at the Geneva Conference on the Syrian Arab
Republic, and endorsed by the Security Council. The United Nations remains
committed to the principles outlined in the Geneva communiqué and to continuing
to seek a political resolution to the crisis.

14-53735

11/24

S/2014/365

Annex
1. Protection of civiliansa
Examples of attacks on civilian facilities (schools, hospitals, camps, places
of worship)
• Between 1 January 2013 and 31 March 2014, the United Nations documented
60 incidents of attacks on schools, 51 allegedly perpetrated by government
forces and 7 by the Free Syrian Army. The perpetrators of the remaining two
incidents are unknown. During the same period, 16 cases of militarization of
schools were documented: 4 attributable to government forces and 12 to
various armed opposition groups (Free Syrian Army, 7; Al -Nusra Front, 2; and
People’s Protection Units, 3). As a result of increasing insecurity in the
affected areas, an estimated 3,600 students had to suspend their education.
• The United Nations is unable to provide a verified assessment of how many of
the above-mentioned schools are still, at the time of reporting, being used for
military purposes. In most of the cases documented, school facilities were used
as military bases, as depositories for weapons or as military residences/offices.
In the same period three incidents of attacks on educational personnel were
documented, two attributable to government forces and one to ISIS. All
incidents involved the arrest and subsequent detention of teachers.
Attacks on schools during the reporting period
• On 3 May 2014, three mortars landed on the Faculty of Economy and Trading,
University of Aleppo, killing 12 students and injuring 16 others.
• On 30 April, an air raid on Ain Jalout School, eastern Aleppo city, resulted in
at least 30 people killed, mostly women and children, all of whom were
preparing to participate in a children’s art exhibition whic h had been publicly
announced. In addition, the school was partially destroyed.
• On 29 April, two shells hit the Badr al-Din al-Hussein educational institute in
the old city of Damascus in Al-Shaghour neighbourhood. The attack killed at
least 14 people (12 of them children) and injured 81 more (UNICEF statement
issued on 30 April).
• On 29 April, a private educational facility serving both Syrians and Palestine
refugees in the Adra area of Rural Damascus was struck by a high -calibre
mortar, resulting in the deaths of four Palestine refugee children and the injury
of least 20 other Palestine refugee and Syrian civilians (UNICEF statement
issued on 30 April).
• On 22 April, a Palestine refugee child was killed by shrapnel from an
explosion in Dar’a city as he walked home from school with friends and
family.

__________________
a The United Nations has a distinct and regular mechanism of reporting on the six grave violations

against children in armed conflict that has set verification standards and periodicity of reporting
to identify trends.

12/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

• On 22 April, three mortar attacks on the area surrounding Dar al -Salam School
and the Salhiyeh quarter of Damascus left two civilians dead and 36 others
injured.
Large-scale impact of conflict on public services
• As a consequence of the conflict, 4,072 schools were closed, damaged or used
as shelter.
• Of 91 public hospitals, approximately 5 per cent (5) are fully damaged (i.e., the
structure is fully damaged) b and 23 per cent (21) are partially damaged. Thirteen
per cent of public hospitals are reported to be non-functioning. A total of
31 functioning hospitals across governorates are operating without emergency
physicians, and the management of severe acute malnutrition with complications
is only available in 30 per cent of the facilities. b
• Fifty per cent of health workers have left the country with the figures higher
for surgeons.
• An estimated 20 hospitals remain occupied.
• Sixty-two per cent of the public ambulance fleet is out o f service (407 vehicles
out of 658), with over one half stolen, burned or badly damaged.
• Local production of medicines has been reduced by 90 per cent compared to
pre-crisis levels.

2.

Safe and unhindered humanitarian access to people in need
Hard-to-reach areas
• It is estimated that there are 3.5 million people in need in hard -to-reach areas.
• During the reporting period, WFP reached 98,500 people in hard -to-reach
locations, 81 per cent of them in areas not controlled by the Government. Th is
compares with 302,250 people reached in such areas during the previous
reporting period.
• Food assistance was provided to 149,726 people (to 98,500 by WFP, 28,576 by
UNRWA and 22,650 by UNICEF).
• UNRWA distributed food assistance to 28,576 people in hard-to-reach areas (to
20,000 in Neirab, 7,576 in Yarmouk and 1,000 in Ramadan).
• From 22 April to 11 May, UNHCR provided 28,500 people with non -food
items, the International Organization for Migration (IOM) provided non -food
items to 3,702 people, UNICEF to 19,500 people and UNRWA to 1,000 people
in hard-to-reach areas.
Inter-agency convoys and missions
• Four inter-agency convoys were dispatched during the reporting period.
• On 24 April, one convoy to two destinations:

__________________
b Health Resources Availability Mapping System (HeRAMS) report for th e fourth quarter of 2013.

14-53735

13/24

S/2014/365

– Convoy to seven villages in Talbiseh (Homs governorate, under opposition
control ) carrying food for 37,500 people, non-food items for 2,680 people,
including children, and medical supplies for 22,765 people, all residing in
the Talbiseh area in rural Homs.
– Convoy to four villages in Mashraf (Homs governorate, governmentcontrolled, convoy unaccompanied) carrying food for 10,000 people,
non-food items for 1,160 people including children, and medical supplies
for 11,000 people, all residing in rural Homs.
All injectable antibiotics were removed, despite the Governor’s approval. Povidone
iodine and chlorhexidine (both antiseptics) were also removed in the deliveries to
both opposition and government-held areas.
• On 27 April, one convoy to Alfoa'a and Kfrya villages (Idlib governorate,
government-controlled, convoy unaccompanied owing to security restrictions)
which carried food, non-food items and medical supplies to assist 2,000
families (10,000 people) residing in Al Foa'a (1,200 families) and Kfrya (800
families); and to Binnish (Idlib governorate, opposition-controlled,
unaccompanied convoy), carrying food, non-food items and medical supplies
to assist 1,000 families (5,000 people).
• On 8 May, one convoy to Kfar Hamra, Maaret Elartiq, Hariten and Hayyan
(rural Aleppo, all opposition-controlled) which carried food, flour, nutritional
supplements and hygiene kits for 2,000 people (500 beneficiaries per village).
Taking part in the inter-agency convoy were UNICEF, UNHCR, WFP, UNFPA,
WHO, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs and the
Department of Safety and Security. Two further trucks (each carrying supplies
for 100 families) were destined for the opposition-controlled villages of
Anadan and Mayer. The convoy took place after two failed attempts.
• On 9 May, one convoy to Nubul and Zahra (rural Aleppo, besieged by
opposition groups, convoy accompanied) which carried, for both locations,
food for 9,000 people, medicines for up to 15,000 and non-food items for
5,000 people. Taking part in the inter-agency convoy were UNICEF, UNHCR,
WFP, UNFPA, WHO, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and the Department of Safety and Security.
• No response was received to the request for a convoy to Madamiyet Elsham,
submitted on 28 April for a departure between 28 April and 1 May. In addition,
no response was received to a request for a convoy to Madamiyet Elsham,
Rural Damascus, scheduled for 14 and 15 May. As a result, the convoys could
not proceed.
• During a joint committee meeting on 15 May, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs
cleared convoys to Adra’a al-Balad and Adra al-Omaliyeh. It was agreed that a
technical meeting would be held to finalize the implementation modality. The
convoys are now planned for 22 May. The convoys were originally planned to
depart between 6 and 8 May, targeting 3,000 people in both locations.
• One convoy for Douma, eastern Ghouta, is planned for 21 May pending the
approval of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

14/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

• On 15 May, the United Nations hub in Homs sent a reminder letter to the
Governor of Hama, as the request for a joint United Nations convoy to western
rural Hama submitted on 22 April remains pending.
• A series of inter-agency missions led by the United Nations hub in Qamishli
has taken place in Al-Hasakeh governorate, notably to Al-Qahtaniyah and
Jawadieh districts on 5 May, and to Amouda and Derbassiyeh on 10 May. The
main purpose of the missions was to monitor the ongoing distribution of
assistance, to conduct needs assessments and to strengthen relations with local
counterparts. On 15 May, the team undertook a mission to Al -Yaroubiyeh, the
results of which are being compiled.
Besieged areas
• 241,000 people remain besieged (1,000 decrease following the end of the siege
on the old city of Homs).
• Food assistance was delivered to 16,576 people, or 6.9 per cent of those in
besieged areas (to 9,000 people in Nubul and Zahra by WFP, and to 7,576
people in Yarmouk by UNRWA); non-food items were delivered to 5,000, or
2.1 per cent of the people in need; and medicines for 15,000, or 6.2 per cent of
those in need, were delivered to Nubul and Zahra.
• UNRWA was permitted to conduct distributions on 17 days and was prevented
from delivering on 7 days, delivering 5,682 food parcels in total. As each food
parcel is sufficient for four people for 10 days such distributions can feed
7,576 people for one month.
Cross-border assistance
From Turkey
• WFP transported 36 truckloads of food and non-food items from Turkey to the
Syrian Arab Republic through the Nusaybin/Qamishli border crossing from
14 to 16 May. The delivery included 11,471 food parcels. This is the second
time the United Nations has transported relief items from Turkey to the Syrian
Arab Republic since March 2014, when an inter-agency convoy with
78 truckloads of food, medical supplies and non-food items crossed the border.
An additional request from UNHCR remains pending. The United Nations has
requested the use of two additional border crossings with Turkey for the
import of relief items. According to the Turkish Red Crescent, other
humanitarian actors have channelled around $23 million worth of humanitarian
assistance (including $17.6 million in April) on average per month from
Turkey to the Syrian Arab Republic through the zero point delivery system
administered by the Turkish Red Crescent (excluding commercial or other
channels).
From Jordan
• The Al Naseeb border crossing between Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic
remained open for the transportation of relief items, although insecurity
continues to prevent direct cross-line deliveries of relief from As-Suweida to
Dar’a governorate. In 2014, this has included, for example, 321 trucks
containing core relief items for UNHCR (with 31 of 34 requests approved,

14-53735

15/24

S/2014/365

while 3 remain pending). The United Nations has requested the use of one
additional border crossing with Jordan to facilitate access to Dar’a
governorate.
• It is estimated that other humanitarian actors transport assistance worth on
average over $2 million from Jordan to the Syrian Arab Republic (not counting
commercial and other channels).
From Lebanon
• The Masna and Al Arida border crossings between Lebanon and the Syrian
Arab Republic remained open for the transportation of relief items. In 2014,
this has included the importation of items through both trucks and courier
services by several United Nations agencies, including WFP and UNHCR.
• It is estimated that other actors transport relatively small amounts of assistance
from Lebanon to the Syrian Arab Republic through other channels.
From Iraq
• The United Nations has requested the use of the Al-Yaroubiyeh crossing
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic for the importation of relief items.
An initial approval to transport items through the crossing was received in
November 2013, but remains conditional on the Government of the Syrian
Arab Republic regaining control of the crossing from the Democratic Union
Party.
Safety of humanitarian workers
• On 15 May, an anti-aircraft round hit the UNRWA Area Office in Aleppo and
fell in front of the main gate. No injuries were reported.
• A national staff member of the United Nations Disengagement Observer Force
and an OPCW-United Nations contractor sustained non-life-threatening
injuries when a mortar landed in a residential area in Shalaan district,
Damascus, on 6 May. Both the staff member and contractor were hospitalized.
• On 13 May, a mortar shell fell on a Syrian Arab Red Crescent headquarters
sub-branch, in eastern Ghouta. One vehicle was damaged but no casualties
were reported.
• A total of 28 United Nations national staff members continue to be detained or
missing (24 from UNRWA and 2 from UNDP are detained, and 2 UNRWA
staff are missing).
• Syrian humanitarian workers face a number of risks, including summary
execution, kidnapping, arrest, violence and harassment. The number of
humanitarian workers killed since March 2011 is 49: 14 United Nations staff,
34 Syrian Arab Red Crescent staff and volunteers, and 1 staff member of a
non-governmental organization.

16/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

3.

Safe passage of medical personnel and supplies
Attacks on medical facilities during the reporting period
• Syrian forces have systematically attacked the health-care system in
opposition-held areas over the past three years, resulting in the deaths of more
than 460 health professionals and widespread destruction to hospitals and
clinics, according to a report released on 14 May by Physicians for Human
Rights. c
• Physicians for Human Rights advised that government forces had committed
90 per cent of the confirmed 150 attacks on 124 facilities between March 2011
and March 2014. However, attacks by anti-Government forces are increasing,
with 9 of the 10 attacks committed by opposition groups occurring since
March 2013.
• From January to end-March 2014, there have been at least 14 attacks on
medical infrastructure, and 36 medical workers have reportedly been killed.
• The governorates of Rural Damascus and Aleppo have witnessed the highest
numbers of attacks on medical facilities, with 35 attacks each . In Rural
Damascus, 78 medical personnel have been killed, with 77 killed in Homs.
• Of the more than 460 civilian health professionals killed across the Syrian
Arab Republic, at least 157 were doctors, followed by 94 nurses, 84 medics,
and 45 pharmacists. Approximately 41 per cent of the deaths occurred during
shelling and bombings, 31 per cent were the result of shootings and 13 per cent
were due to torture.
Removal of medicines and medical supplies from convoys
• Approximately 89,652 people were denied medical assistance as a result of
medicines and supplies being removed from an inter-agency convoy
dispatched to Talbiseh and Ashrafieh on 24 April, as well as the lack of
approval for convoys to Madamiyet Elsham, Douma and Adra al -Omaliyeh
and Adra al-Balad in the reporting period.
Medical supplies procedures
• A note verbale (facsimile dated 11 April) was sent by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs stating the list of medical supplies approved for transportation in all
United Nations convoys. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs informed the United
Nations that the list was approved for immediate implementation, in addition
to a mechanism for the supervision, sealing and offloading of the trucks on the
understanding that the trucks would not be searched again at checkpoints.
• The new list differs significantly from a more comprehensive list of essential
medicines agreed by WHO and the Ministry of Health in January 2014. The
latter included lifesaving and paediatric medicines and medical supplies
needed for diseases such as cardiovascular conditions and diabetes and for
reproductive health, as well as critical hospital equipment and 168 priority

__________________
c See http://physiciansforhumanrights.org/press/press-releases/new-map-shows-government-

forces-deliberately-attacking-syrias-medical-system.html.

14-53735

17/24

S/2014/365

medicines needed in the Syrian Arab Republic, including 92 essential
medicines. The WHO Regional Director for the Eastern Mediterranean Region
has written to the Minister of Health, copying in the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, urging the Syrian Government to treat all people equally and allow
equal access to essential medicines in accordance with the list agreed in
January 2014. No reply has so far been received from the Government. The
United Nations country team has agreed that inter-agency convoys will not
depart until approval for medical items is received in order to ensure
principled humanitarian assistance.
• For example, on 24 April, the United Nations hub in Homs, in collaboration
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent Homs, organized an inter-agency convoy to
deliver humanitarian assistance to seven villages in Talbiseh and four villages
in Al-Mshrfa. The convoy carried food, hygiene, water and non-food items for
at least 47,500 people, as well as medicine. However, as with other interagency convoys in Homs, prior to departure, government security officials
removed all injectable antibiotics, povidone iodine and chlorhexidine
(antiseptics) from basic health kits before dispatch.
Polio vaccination campaign
• As at 28 April 2014, 36 confirmed cases of wild polio were reported in the
Syrian Arab Republic, with the majority in Deir-ez-Zor (25) and the rest in
Aleppo (5), Idlib (3), Al-Hasakeh (2) and Hama (1). One case was reported in
2014.
• The sixth countrywide vaccination campaign for polio took place from 4 to
8 May 2014. The results of the campaign, including an evaluation of vaccine
access to hard-to-reach areas, is currently under way. Figures on the numbers
of children reached, including by governorate, are not expected to be available
until the third week of May.
• According to the Ministry of Health, areas in 29 districts of 11 governorates
were not accessible during the April polio immunization round: Dar’a (4); Homs
(1); Al-Hasakeh (2); Damascus (3); Aleppo (1) Quneitra (1); Ar Raqqah (3);
Rural Damascus (7); Lattakia (2); Hama (5); and Deir-ez-Zor (1). Based on the
recommendations of WHO and UNICEF, the Ministry of Health agreed to
extend the response efforts until November 2014 (the phase II outbreak
response plan, covering the response in the whole subregion, is under
development).
• The fifth round of the response to the polio outbreak in t he Syrian Arab
Republic of April achieved the immunization of approximately 3 million
children across the country. Immunization was carried out in all governorates.
Post-campaign monitoring data from all sources have found that over 85 per
cent of monitored children were reported to have been immunized in all but
one governorate (Rural Damascus).
• In addition to the ongoing polio campaign, a vaccination week was held in the
Syrian Arab Republic (26 to 30 April) as part of World Immunization Week.
The campaign aimed to provide catch-up routine vaccinations to children and
women who had previously missed out. Of the 442,583 children reached,
around one third, or 143,684, received the needed vaccinations. Of the 257,381

18/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

women reached, around 35 per cent, or 89,238, were eligible for a tetanus
vaccination. The governorates of Aleppo, Dar’a, Al-Hasakeh and Deir-ez-Zor
had a very poor response to the campaign.
• Measles outbreaks are of increasing concern. From the end of March to 3 May,
965 cases of suspected measles were reported through the early warning and
reporting system, including 378 in Ar Raqqah, and 341 in Deir-ez-Zor. In
response, the Ministry of Health will implement a measles vaccination
campaign immediately after the May polio round. UNICEF will provide the
Ministry of Health with 1.3 million doses of monovalent measles vaccine to
respond to the outbreak and to sustain the routine vaccination programme until
the end of 2014. WHO will support the outbreak response campaign and
routine vaccinations by covering part of the operational costs and will also
provide technical support through WHO focal points in the field.

4.

Administrative hurdles
Clearance procedures for convoys
• On 27 March, the Government communicated a new procedure for
unaccompanied truck clearance, whereby trucks will be checked and sealed at
warehouses and not searched at checkpoints. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs
confirmed in writing that instructions regarding the new procedure and
expectations for compliance had been communicated to military checkpoints.
However, a lack of harmonization and understanding of the procedure by
security forces led to significant problems and delays during the first two
weeks of May. At least 150 agency trucks have been stopped or turned bac k at
checkpoints, especially at the entrance to Damascus. Security personnel have
requested facilitation letters in addition to the ones already required. A
technical committee has been created to discuss the issue and seek solutions. It
is not clear how long it will take to resolve the problem. The position of the
United Nations remains that inspection is to be followed by the sealing of
trucks to facilitate passage at checkpoints.
Approval of requests for inter-agency convoys to hard-to-reach areas
Hard-to-reach areas
• In the reporting period, eight requests were made for convoys to hard -to-reach
areas: Talbiseh/Mashraf (1 convoy/2 destinations), Alfoa'a, Kyfra, Binnish
(Idlib) and Adra al-Omaliyeh (2) and Adra al-Balad (2). Six were approved
and two were not. Convoys to Adra al-Balad and Adra al-Omaliyeh could not
proceed as planned during the period from 6 to 8 May. Two new requests for
these locations were submitted to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and approved
on 15 May. Plans are for the convoy to proceed on 22 May, with modalities
still being discussed.
Besieged areas
• Five inter-agency convoy requests were made to besieged communities:
Douma (2), Madamyiet Elsham (2) and Nubul and Zahra (1). Two were
unanswered (Madamyiet Elsham); one to Douma was approved on 24 May but,

14-53735

19/24

S/2014/365

despite the approval, could not proceed as no agreement was reached on the
inclusion of medical supplies. A second request for Douma was made on
13 May and answered verbally on 15 May for a planned departure during t he
period from 19 to 22 May, with modalities still being discussed. One convoy
proceeded to Nubul and Zahra, reaching as well four hard -to-access villages in
opposition-held areas.
Empowered interlocutors
• Government of the Syrian Arab Republic. A security focal point is now
included in the joint working group of the United Nations and the Syrian
Government established following the adoption of Security Council resolution
2139 (2014). Meetings are taking place on an almost daily basis between the
Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Humanitarian Coordinator.
• Opposition. The opposition is still unable to designate empowered
interlocutors. The fragmented nature of the opposition makes it difficult to
have a clearly identified interlocutor for armed opposition groups. Ad hoc
local engagement is ongoing to negotiate access. Interlocutors vary, depending
on the localities for which access is being negotiated.
Visas
• A total of 48 United Nations visa or renewal requests remain pending. The
revised visa policy established by the Syrian Government on 4 March
continued to be implemented. From 22 April to 15 May, the United Nations
submitted 38 new requests for visas or visa renewals. Of these, 11 were
approved within the agreed time frame of 15 working days, and 27 remain
pending.
• In addition, 21 requests for visas or visa renewals submitted prior to the
reporting period remain pending.
• No new requests for visas or visa renewals for international non-governmental
organizations were approved during the reporting period, leaving a total of
13 visa requests pending.
Humanitarian hubs
• The Qamishli hub is functional, with international staff of UNICEF, the
Department of Safety and Security, WFP, UNHCR, WHO and the Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs present on a permanent basis.
• The Aleppo hub is still being operationalized and is currently staffed with
national staff. Missions to Aleppo meant that international staff were pres ent
during the reporting period (UNHCR mission on 26 April; UNICEF mission
from 29 April to 3 May; inter-agency mission from 6 to 11 May).
International non-governmental organization partners
• During the reporting period, no new requests were recei ved from international
non-governmental organizations for approval to work in the Syrian Arab
Republic.

20/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

• The number of international non-governmental organizations approved to work
in the Syrian Arab Republic has been reduced to 16 (departure of one
non-governmental organization at the request of the Government in view of its
cross-border activities and a decision by another not to work in the country).
An international non-governmental organization requested to cease operations
by the Government met with senior representatives of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs on 19 May and agreed to remain in touch and to continue discussion
about its role in the Syrian Arab Republic.
• International non-governmental organizations are still not authorized to work
directly with national non-governmental organizations and are not allowed to
accompany United Nations convoys to the field.
National non-governmental organization partners
• During the reporting period, three national non-governmental organizations
were approved by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs to partner with United
Nations organizations in Aleppo, Al-Hasakeh and Damascus governorates. On
15 May, one national non-governmental organization operating in Ar Raqqah
governorate was officially dissolved.
• Some 84 national non-governmental organizations are authorized to operate
through 141 of their branches countrywide. There are now 18 national
non-governmental organizations allowed to work in Aleppo, 15 in Al -Hasakeh,
8 in Deir-ez-Zor, but only 6 in Rural Damascus, 4 in Dar’a and Idlib, and 3 in
Ar Raqqah.

5.

Funding
• Around $695.6 million of funding for the Syrian crisis was registered during
the reporting period. Of this amount, $214.9 million was for activities inside
the Syrian Arab Republic and $480.7 million was to support Syrian refugees in
neighbouring countries.
• Of the total amount reported for the Syrian Arab Republic during the current
period, 76.2 per cent ($163.7 million) was for activities included in the Syria
Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan. For neighbouring countries, 73.9 per
cent ($355.4 million) of the amount reported was for activities included in the
Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan.
• As at 19 May, total funding for Syria Humanitarian Assistance Response Plan
and the Syria Regional Refugee Response Plan stood at 24 per cent of that
requested ($6.5 billion requested, $1.59 billion received).

6.

Overview of United Nations humanitarian response
Food assistance
• In the May 2014 dispatch cycle, food deliveries are ongoing at a much slower
pace owing to difficulties in the implementation of a new transport facilitation
mechanism for sealing trucks. As at 12 May, WFP has only been able to
dispatch food rations to assist 942,000 people in 10 of the 14 Syrian

14-53735

21/24

S/2014/365

governorates, reaching 22 per cent of the 4.25 million people targeted, in
comparison to the 47 per cent achieved by the same time in April.
• WFP received approvals and facilitation letters that enabled the delivery of
775,282 family food rations in April (in support of nearly 3.9 million people)
and, at the time of writing, 148,542 family rations in May (in support of
942,710 people).
• UNRWA provided food to 102,476 people and cash assistance to 235,491
people. Of this, assistance to 28,576 people was provided in hard-to-reach
areas. UNICEF provided nutritional supplies to 22,650 children under five
years of age.
Core relief items and shelter
• UNHCR participated in a United Nations inter-agency mission to Ras al-Ain
and distributed core relief items to 9,000 people.
• After 14 months without access, UNHCR finally reached Al -Nabek, located in
the Al-Qalamoun district. One of the purposes of the visit was to monitor the
distribution of core relief items for 10,000 persons. UNHCR dispatches core
relief items to cover the needs of 60,000 beneficiaries weekly; this includes the
host community in Al-Nabek and internally displaced persons who fled from
Al-Sahel, Meshrefeh and Jarjeer.
• During the reporting period, IOM delivered non-food items to 27,964
beneficiaries, including 3,702 beneficiaries in hard -to-reach areas.
• During the reporting period, UNICEF provided blankets and quilts to 74,650
people in need in Aleppo, Rural Damascus and Homs through its regular
programmes.
Health
• WHO delivered a shipment targeting 117,000 beneficiaries in the hard -to-reach
area of Ar Raqqah city. Two trucks loaded with 40 metric tons of lifesaving
medicines to treat chronic diseases as well as surgical equipment reached
Ar Raqqah on 4 May to support the local health authorities and
non-governmental organizations, including the Syrian Arab Red Crescent.
• UNICEF provided health-care assistance to 5,000 people in Kafraya Maar
Tamsarin in Idlib governorate.
• UNFPA supported 28 mobile clinics, 27 static clinics and 13 medical points
operated by its partners in Damascus, Rural Damascus, Homs, Aleppo, Deirez-Zor, Ar Raqqah and Hama, which have been providing lifesaving
reproductive health services to more than 21,500 women.
• Some 1,000 women benefited from specialized reproductive health care
through free-of-cost, reproductive health vouchers. In addition, at the request
of the Ministry of Health, UNFPA procured and delivered 2,000 anti -D
injections to cover the gap in unavailability of the medicine. UNFPA also
provided 300 primary health-care centres and three referral hospitals of the
Ministry of Health, the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Syrian Family

22/24

14-53735

S/2014/365

Planning Association with medical equipment, reproductive health supplies,
medicines and contraceptives.
• UNFPA assisted clinics and mobile teams of the Syrian Family Planning
Association and the Syrian Arab Red Crescent in Damascus, Rural Damascus,
Homs, Lattakia, Tartous, Idlib and Dar’a and provided 2,250 women affected
by the crisis with psychosocial support services and psychological first aid
services. Similarly, about 105 survivors of gender-based violence, who
reported to Syrian Family Planning Association clinics, received medical
counselling, community services, and social and legal advice.
Water, sanitation and hygiene
• In Deir-ez-Zor governorate, UNICEF delivered 50 metric tons of hypochloride
to the Department of Water Resources. Some 20 metric tons of hypochloride
was delivered to the Department in Al Raqqah governorate (fully under
opposition control) for treatment of the drinking water supply. It is estimated
that 1.3 million people in opposition-controlled areas will benefit from safe
drinking water as a result of this intervention.
• In response to the water crisis in Aleppo, UNICEF provided a 1,000 kVA
generator which was installed by the Water Board in the Tashrin area. As a
result, 500,000 people are benefiting from access to clean water.
• Around 30,000 people have had improved access to safe water in Idlib,
following the support provided by UNICEF to the water authorities in the form
of generators and storage tanks. Two generators (250 kVA, 350 kVA) were
delivered to the Water Authority for Harim during the reporting period, while
two additional generators of 100 kVA each were delivered to Ma'arrat
al-Nu'man, benefiting 20,000 people.
Education
• UNICEF, in partnership with the Directorate of Education and local
non-governmental organizations, distributed 22,904 school bags and supplies
in Abu Rasin, Al-Hasakeh city, Amouda and Qamishli in the governorate of
Al-Hasakeh.
• UNICEF, in partnership with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent and the Directorate
of Education distributed education supplies for 31,060 students in Harim, Jisr
ash-Shugur, Khan Shaykun and Ma’arrat al-Nu’man in the governorate of
Idlib.
Palestine refugees
• UNRWA provided food to 102,476 people and cash assistance to 235,491,
including to 28,576 people in hard-to-reach areas.
• In addition, UNRWA provided education to 40,589 students, 77,357 health care consultations and non-food items (mattresses and blankets) to 9,830
people.

14-53735

23/24

S/2014/365

Agriculture
• FAO provided 58,163 beneficiaries with agricultural assistance: 48,734 people
in Aleppo received wheat bran, barley and wheat seeds; 875 people in Idlib
received animal feed; and 8,554 people in Rural Damascus received laying
hens and poultry feed.
Protection and community services
• UNHCR continued to extend support through six offices, 11 community
centres, partner organizations and outreach volunteers. These centres offer a
range of social services to civilians affected by the conflict, including
vocational and skills training, legal counselling, social and recreational
activities, and health awareness.
• Protection agencies continued the provision of capacity-building on prevention
of and response to sexual and gender-based violence. Between 22 and 24 April
2014, 33 staff of five national and international non-governmental
organizations present in six governorates were trained. UNHCR also provided
support for a workshop on child protection and psychosocial support held from
11 to 15 May, aimed at strengthening the response to protection concerns
identified during recreational and other activities with children.

24/24

14-53735
