S/PV.9344

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9344th meeting

Monday, 12 June 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Shaheen . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United Arab Emirates)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Silveira Braoios
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Pérez Loose
Mrs. Dime Labille
Mrs. Onanga
Mrs. Gasu Aheto
Mrs. Shino
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Chumakov
Mrs. Chanda
Mr. Wickremasinghe
Mr. Simonoff

Agenda
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-16544 (E)
*2316544*

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

fair trial rights and, ultimately, convicting those who
have been proven guilty beyond reasonable doubt of the
most horrific crimes.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia to participate
in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals; and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Chief Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Judge Gatti Santana.
Judge Gatti Santana: Nothing encourages crime
more than impunity. In May 1993, the Security Council
agreed unanimously to take exceptional action regarding
the former Yugoslavia and establish an international
criminal tribunal. That bold act asserted the rule of
law and served as a warning to others elsewhere that
violations of international humanitarian law would not
be tolerated and, more importantly, that they should not
go unpunished.
What the Security Council realized back then,
and what continues to be true today, is that criminal
conduct
affecting
and
offending
humankind
requires global accountability. That same sentiment
also prevailed in 1994, with the establishment of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda
(ICTR). And in 2010, a successor body of the ad hoc
tribunals — the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, which I have the honour to
lead — was conceived as an expression of the ongoing
collective commitment to an indispensable system of
international justice.
Within the framework of the Mechanism’s
wide-ranging mandate, particular attention has been
paid to delivering justice, establishing the truth,
upholding international standards of due process and
2/24

12/06/2023

Two weeks ago, the Appeals Chamber handed
down its last judgment concerning crimes committed
during the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, in
the case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović. With that judgment, the ambitious journey
of the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
has come to an end, insofar as the cases against all 161
persons indicted by that Tribunal have concluded. That
leaves only one case related to core crimes committed
in Rwanda — the trial against Félicien Kabuga.
Before I update the Council on those proceedings, I
wish to pay tribute to Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya,
who was a member of the Kabuga Trial Chamber. Her sad
passing in January of this year was devastating not only
to the Mechanism, but also to the wider international
legal community. Judge Ibanda-Nahamya was a great
judge and an even greater human being, who garnered
tremendous respect. Her dedication, professionalism
and kindness as a colleague are terribly missed. I am,
however, pleased that Uganda has nominated another
experienced female jurist, Judge Lydia Mugambe Ssali,
who joined our judicial roster in late May.
Turning back to the case, on 6 June, the Trial
Chamber rendered its decision on the fitness and
future of the trial of Félicien Kabuga. After months
of carefully examining the issues at stake, the judges
on the bench have decided, by majority, that he is not
fit to stand trial and is very unlikely to regain fitness
but that, nevertheless, the Chamber will continue the
proceedings through an alternative findings procedure
to provide Mr. Kabuga with an opportunity to establish
his innocence of the charged offences and in view of
the strong public interest to make findings in relation
to allegations of conduct attributed to Mr. Kabuga. It is
expected that that decision will be appealed.
Turning to the Mechanism’s other important
functions, I wish first to praise the outstanding quality
of the Prosecutor’s fugitive-tracking team. Their
work is another example of the Mechanism’s strong
commitment to realizing its mandate. The recent
arrest in South Africa of Fulgence Kayishema, one of
the four remaining ICTR fugitives, serves as a stark
reminder that even after all these years, justice remains
achievable, especially when supported by the power of
State cooperation.
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Another significant development concerns the
monitoring of three cases referred to the Republic of
Rwanda by the ICTR. The proceedings against Jean
Uwinkindi and Bernard Munyagishari were completed
in 2022, prior to my appointment as President. I am
pleased to note that in March of this year, the appeal
proceedings in the third case, Prosecutor v. Ladislas
Ntaganzwa, were also completed. Based on the reports
of that last case submitted by our monitors, I would
like to commend the efforts of the Rwandan judicial
authorities towards guaranteeing due process, and I
also acknowledge the cooperation and responsiveness
of the Rwandan Ministry of Justice and the Rwandan
Correctional Service. I further note the professionalism
of the national prosecutorial authorities and the active
role undertaken by the Rwandan Bar Association in
that regard.
The Mechanism observes the encouraging
advancements in Rwanda’s ability to discharge
cases relating to international crimes efficiently
and effectively. It is therefore confident that the
Rwandan judiciary will be similarly steadfast during the
proceedings on Fulgence Kayishema, which we will be
following closely in line with our monitoring functions
as set out in article 6, paragraph 5, of the statute.
I now turn to three main areas that require the
Council’s urgent attention and vigorous backing.
The first relates to the enforcement of sentences.
The Mechanism is extremely grateful for the willingness
of those 13 States that are currently enforcing sentences
imposed by the ad hoc tribunals or the Mechanism.
That represents a major contribution to the fulfilment
of our mandate. However, the burden is not shared
equally. More than half of the 45 convicted persons
who are serving their sentences in enforcement States
are imprisoned in two African countries. In Europe, 10
enforcement States are enforcing the sentences of 18
convicted persons.
In addition, there are four convicted persons at the
United Nations Detention Unit in The Hague awaiting
transfer to an enforcement State. The domestic
legislation of some enforcement States limits their
ability to enforce lengthy sentences. As a result, the
Mechanism has recently been faced with situations
where convicted persons had to be returned to our
Detention Unit while awaiting the designation of a
new enforcement State. Unfortunately, those situations
are expected to continue to occur in the future. That
development also has a detrimental impact on the

S/PV.9344

Mechanism’s detention function. While the Detention
Unit is meant to serve as a remand facility, 80 per cent
of its occupants are now convicted persons. That not
only has financial repercussions for the Mechanism but
also burdens the host State significantly.
Secondly, there is the situation of the acquitted or
released persons who were relocated to the Niger in
December 2021. Let me begin with news I received over
the weekend concerning the passing of one of those
individuals, Mr. Tharcisse Muvunyi, on Friday evening.
As a matter of priority, the Mechanism is obtaining
more information on the particular circumstances of
his death. I wish to underscore that the situation in the
Niger contravenes the relocation agreement concluded
with the United Nations and that the Mechanism is
simply not in a position to resolve that predicament
alone. Indeed, the Security Council has called on all
States to provide the necessary assistance. Any decision
on the relocation of those persons should be consistent
with resolution 2637 (2022) and is without prejudice
to their own personal efforts to find a solution. In the
meantime, I urge the Council to appreciate how the
status quo is untenable in every respect.
The third issue I wish to bring to members’
attention today — and, arguably, the biggest threat
we face — has to do with the relentless attempts to
undermine our current work and the judgments issued
by the ICTR, the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and the Mechanism. That includes the
flagrant disregard by Serbia of its international legal
obligations set forth by the Security Council itself and
its persistent failure to arrest and surrender Petar Jojić
and Vjerica Radeta for their alleged interference with
the administration of justice. It bears repeating that
such non-cooperation prevents the Mechanism from
fulfilling its mandated functions.
Moreover, there is a disturbing trend of genocide
denial, the glorification of war criminals, the purported
rewriting of history and even provocative statements
by convicted persons shamelessly admitting that they
would do it all over again. In the face of those challenges,
one of my priorities is to consolidate, safeguard and
make more accessible the invaluable legacy of the ad
hoc Tribunals and the Mechanism.
It is for the first time that a Mechanism President
stands before the Council and can announce that in-court
proceedings are all but concluded. The Mechanism
only has the Kabuga case on its docket in that respect,
with its future currently unclear. This represents a

23-165443/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

watershed moment in the life of the Mechanism and
for international criminal justice more generally. As a
result, the Mechanism is poised to enter the next phase
of its operations — one in which the reality of its daily
responsibilities will be more closely aligned with its
name and intended nature.
Nevertheless, the fact that the Mechanism is
drawing down does not mean that it is ready to close
down. We are not finished; rather, we are preparing
to start a new phase. While decisions on bigger
institutional changes and the transfer of our mandated
activities will ultimately lie with the Council, the
Mechanism will continue to streamline its activities
wherever it can. As detailed in the progress report,
the Mechanism made great strides over the past six
months towards the planning of its future. Based on
the road map we developed last year, senior managers
from all three organs are working on a scenario-based
workforce plan. Furthermore, a panel on judicial
functions will produce recommendations with regard
to the Mechanism’s continuous judicial activities.
Those efforts are bolstered by ongoing exchanges with
officials of other judicial institutions, which have shed
light on how our residual functions might look in the
years to come.
In exactly one year, the Security Council will
be conducting its fifth review of the Mechanism’s
progress of work. I am determined to continue pursuing
innovative, more efficient ways of operating and to
take all the necessary steps to keep achieving positive
results. In that respect, I look forward to constructive
collaboration with the Office of Internal Oversight
Services, which is in the process of conducting another
evaluation exercise.
While we do not presume to do everything to
perfection, I can assure the Council that we do our
very best. I conclude by expressing deep appreciation
to all those whose support has been fundamental to our
progress so far. The efforts we have invested in getting
there are rivalled only by the satisfaction of being here
to report on such results.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Judge
Gatti Santana for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Brammertz.
Mr. Brammertz: I thank you, Madam President, for
this opportunity to again update the Security Council
on my Office’s activities and results. While my written
report provides information through 15 May, I would
4/24

12/06/2023

like to focus my briefing today on several important
developments in the past few weeks.
First, I would like to express my satisfaction that,
on 23 May, Fulgence Kayishema — our most wanted
Rwandan fugitive — was arrested in Paarl, South Africa.
As members will recall, the search for Kayishema was
the subject of several of my briefings in recent years, as
were the challenges in obtaining needed cooperation.
As I have previously explained, Kayishema is charged
with the killings of more than 2,000 innocent women,
men, children and elderly persons at Nyange Church
in Rwanda on 16 April 1994. He is alleged to have
attempted to set the church aflame with refugees inside.
When that failed, he organized a bulldozer to collapse
the roof of the church, killing those who were still alive.
Kayishema’s arrest is a signal moment in the global
effort to punish perpetrators of genocide. That kind of
result renews faith in international justice. The families
of 2,000 victims will now see Kayishema answer for his
alleged crimes. The wrongs they suffered 30 years ago
can begin to be put right. For the Council and the United
Nations, they have demonstrated again the strength of
their determination to ensure that genocide is repressed
and punished, and that justice for atrocity crimes
is a matter of international concern. The arrest also
exemplifies what can be achieved through international
and national cooperation in law enforcement.
While my Office led the investigation, many Member
States — particularly in southern Africa — played a
critical role in bringing Kayishema to justice. South
Africa is the most obvious. Over the past year, my
Office enjoyed the full and unreserved support of
the South African authorities, who established an
operational task force to assist our investigations. The
direct operational cooperation we achieved together
was essential to our success, particularly on the final
day of the arrest.
Eswatini also deserves recognition. Swazi
authorities quickly created a task force at our request
and worked intensively with our tracking team.
Their dedication and cooperation were exceptional.
Mozambique was another important partner. I am
grateful to the Attorney General for having received
my team and pledging her Office’s full support.
And, as always, Rwandan authorities made
enormous contributions to our success. The Prosecutor
General, the Inspector General of Police and many
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

others supported our work in Rwanda and ensured that
we were able to obtain vital evidence.
My Office would like to extend our deepest
gratitude to these countries and others who cooperated
with our investigation. The challenges were immense,
and it was only by working so closely together that
Kayishema was finally located and arrested. There
are now only three fugitives remaining. My Office is
working intensively to account for them and bring this
mandate to a successful conclusion in the near future.
One week after Kayishema’s arrest, the Mechanism’s
Appeals Chamber delivered its last judgment in the
Stanišić and Simatović case, in the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). My Office
is satisfied that the Appeals Chamber accepted key
aspects of our appeal. The Judges agreed with us that
both accused were criminally responsible as members
of a joint criminal enterprise for a larger number of
crimes in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As the Chief and the Senior Deputy in the Serbian
State Security Service, under Slobodan Milošević,
Stanišić and Simatović shared the intention with other
Serbian, Croatian Serb and Bosnian Serb leaders to
ethnically cleanse non-Serbs from large areas of Croatia
and Bosnia and Herzegovina. They further contributed
to the implementation of the joint criminal enterprise
in important ways, particularly by supporting notorious
paramilitary groups.
The Appeals Chamber increased their sentences to
15 years of imprisonment each. That judgment is a fitting
final chapter in the work of the ICTY. Over 30 years
of work, we were able to successfully prosecute senior
political, military and police officials from all sides of
the conflict. We demonstrated that accountability for
the most serious international crimes is possible, while
also leaving as our legacy a record of what occurred.
I would also like to mention the decision issued by
the Trial Chamber last week in the Kabuga case. This
decision is not yet final, and will likely be appealed.
What I can say at this point is that my Office believes
that the trial against Kabuga can and should be
completed in a manner that is consistent with the rights
of the accused.
The arrest of Fulgence Kayishema and the
completion of the Stanišić and Simatović case are
significant steps bringing the Mechanism closer to
finalizing its judicial activities. Under the President’s
leadership, the Mechanism is actively planning its

S/PV.9344

future as a true residual institution. My Office is fully
participating in that process and providing our input
and support. In my view, the Mechanism must and will
soon be a smaller institution than today. That will mean
strictly focusing resources on core functions.
At the same time, it is important to recognize
that my Office and the Judges of the Mechanism
will still have important work to do. For my Office,
our focus will be on our mandate under article 28,
paragraph 3, to assist national jurisdictions to continue
the accountability process for international crimes
committed in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia.
That mandate is in furtherance of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and ICTY completion
strategies, which foresaw that even as trials ended in
Arusha and The Hague, national courts would take over
responsibility for achieving more justice.
As my written report details, there can be no
question that much more justice still needs to be
achieved at the national level. In Rwanda, there are
more than 1,000 fugitives to be prosecuted. My Office
is already actively working to transfer evidence and
case files to the Prosecutor General’s office.
In the former Yugoslavia, national prosecutors still
must deal with several thousand cases. In addition to
evidentiary and legal support, my Office is intensively
engaging in resolving challenges in regional judicial
cooperation, which remains problematic. In addition,
every year, countries around the world identify in their
territories persons suspected of committing crimes in
Rwanda or the former Yugoslavia, who then need to be
extradited or prosecuted domestically.
My Office plays a critical role in supporting that
continued accountability process. In the past few years,
we have received more requests for assistance than ever
before. This is a positive sign, as justice is best delivered
at the local level. Investigators and prosecutors in many
countries look to my Office for assistance in obtaining
evidence, preparing investigative strategies, drafting
indictments or proving cases in court. That vital
assistance, which helps achieve better results, cannot
be obtained anywhere else. I fully trust that we will
continue to enjoy the Security Council’s support in
carrying out that vital mandate, through which Member
States themselves take the lead in securing further
justice and promoting peace.
In conclusion, the past several weeks have seen the
Mechanism achieve important results, bringing it much

23-165445/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

closer to completing its final ad hoc judicial activities.
After more than 20 years, Kayishema is no longer a
fugitive and will now stand before a court of law. The
Stanišić and Simatović appeal judgment brings to an
end the important work that the ICTY began in The
Hague 30 years ago.
In relation to both Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia, the international justice process has been
imperfect. Significant time was needed, and there are
lessons to be learned from constructive critiques. Yet, the
results have been beyond expectation, and a significant
success for the United Nations. More justice still needs
to be achieved and Member States are committed to now
taking the lead in that work. Very soon my Office will
be fully focused on our remaining residual functions,
the most important of which is assisting Member States
to continue the accountability process.
As a last comment, genocide denial and the
glorification of war criminals remain significant
concerns. The international community is determined
to bring war criminals to trial. It should be equally
committed to promoting the truth after those trials
are completed. My Office is grateful for the continued
support of the Council in all of our efforts.
The President (spoke in
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.

Arabic):

I

thank

I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Onanga (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
would like to express how pleased we are to see
you preside over this meeting, Madame President. I
thank you for convening this meeting on the progress
report of the International Residual Mechanism for
Criminal Tribunals.
I would also like to thank the President of the
Mechanism, Judge Graciela Gatti Santana, as well as
Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their briefings in the
context of the twenty-second progress report on the
work of the International Mechanism, in accordance
with resolution 1966 (2010) and article 12 of resolution
2637 (2022).
It is my honour to take the floor on behalf of
Ambassador Xavier Biang, Chair of the Informal
Working Group on International Tribunals.
I welcome the representatives of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Croatia, Serbia and Rwanda to
this meeting.
6/24

12/06/2023

This meeting is being held 30 years after the
Security Council, in May 1993, undertook the creation
of tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda to
lead the fight against impunity. I reaffirm here that
combating impunity is a moral imperative to ensure
more peace, security and justice. It therefore requires
the sustained effort of the international community. We
commend the Mechanism’s efforts during the reporting
period, despite the numerous challenges it faced, to
successfully perform its residual functions, pursuant
to resolution 1966 (2010), with regard to the efficiency
and expediency of judicial proceedings, respect for the
fundamental rights of the accused or the protection of
witness identity.
Gabon welcomes the fact that the Office of the
President has maintained its focus on implementing
the road map, the strategy of which places particular
emphasis on a transition to a completely residual
institution while focusing, of course, on recruiting
competent staff through a fair process to carry out the
residual tasks. We see that approach, which prioritizes
the strengthening of existing working methods and
tools, as a suitable way to enable a targeted transition
towards the definitive completion of the Mechanism’s
residual functions. To that end, Gabon supports all the
measures taken to achieve that goal, including the very
useful consultations with other judicial bodies.
In that particularly sensitive context that the
President just highlighted, we encourage her to use
that strategy to raise the awareness of the international
community — and the Security Council in
particular — of complex issues such as tracking down
fugitives, conducting trials for highly sensitive cases,
providing technical assistance to national jurisdictions,
monitoring and carrying out sentences, protecting
victims and witnesses, managing and archiving
documents and ensuring the legacy of the Mechanism.
The significant progress made on the ongoing trials
is an example of that, especially in the closing of the
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
case, which represents a crucial step in the fight against
impunity and, above all, reaffirms the relevance of
criminal courts. At the same time, it offers victims
renewed hope in the knowledge that however long it
takes, they will receive justice. That breakthrough,
after so many years of legal proceedings, including a
retrial, is now enabling the Mechanism to focus on the
case of Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga, which has been
suspended since the trial began in September 2022.
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

The Mechanism is now at a crucial phase. Its
credibility and effectiveness will continue to depend to
a large extent on the assistance it receives from States,
in particular their unwavering support to Prosecutor
Serge Brammertz. That indispensable support should
enable him to arrest the fugitives and their accomplices
who are at large. In that regard, Gabon welcomes the
recent arrest of Fulgence Kayishema, which marks a
considerable step forward in the Mechanism’s efforts to
bring the transition process to a successful conclusion.
Indeed, if he had not been arrested and tried in
accordance with the requisite legal procedures, the
Mechanism’s purpose could have been weakened.
The fight against impunity must remain an
imperative for the international community. Gabon
encourages the States concerned to cooperate closely
with the two branches of the Mechanism in order to
maximize the collection of evidence essential to the
opening of future judicial investigations — which are
labour-intensive — to establish the facts of serious
crimes committed. We take this opportunity to
denounce the glorification of perpetrators.
In conclusion, we express the hope that the work
of this important Mechanism will continue unhindered,
with the effective collaboration of the international
community. Beyond the fulfilment of its essential
mandate, its work enshrines the search for truth
and justice and constitutes a moral bulwark against
arbitrariness and mass atrocities. To that end, further
consolidating the legacy of the Tribunals and the
Mechanism is major asset in terms of strengthening the
promotion of international criminal law.
Mrs. Chanda (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland would like to thank President Gatti Santana
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their detailed briefings.
We also welcome the participation in this meeting of
the representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Rwanda and Serbia.
Thirty years ago, the Security Council took the
decision to establish the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia. Ten years ago, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals began its
work in The Hague. This double anniversary reminds
us of the importance of international justice in the fight
against impunity and of the Residual Mechanism in
particular. With that conviction in mind, I would like to
highlight four points.

S/PV.9344

First, Switzerland commends the efforts made by
the Mechanism to successfully carry out its mandate. We
welcome the fact that the Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić
and Franko Simatović case has been brought to a
successful conclusion. Switzerland joins the SecretaryGeneral in recognizing the dedication of the judges
and staff involved in that case. We also welcome the
continuing efforts in the Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga
case and commend the close collaboration between the
Mechanism and the local authorities. That contributes
to enshrining the principle of complementarity and
national ownership of post-conflict accountability.
Given the Mechanism’s downsizing and budgetary
constraints, those various achievements are all the
more impressive. It is essential for us to provide our full
support to the Mechanism until its work is completed.
Secondly, we recall that all States are obliged to
cooperate with the Mechanism, including in the arrest
and surrender of fugitives. We therefore welcome the
recent arrest of Mr. Kayishema, with the support of
South Africa. On the other hand, the situation of the eight
persons acquitted or released who have been resettled
in the Niger remains worrying, despite the considerable
work of the Mechanism. We encourage States to respect
all the agreements concluded with the Mechanism and
to step up their efforts to enforce sentences.
Thirdly, the work of the Mechanism is essential
to preventing the commission of new atrocities.
Accountability is a crucial element in turning the page
on the conflicts of the past and building a sustainable
peace based on reconciliation and cooperation. That is
why we are deeply concerned about the hate speech,
glorification of war criminals, historical revisionism and
disinformation that is spreading in the Western Balkans
and elsewhere. That jeopardizes the reconciliation
process and peaceful, multi-ethnic coexistence. In that
regard, we welcome the efforts made by the Mechanism
to help the affected communities to better understand
the facts of the crimes committed and to address
their suffering.
Finally, we stress the importance of guaranteeing
the protection of witnesses and victims while also
planning for the future of the Mechanism and ensuring
the continuity of its work. In that regard, Switzerland
takes note of the Mechanism’s meticulous preparations
for the future of its operations. We also welcome the
efforts made to preserve the Mechanism’s archives and
premises, and to digitize the Arusha archives, thereby

23-165447/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

guaranteeing the right to the truth for victims and
their families.
There is no doubt about the Mechanism’s important
contribution to transitional justice and, consequently,
to the promotion of sustainable peace. On the occasion
of this symbolic double anniversary for international
criminal justice, let us demonstrate the same
commitment to peace and combating impunity that
inspired our predecessors.
Mrs. Dime Labille (France) (spoke in French): I
would like to thank the President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, Ms. Gatti
Santana, and Prosecutor Brammertz for presenting the
report of the Mechanism and for their briefings.
On behalf of France, I would also take this
opportunity to also pay tribute to the memory of
Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya and her invaluable
contribution to international criminal justice. We extend
our sincere condolences to her family and friends.
France reaffirms its full support for the Mechanism
and its efforts to combat impunity and preserve the
legacy of the former Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia
and Rwanda. The past six months have demonstrated
the Mechanism’s determination to implement its
mandate and bring to justice all those indicted by the
ad hoc Tribunals. The Security Council must support it
in its work. The handing down of the appeal judgment
in the case of Stanišić and Simatović on 31 May marks
a crucial stage in the Mechanism’s judicial activity.
For the victims, it represents a victory for justice
over impunity, 30 years after the establishment of
the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.
However, in their decision of 6 June, the judges of
the Trial Chamber concluded that Mr. Kabuga, who
was arrested in France in 2020 and handed over to the
Mechanism, was not fit to stand trial and was unlikely
to be so in the future. We encourage the Mechanism to
find ways to respond to the victims’ quest for justice.
France urges all States to cooperate with the
Mechanism in accordance with their international
obligations and to support it in its activities. We regret
that certain partners have continued to refuse to do so,
despite the repeated appeals from the President of the
Mechanism, its Chief Prosecutor and many Member
States, supported by the Council. It is imperative that
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda be brought to justice.
In that regard, we welcomed the arrest on 24 May
8/24

12/06/2023

of Fulgence Kayishema, thanks to the collaboration
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the
authorities of South Africa and other countries. His
arrest exemplifies efficient and effective international
cooperation in combating impunity. In that regard, I
should mention that the trial of Philippe Hategekimana/
Manier, who has been charged with genocide and crimes
against humanity, began on 15 May and will conclude on
30 June at the Paris Court of Assizes. However, the fate of
those who are currently in the Niger is of great concern,
and France will continue to follow their fate closely.
The recent judicial developments have marked
the beginning of the Mechanism’s residual activities
phase, which does not mean the completion of its vital
activities. We welcome the President’s plan to draw up
a completion plan for the Mechanism, and encourage
her to pursue her efforts and work on options for the
Mechanism’s future jurisdiction. We call on the other
organs of the Mechanism to work in close cooperation
with the President, and we are confident that she will
carry out her work with the leadership she is known
for. After trying cases relating to core crimes, the
Mechanism will have to continue to perform its essential
tasks, including assistance to national jurisdictions, the
protection of victims and witnesses, the management of
archives and monitoring of the execution of sentences.
Remembrance work is also essential for reconciliation.
We remain deeply concerned about the denial
of the commission of crimes and the glorification
of the perpetrators of genocide and war criminals
convicted by international criminal tribunals following
impartial and independent proceedings. We support the
Mechanism’s efforts to combat revisionism in all its
forms, efforts that include the President’s participation
in commemoration ceremonies, the Mechanism’s
awareness-raising activities, the disposal of contemptof-court cases and the completion of legal proceedings.
Lastly, we welcome the appointment of Judge Lydia
N. Mugambe Ssali to the Mechanism’s roster, which
represents some progress towards achieving parity in
the highest judicial offices of the Mechanism.
Mr. Fernandes (Mozambique): I would like to
thank you, Madam President, for convening this timely
and critically important debate on the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals. I thank
the President of the Mechanism, Judge Graciela Gatti
Santana, and Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for
their insightful briefings this afternoon. We learned
with sadness of the tragic loss in January of Judge
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya of Uganda. We join others
in paying tribute in acknowledging her valuable
contribution to the work of the Mechanism and the field
of international criminal justice in general.
Mozambique strongly supports the pursuit of
international justice and the work of the International
Residual Mechanism, which has assumed the
responsibilities and functions of the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda and the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. We would like to
share our thoughts on three points.
First, where the delivery of international criminal
justice is concerned, the maintenance of international
peace and security — the primary responsibility of the
Security Council — requires us to assess and improve
our ability to provide justice for the most serious crimes
under international law. There should be no impunity
for the perpetrators of crimes against humanity, crimes
of genocide or serious violations of international
humanitarian law. In that regard, we should recognize
the historical contribution of the ad hoc International
Tribunals, which were established to hold individuals
responsible for genocide accountable. Mozambique
would like to commend the excellent work done by
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals since its assumption of the functions of the
two Tribunals. As the Mechanism’s President explained
earlier, the Mechanism has been able to pursue judicial
proceedings while planning for a future when it will
fulfil only residual functions.
The completion of the Stanišić and Simatović
case inherited from the Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia is an achievement that the Mechanism
should be proud of. It is a historic contribution of
the institution to providing justice to the victims of
the crime of genocide. Victims must be effectively
placed at the centre of our efforts to promote justice
for the crimes committed in Rwanda and the former
Yugoslavia. In that context, we believe that truthtelling and reconciliation mechanisms must also be
taken into account, together with judicial mechanisms.
Secondly, concerning the importance of cooperation
between the Mechanism and States, we recognize that
for the Mechanism to properly undertake its functions,
it requires cooperation and above all compliance by
States with their legal obligations regarding judicial
proceedings in progress. Mozambique encourages
all States to collaborate speedily with the Residual
Mechanism when required so that it can complete its

S/PV.9344

work. We call on States to cooperate with the Mechanism
in the areas of the enforcement of sentences and the
relocation of acquitted and released persons. With
regard to sentence enforcement, States are required
to collaborate to ensure compliance by those who are
convicted by the ad hoc Tribunals or the Mechanism.
Ideally, those who have been convicted should be
allowed to carry out their prison terms in their country
of origin, with the assistance of the Mechanism and
other organizations in supporting the host countries in
that endeavour.
Thirdly, with regard to the preservation of the
legacy of the ad hoc Tribunals and the Mechanism,
the management and preservation of records and the
granting of public access to them are important for
research purposes and education, and can significantly
contribute to combating denial and revisionism and
achieving our overall objective of the maintenance of
international peace and security. We encourage the
Mechanism to pursue its ongoing efforts to address
the challenges linked to managing physical and digital
records. Finally, we take note of the fact the Mechanism
has begun the critical phase of its transition from an
operational court to a fully residual institution. We look
forward to the assessments and recommendations of the
panel on judicial functions that will ultimately assist
the Council in deciding on the future of the Mechanism.
In conclusion, we wish to reiterate Mozambique’s
appreciation for the achievements made by the
Mechanism. We want to assure the Mechanism of
our continued support in all its endeavours, and we
wish the Mechanism’s President and Chief Prosecutor
success in the accomplishment of their noble mission
and crucial activities.
Mrs. Gasu Aheto (Ghana): First of all, I wish
to thank Judge Graciela Gatti Santana, President of
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals, and Mr. Serge Brammertz, Prosecutor of
the Mechanism, for their insightful briefings to the
Council, which provide Council members with an
overview of the progress of the work of — and the
challenges facing — the Mechanism.
My delegation remains convinced that the
Mechanism has an important role in ending impunity
and bringing the perpetrators of atrocity crimes to
justice and will continue to support every effort and
work constructively with other delegations in that
regard. With regard to the content of the report, Ghana
would like to make the following three points.

23-165449/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

First, on cooperation, Ghana continues its call
on all States to cooperate with the Mechanism, in
accordance with applicable laws, by handing over
fugitives to enable the judicial process to continue and
be completed. It may be noted that 153 States have said
no to atrocity crimes, through the Convention on the
Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide,
and we urge those States that are still harbouring
identified fugitives to hand them over, in fulfilment
of their international obligations. We also call for the
cooperation of States in the enforcement of sentences.
Ghana has always maintained that, as a comity of
nations, we have a collective responsibility to remember
the survivors and families of victims of those atrocity
crimes that have been committed and to sustain
the demands of justice and accountability without
limitation over time. We underscore that the wheels of
justice may sometimes grind slowly. However, it is also
our collective responsibility to seek justice for them
by holding accountable the perpetrators of the heinous
atrocity crimes. The only way the survivors, their
families and the families of victims can find closure
is for the perpetrators of such heinous crimes to be
brought to justice.
On the challenges facing the Mechanism in
relocating persons who have been acquitted or have
completed their sentences, pursuant to resolution 2529
(2020), Ghana regrets to note that such persons who
were sent to the Niger are still being kept in a safe
house against their will, given the withdrawal of the
Niger from the cooperation agreement signed with
the United Nations. Ghana wishes to once again draw
attention to the challenges facing the Mechanism in
implementing the resolution. It is pertinent to state that
the international justice community must pay attention
to and resolve the situation of the acquitted and the
released persons who have completed their sentences.
The continued lack of liberty of those persons
remains a stain on international justice and perpetuates
a well-founded criticism that international justice has
failed to ensure and implement fundamental human
rights. As we commend the efforts of the Registrar
for using diplomatic, political and judicial avenues to
resolve some of the challenges, we call on the Council
to critically discuss the matter with an outcome that will
assist the Mechanism, in line with resolution 2637 (2022).
Ghana wishes to reiterate that paragraph 5 of the
resolution states,
10/24

12/06/2023

“Notes that decisions on the relocation of
persons who have been acquitted or completed
their sentences should take into account inter
alia the readiness of the state of origin to accept
its nationals, the consent or any objections
raised by the individuals to be relocated and the
availability of other relocation states” (resolution
2637 (2022), para.5).
Ghana remains convinced that paragraph 5 sets the tone
for an in-depth discussion by the Council. The proposal
is being made against the backdrop that more of such
persons will be released in the future. Faced with that
fact, not many States have expressed interest in taking
in those persons of late. How long will the Mechanism
continue to take on such responsibilities, which also
have budgetary implications?
Finally, Ghana continues to note with appreciation
the collaboration between the Office of the Prosecutor
and the national prosecutions through the provision
of access to evidence and information in response to
a high volume of requests for those crimes. We deem
that to be a positive development, as it helps build the
Office’s capacities in the national prosecutions of the
affected countries.
Mr. Simonoff (United States of America): I thank
President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz for
today’s briefing on the ongoing work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to advance
accountability for atrocities committed in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia.
Since the previous briefing (see S/PV.9217), the
Mechanism has achieved a significant milestone, with
the capture and arrest of fugitive Fulgence Kayishema.
We congratulate the Mechanism and the South African
authorities on the arrest and are grateful for the
indispensable role played by South Africa in the capture
and arrest. Kayishema was indicted more than 20 years
ago, charged with genocide and extermination as a
crime against humanity, for his role in the cold-blooded
murders of more than 2,000 Tutsi men, women and
children at the Nyange parish church. His arrest cannot
restore what was lost in April 1994 in Kivumu, but we
hope that it will provide victims some comfort that
the fight for justice for their loved ones will continue
and the facts surrounding their death will be fully
brought to light. We continue to offer a reward of up to
$5 million for the three remaining Rwandan fugitives
sought by the Mechanism. Let Kayishema’s arrest to
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

S/PV.9344

be a message to all those responsible for similar crimes
that they cannot escape accountability.

issues, including supporting national jurisdictions and
managing and preserving evidence.

We also acknowledge the significance of the
Mechanism’s recent appeals judgment in the case
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović.
That long-awaited judgment, which confirmed their
liability as participants in a joint criminal enterprise
to forcibly remove civilians through the crimes of
persecution, murder, deportation and inhumane acts
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, is the final
case involving atrocity crimes committed in the former
Yugoslavia and closes an important chapter in the
history of international criminal justice.

The success of the Mechanism has always depended
on the cooperation and support of all States. We are
grateful to the 13 countries that serve as enforcement
States, holding those who were convicted. They are
a fundamental pillar of the Mechanism’s successful
operation. We also continue to urge all parties to find a
durable solution for the acquitted and released persons
who have been relocated.

Just over 30 years ago, the Security Council adopted
resolution 827 (1993) to establish the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). The ICTY,
the first international tribunal since Nuremberg and
Tokyo to address atrocity crimes, demonstrated the
international community’s enduring commitment to
holding those most responsible for atrocity crimes
accountable. We are grateful for the decades of work by
the judges, attorneys and other court staff of the ICTY
and the Mechanism and their immense contributions to
the rule of law and the fight against impunity in the
former Yugoslavia.
There is only one other remaining case involving
core crimes pending before the court — the case
Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga, accused of acting as
the primary financier of the militia and political groups
that perpetrated the genocide in Rwanda. We note the
Trial Chamber’s decision last week finding Kabuga
unfit for trial and deciding to adopt an alternative
finding procedure.
Unfortunately, this year we mourn the loss of Judge
Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya of Uganda, who served on
the Kabuga Trial Chamber and worked on other matters
of distinction at the Mechanism. Her contributions in
service to the field of international criminal law were
outstanding, and we appreciate and recognize her years
of service.
As President Gatti Santana’s report notes, the
Mechanism is now preparing to enter a new phase in its
life cycle. We appreciate the efforts of the Mechanism
to manage a smooth transition away from active
casework to focus on residual court functions and
learn lessons from the tribunals on Cambodia, Sierra
Leone and Lebanon on how best to address important

We are also pleased to note the Prosecutor’s
report of increased cooperation among Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia on war crimes
cases, as well as the report that the Croatian Minister
for Justice has been transferring requests for assistance
to the appropriate judicial authorities for action. We
hope that the region can continue to make progress on
cooperation, as victims have waited too long for justice.
In particular, we continue to urge Serbia to act on the
outstanding arrest warrants for Jojić and Radeta.
Finally, we acknowledge and honour the courage and
resilience of victims and survivors and their loved ones
who continue to fight for the official acknowledgement
of the crimes that they have witnessed and experienced.
We recognize the courage of the thousands of witnesses
who have participated in these and other trials, without
whom justice could not be served. The United States
will continue to press for justice, mutual trust and
reconciliation as the foundation for peace and stability.
Mr. Silveira Braoios (Brazil): I would like to thank
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT), Judge Graciela Gatti
Santana, and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for their
latest reports on the activities of the Mechanism.
We also express our condolences following the
passing of Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya to her
family and close ones.
As we know, the IRMCT inherited judicial cases
and the residual functions of the International Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and the International
Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (ICTR). Those former
Tribunals are landmarks in the history of international
criminal justice. One cannot underestimate their
invaluable contribution to the development of
jurisprudence on international criminal law and their
role in providing accountability for the most serious
crimes of international law committed in the territories

23-1654411/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda. It is of the utmost
importance to preserve their legacy.
One year ago, by adopting resolution 2637 (2022),
the Security Council allowed the IRMCT to continue its
work for two more years. One year before the expiration
of the current mandates of its Prosecutor and Judges,
we must acknowledge that the IRMCT still needs time
to complete the tasks for which it is responsible in its
mandate to fulfil the residual functions of the ICTY
and the ICTR.
In spite of its importance, the IRMCT, with the
support of the Security Council, must envisage the
path towards the conclusion of all of its activities. The
Security Council conceived it to be temporary and for
its functions to diminish over time. For that reason, we
commend the principals of the IRMCT for bearing in
mind the need for clear timelines for the completion
of its judicial activities. We also welcome Judge Gatti
Santana’s remarkable efforts to promote a reflection on
how best to gradually discontinue the activities of the
IRMCT — an undeniably complex task. In that regard,
we note with satisfaction the establishment in January
of a panel on judicial functions to assess the nature and
duration of the Mechanism’s remaining judicial functions.
We were also satisfied to learn about the progress
achieved by the Mechanism in its remaining core
judicial cases. That was illustrated by the conclusion of
appeal proceedings in the Stanišić and Simatović case
on 31 May. We are also grateful for Judge Gatti Santana’s
initiative to present Council members’ experts with an
overview of the expected timeline concerning the case
of Félicien Kabuga, whom on 7 June the Trial Chamber
considered unfit to stand trial. We support the Trial
Chamber’s decision to proceed with evidence hearings,
even in the face of the impossibility of a conviction.
Despite the progress in the conclusion of the
IRMCT’s core judicial cases, Brazil is aware that there
are long-term residual functions that the Mechanism
is expected to perform. That is the case for the
supervision of the enforcement of sentences. That task
must be carried out until the final convict passes away
or finishes serving their sentence. Victim and witness
protection may be necessary until the final member of the
immediate family deceases. Convicted persons may also
request judicial reviews of their cases if new facts arise.
The tracking of fugitives is also a key function of
the IRMCT to ensure punishment for serious crimes.
There are still remaining fugitives. In that context, we
12/24

12/06/2023

commend the Office of the Prosecutor for its key role
in arresting Fulgence Kayishema, who remained at
large for more than 20 years and will be extradited to
Rwanda for prosecution. It is also crucial to preserve
the IRMCT’s archives, and we welcome its efforts to
disseminate information about its legacy. The IRMCT
needs the support of the international community
to discharge its mandate. Therefore, we call for full
cooperation with the Mechanism in the tracking of
fugitives and the execution of outstanding arrest
warrants and orders for surrender and for the relocation
of acquitted or released persons.
Brazil reiterates its belief that States bear the
primary responsibility to hold accountable those who
perpetrate crimes in their territories. International
tribunals are supplementary to national judiciaries.
They must act when national institutions are unable or
unwilling to adjudicate those crimes themselves. The
principle of complementarity ensures that States retain
ownership in their right and, above all, duty to provide
justice to their citizens. Strong national institutions that
ensure accountability for serious crimes make their
societies more resilient against criminality.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I also thank President
Gatti Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz for their
briefings on the ongoing work of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals to bring
perpetrators of atrocities committed in Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia to justice. We applaud their
leadership and commitment towards advancing the
work of the Mechanism.
We value the focus on the remaining judicial
work. In that regard, we highlight the remarkable
progress that has been made by the Mechanism. In
particular, we welcome the recent judgment and final
convictions in the Stanišić and Simatović case and take
note of the arrest of Fulgence Kayishema, which was
achieved through a joint operation by the Office of
the Prosecutor’s fugitive-tracking team and the South
African authorities, with the assistance of Mozambique
and Eswatini. That is a clear example of how State
cooperation is a major contributor to the justice
process. The arrest sends a strong message that those
who commit such crimes cannot escape justice.
As noted in the report, the Mechanism continues to
make strides in relation to supervising the enforcement
of sentences, responding to national requests for
assistance, protecting victims and witnesses and tracking
the remaining fugitives indicted by the International
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. Moreover, the careful
forethought and preparation for the Mechanism to enter
into the next phase in its life cycle — that of being a
truly residual Mechanism — is commendable and must
be continued in line with resolution 2637 (2022) and the
outstanding recommendations of the Office of Internal
Oversight Services.
However, we recognize that the Mechanism
will need to continue its work on the enforcement of
sentences, the preservation of archives, the protection
of witnesses and, in particular, assistance to national
jurisdictions and other judicial activities, and we want
to assure the President of our full support.
Cooperation is essential in ensuring that the
Mechanism can fulfil its mandated functions. We
urge all States to comply with their obligations and to
cooperate fully with the Mechanism in its efforts to
arrest and surrender the remaining fugitives.
Moreover, Malta adds that the continuing situation
of the acquitted and released persons who were
relocated to the Niger in December 2021 requires an
urgent solution. We call on the States concerned to
respect the provisions of resolution 2637 (2022) and
urge the Registrar to continue using his good offices to
resolve the issue.
Regrettably, as we have just heard from the
President and the Prosecutor, we continue to confront
the dangerous matter of non-acceptance of historical
facts. We concur with the Prosecutor on his call for a
break with the rhetoric of the past and leadership in
favour of reconciliation and peacebuilding. In that
regard, we welcome the continuation by the Mechanism,
together with the European Union, of the Information
Programme for Affected Communities and the recently
launched the Guide for History Teachers, which allows
public access to judicial records of the Mechanism,
thereby contributing to defending the truth.
Let me also welcome the Office of the Prosecutor’s
continued efforts to build the capacity of national
authorities prosecuting war crimes and commend the
Office for the recent training on the prosecution of
sexual violence crimes for prosecutors from Eswatini.
In conclusion, let me acknowledge that President
Gatti Santana has made it a priority to address victims
and survivors, including through the recent remarks
for the thirtieth commemoration of crimes in Ahmići.
We must continue to place victims, including women
and children, at the centre of our efforts to promote

S/PV.9344

justice for the crimes committed in Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia.
Malta reaffirms its steadfast commitment to
international criminal justice. Ensuring accountability
and achieving justice is a priority. The victims and
survivors of atrocity crimes deserve no less.
Mr. Chumakov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have carefully reviewed the reports of
the President and the Prosecutor of the International
Residual Mechanism on the activities of that body over
the past six months.
The situation of the Residual Mechanism is still
best described by the Russian proverb: “Nothing is more
permanent than a temporary solution.” In that regard,
we continually remind its leadership of resolution 1966
(2010), which established the Mechanism as a small,
temporary and efficient structure, whose functions and
size will diminish over time, with a small number of
staff commensurate with its reduced functions.
At the same time, we note some initial steps have
been taken in the right direction, namely, the closure
of the detention centre in Arusha and the Sarajevo
office, as well as some reductions in temporary and
permanent positions. However, the number of reduced
positions has not even reached that set out in the plans
of the Mechanism itself, which were presented to the
Council previously. Let us recall that they stipulate the
reduction of at least 46 more positions by the end of
2023. We await full implementation in that regard, and
we will continue to closely monitor the Mechanism’s
fulfilment of its pledges.
Until recently, the Residual Mechanism had
essentially only one case pending against Kabuga. We
will not count the so-called case of contempt of court.
As we have repeatedly stated, the Mechanism should not
multiply cases under that category to artificially prolong
its existence. National courts can manage those perfectly
well. The referral of such cases is permitted under article
1, paragraph 4, of of the statute of the Mechanism.
In a recent decision, Mr. Kabuga was declared
unfit to stand trial for health reasons. The trial of facts
initiated by the Trial Chamber in his case, which will
take place without the participation of Mr. Kabuga, is
not based on the founding documents of the Mechanism
and therefore its status is completely unclear to us and
raises questions in terms of its practical expediency.
The Mechanism appears to have invented yet another
way to prolong its existence.

23-1654413/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

In that sense, the Mechanism’s judicial docket is
effectively empty. Against that backdrop, no amount of
rhetorical balancing acts in its reports can justify the
preservation of a huge bureaucratic machine comprised
of 388 people. Since many of the positions are part of
the inordinately inflated staff of the Mechanism, we
demand that the Registrar undertake robust measures
to reduce superfluous staff as quickly as possible.
The intention expressed by President Gatti to
implement a strategy to transform the Mechanism
into a genuinely residual body is appropriate. We are
surprised that this appropriate idea was first voiced 10
years after the Mechanism’s establishment. In fact, the
President acknowledged the rectitude of the Russian
delegation, which for all these years has stated that the
Mechanism failed to comply with the parameters of
the resolution that established it to begin with and had
simply ignored the Council’s instructions regarding its
residual, temporary and compact nature. In that regard,
given that the transformation of the Mechanism into
a genuinely residual structure has been delayed by at
least a decade, a significant acceleration in the pace of
the efforts to draw down its work is required from its
current leadership.
In that connection, we call on the Office of Internal
Oversight Services to develop a set of recommendations
and scenarios for the Mechanism to help it finally
comply with the Council’s instructions, as set out in
resolution 1966 (2010) which established it, to come
to terms with its temporary nature and transition to an
active closure of its activities. Those recommendations
should be aimed at, above all, a fundamental reduction
in staff and budgetary expenditures. To summarize,
we are awaiting specifics on what will be closed,
transferred or reduced and when. We also would like
to know the date for the completion of the functions
of this structure, which was originally created as a
temporary structure.
Moreover, we would like to comment on some
issues related to the current activities of the Residual
Mechanism. The question of respect for the basic rights
of convicted persons remains acute. At the previous
meeting of the Security Council (see S/PV.9217), we
mentioned the case of an open letter from Serbian
intelligentsia defending the rights of Mr. Karadžić,
who is serving a sentence in the United Kingdom.
Having failed to receive information on that matter
from the Mechanism, we attempted to make enquiries
of Parkhurst Prison, where the convicted person is
14/24

12/06/2023

being held. It emerged that, among local human rights
activists, that prison has a notorious reputation because
of the conditions of detention, which are “unacceptable
and detrimental to the health of detainees”. The
January report of the specialized British government
commission notes that the prisoners in this prison
are deprived of medicine and psychological care. The
leadership of Parkhurst does not even deny this but
does refer to a lack of financing.
Mr. Karadžić’s daughter, Sonja KaradžićJovičević, also shed light on the conditions of detention
of her father. As she puts it, those conditions are simply
inhumane. He has had all forms of communication,
including books and personal correspondence,
confiscated from him. He has been prohibited from
speaking in his mother tongue, allegedly due to
security concerns related to the fear that Muslim
cellmates may try to take his life. Similar information
has emerged from Goran Petronvjevic, Mr. Karadžić’s
lawyer, who has also drawn attention to the fact that
the sentenced person was not given the right to meet
his basic cultural and religious needs. Specifically, the
Orthodox priest who recently visited him was subject to
the undignified procedure of a body search and had to
remove his garments.
Mr. Petronjevic has been following the conditions
of other Serbs serving sentences. In addition to the
violations reported to have been committed by the
United Kingdom and the Kingdom of the Netherlands,
there have been violations reported to have been
committed by Germany, Poland, France and Estonia.
Further, the magnitude of the problems related to prison
conditions are eloquently attested to by the fact that 14
Serb convicts serving sentences died while proceedings
were being carried out by the ICTY and the Mechanism.
We demand that the Mechanism adopt urgent measures
to remedy this unacceptable situation, and Mr. Karadžić
and other sentenced Serb persons must be allowed to
serve their sentences under appropriate conditions.
The following issues are related to the Serb
general Mr. Ratko Mladić. We remain uncertain as
to whether Mr. Mladić is receiving quality medical
assistance while at the Mechanism’s detention facility.
Given Mr. Mladić’s advanced age and the state of his
health, we wish to recall article 26 of the statute of the
Mechanism, which empowers the President to decide
issues of pardoning or commutation of sentences in the
interests of justice and the general principles of law. At
the same time, we wish to stress that, in this specific
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

instance, it would be well advised to take into account
not just the humanitarian component, but also the
specific procedural features that are linked to the wellknown shortcomings in the work of the Mechanism
and its predecessor, the International Tribunal for the
Former Yugoslavia (ICTY).
The handing down of a final ruling in the case
of the Serb general took unacceptably long and was
accompanied by a disregard of the basic rights of
an accused person that have been enshrined in core
international legal human rights protection instruments,
key Security Council resolutions and the Mechanism’s
rules of procedure and evidence. On the whole, the ICTY
and the Mechanism have for now mentioned what has
been explicitly stipulated in their founding documents,
namely, the commutation of sentences, only when the
sentenced or convicted persons were literally at death’s
door. Indeed, Radoslav Brdjanin, who was gravely ill,
received an early release literally days before his death.
It is not about humanity. It is a mere attempt to evade
responsibility and avoid uncomfortable questions about
inappropriate conditions in detention facilities and
failure to provide medical assistance. This is a practice
that needs to be fundamentally revised.
We draw attention to the growing concern in the
statements of the Prosecutor of the Mechanism about
the glorification of war criminals and the failure of
all countries in the region to recognize the rulings of
the ICTY and Mechanism. It is important to get to the
bottom of this and ascertain why it is taking place. The
reasons for Serb dissatisfaction are not hard to grasp.
The anti-Serb bent in the rulings of the ICTY and the
Mechanism is impossible to deny, for the absolute
majority of persons convicted are Serbs. Representatives
of other parties to the conflict have received a minority
of guilty verdicts, and of some parties just a handful of
such verdicts.
There are double standards and politicization
in the work of the bodies of international criminal
jurisdiction. These double standards and politicization
have hampered the achievement of lasting national
reconciliation, which is one of the main objectives
of transitional justice mechanisms. In this regard,
the Mechanism has become a “worthy descendant”
of the ICTY case. On 31 May, it denied the appeal
of Serb security service representatives Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović, who had been found
guilty of war crimes and crimes against humanity

S/PV.9344

perpetrated in 1992 in connection with the seizure
of Bosanski Šamac, in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The trial of Stanišić and Simatović will probably go
down as one of the most protracted and contradictory in
the history of international justice. The trial began with
an indictment way back in 2003. In 2013, the ICTY Trial
Chamber acquitted both accused of all charges because
their direct involvement in the tragic events on the
territory of the former Yugoslavia was not established.
On appeal, proceedings led to the ICTY Appeals
Chamber overturning the acquittal, on 15 December
2015, and calling for a second judicial proceeding,
which the Mechanism commenced in 2017. It was only
on 30 June 2021 that the Trial Chamber found both
individuals guilty on all charges and sentenced them to
12 years of incarceration.
The insufficient evidentiary basis was disregarded,
as if the appellate judges had never heard of the core
principle of criminal law that all doubts in a case are
to be resolved in favour of the accused. Nevertheless,
they eagerly embraced legal innovations penned by the
ICTY, namely, that the joint criminal enterprise concept
could be applied to the alleged expulsion of persons not
ethnically Serb from the territories of Croatia and of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This concept had, in practice,
already allowed the ICTY to identify as guilty not just
those persons who physically did not commit crimes,
but also persons who had simply no knowledge that
those crimes had been perpetrated.
As a result of such “creativity”, the acquittal was
reversed and turned completely on its head. Appeals
proceedings then dragged on up until very recently,
namely, 31 May 2023, resulting in a sentence for both
individuals, that increased the term from 12 years to 15
years. This probably happens only at the ICTY and the
Mechanism. With each new trial, the situation of the
accused only worsens. Perhaps it merely boils down to
the fact that they have already served their appointed
sentences, given the time spent in the detention facility,
and there was a need to tack something on at the
last minute.
We view this verdict as an open mockery of the
provisions of the core international legal instruments in
the area of the protection of human rights, specifically
the right to expeditious and fair judicial proceedings,
which is reflected in the statute of the Mechanism. We
believe that with rulings of this quality, the achievement
of lasting national reconciliation is simply impossible.

23-1654415/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

I thank the interpreter for her good interpretation.
Mr. Stastoli (Albania): I would like to begin
by thanking President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their insightful report and their
detailed briefings. Albania commends their efforts and
dedication to the pursuit of justice, in full compliance
with their mandate. We express our condolences for
the passing of Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya, of
Uganda, and pay tribute to the work and legacy that she
leaves behind.
Allow me to state at the outset that Albania
strongly supports the work of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT) as an
international judicial body in pursuit of accountability
for the most serious crimes under international criminal
law. By seeking accountability, the Mechanism lays
the foundations for reconciliation, peace and stability.
The Mechanism’s ruling on 31 May, which decided
to expand the conviction for Stanišić and Simatović,
rather than acquitting them, is a milestone development
in the quest for justice in the Balkans. We commend
the valuable work of the Office of the Prosecutor
and the tracking team that succeeded in finding and
arresting Mr. Kayishema — indeed another milestone
achievement for transitional justice.
However, we regret that Mr. Kabuga was declared
unfit to stand trial. Albania stands with the victims
and their families and strongly supports their quest
for justice.
These tangible results in achieving justice for
atrocities in the Balkans demonstrate the value of the
Mechanism’s work. But there is a real need for active
support and cooperation from all Member States for the
Mechanism to deliver justice and heed the demand for
justice from thousands of victims and their families in
the Balkans and elsewhere. Member States are obliged
to cooperate with the Mechanism to arrest, surrender
and execute arrest warrants, without delay. We call on
all Member States to cooperate fully and in good faith
with the Mechanism.
In that regard, we deplore the persistent refusal
to cooperate with the Mechanism. In particular, the
arrest warrants for Jojić and Radeta must be executed
by Serbia promptly to make sure that they face justice.
Failure to cooperate fully and in good faith with the
Mechanism not only goes against the rulings of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, but it
also offends and dishonours the memory of thousands
16/24

12/06/2023

of victims everywhere, not least in Srebrenica, Vukovar
and Račak.
Those atrocities are part of the darkest chapter of
the Balkans and need to be properly addressed in order
to open a new chapter of reconciliation and lasting
peace in the region and beyond. Fighting impunity,
incitement to violence and the denial of atrocities, as
well as condemning the glorification of war criminals,
are crucial to preventing the repetition of heinous
crimes, properly recognizing their lingering effects
across the Balkans and forging ahead towards a more
hopeful future.
In conclusion, Albania reaffirms its strong support
for the international courts in fighting impunity and
delivering justice everywhere. The Security Council
must ensure that the Mechanism gets the resources it
needs to fully complete its mandate.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank President Gatti Santana
and Prosecutor Brammertz for their informative reports
and briefings. I would like to express our heartfelt
condolences for the passing of Judge Elizabeth IbandaNahamya and our gratitude for her dedication, especially
to the Kabuga case. I also extend our sympathy and
solidarity to her family, friends and colleagues.
During the reporting period, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
has shown progress in the areas of investigation and
prosecution. Japan is committed to promoting the rule
of law, including the fight against impunity and the
pursuit of transitional justice, and therefore supports
the role of the Mechanism. We would like to call upon
all States to cooperate with the Mechanism.
Japan welcomes the recent arrest of Fulgence
Kayishema, long sought for the alleged atrocious murder
of over 2,000 Tutsi refugees. As the Secretary-General
has stated, “those who are alleged to have committed
such crimes cannot evade justice and will eventually be
held accountable, even more than a quarter of a century
later.” We commend the Prosecutor and his team for
their efforts, and we commend South Africa, Eswatini,
Mozambique and Rwanda for their important support.
We hope that the three remaining fugitives will be held
accountable in the near future.
Another important development is the conclusion
of the Stanišić and Simatović case, which is one of the
remaining two cases dealt with by the Mechanism. Thirty
years after its inception, we have finally witnessed
the completion of the mandate given by the Security
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Council to the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. With regard to the other outstanding case,
the Kabuga case, we note the Trial Chamber’s decision
to adopt the “trial of the facts” procedure. Japan hopes
these proceedings will lead to the finding of truth and
contribute to future reconciliation.
Japan understands that fair and legitimate due
process requires time. On the other hand, for victims
and societies, justice needs to be done as expeditiously
as possible. We encourage the Mechanism to advance
its proceedings under a clear and reasonable timeline
and to use its accumulated information, evidence and
expertise in cooperating with national authorities
in their endeavour to end impunity. In that regard,
we acknowledge that the Mechanism continues to
fulfil a limited, but indispensable role to hold those
responsible accountable.
Once again, let me reiterate Japan’s unwavering
support for the activities of the Mechanism. We are
committed to promoting the rule of law together with
fellow Member States and the international judicial
institutions, including the IRMCT.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
thanks President Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz
for their briefings and expresses its condolences for the
passing of Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya.
During the reporting period, the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals (IRMCT)
advanced its judicial work in an orderly manner for the
transition towards a truly residual body and delivered its
judgment on one appeal case earlier than the estimated
timeline. That judgment marks the completion of all
cases transferred to the Residual Mechanism by the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia and is
of positive significance to the IRMCT’s advancement
of the processing of other cases.
According to the relevant Security Council
resolutions, the Residual Mechanism should be a small,
temporary and efficient structure. China hopes that
the Mechanism will continue to carry out its activities,
as mandated by the resolutions of the Council, and
gradually draw down its functions and size as the
number of cases and judicial functions diminish. The
Residual Mechanism should reduce its expenditures in
a rational manner and further optimize the allocation
of financial resources, with a focus on ensuring judicial
activities. The practical and effective cooperation
between the Mechanism and the countries concerned is

S/PV.9344

of major significance to the completion of its mandate
and progress in its work.
Regarding the transfer of cases, the tracking of
fugitives and the relocation of those who have been
acquitted or completed their sentences, among other
things, China hopes that the Residual Mechanism
will work with all of the relevant parties to step up
communication, enhance mutual trust, accommodate
each other’s legitimate concerns and draw on the
successful practices of international criminal tribunals
so as to find appropriate solutions and jointly
combat impunity.
In conclusion, I wish to take this opportunity to
thank Gabon, Chair of the Informal Working Group on
International Tribunals, and the Office of Legal Affairs
for their work in coordinating the work in the Council
and the Residual Mechanism.
Mr. Wickremasinghe (United Kingdom): I would
like to begin by acknowledging the sudden and tragic
passing of Judge Ibanda-Nahamya and remembering
her vital contribution to international justice. In that
respect, in particular, I would point to her exemplary
work on the Prosecutor v. Ratko Mladić and Prosecutor
v. Félicien Kabuga cases. I also take this opportunity to
welcome the appointment of Judge Mugambe Ssali and
wish her all the best in her new role.
Turning to today’s briefing, let me thank President
Gatti Santana and Prosecutor Brammertz for presenting
the report of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals and for their statements today.
Under their guidance, over the past six months, the
Mechanism has continued to implement its mandate
in a timely and effective manner. Two very recent
successes reflect that.
First, there are the final convictions of Jovica
Stanišić and Franko Simatović, which bring to a close the
major cases of the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY) and are landmarks in international
justice. Their convictions, while occurring many
years after their offences, are of great importance in
demonstrating the international community’s continued
fight against impunity for the most serious crimes. The
judgments of the ICTY and the Mechanism form part of
the record of the suffering inflicted on civilians during
the conflicts in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s. We
remember the victims and survivors and recognize the
bravery of all those who have cooperated and supported
the judicial processes.

23-1654417/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

Secondly, there is the recent arrest of Fulgence
Kayishema. Having recently marked the twenty-ninth
commemoration of the 1994 genocide against the
Tutsi in Rwanda, Mr. Kayishema’s arrest is a salient
reminder of the Mechanism’s ongoing commitment to
securing justice. The United Kingdom would like to
commend the Mechanism’s fugitive-tracking team and
the South African authorities for their successes in that
matter, and we also thank the authorities of Eswatini
and Mozambique for their important contributions to
that success.
We note the recent news that the Trial Chamber
has decided that Félicien Kabuga is no longer fit to
stand trial and that it will deal with his case by way
of an alternative finding procedure. We look forward
to future updates on that case and underline our
commitment to holding the perpetrators of the genocide
against the Tutsi to account. As such, we are concerned
about the reports of the ongoing denial of genocide.
That is unacceptable, both in its impact on the victims
and in hampering the international community’s efforts
to ensure the accountability of the perpetrators and to
deter future atrocities.
While the international trial and appeal processes
for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are coming to
an end, processes at the domestic level are ongoing. We
call on all countries to cooperate and to support those
national processes in order to ensure justice for all. In
that regard, continued reports from the Mechanism
of some States blocking cooperation in the Western
Balkans remain deeply concerning. It is also high time
that Serbia arrest and transfer Petar Jojić and Vjerica
Radeta to the Mechanism, following years of requests.
Looking to the future, we note that the Mechanism
continues to have much work to do, even though the
trial phase is very nearly over. There are 47 individuals
serving sentences, which need to be supervised, many
witnesses who continue to need protection and domestic
proceedings in the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda
that need the Mechanism’s support. It is nevertheless
important that this remaining work is done as efficiently
as possible, so we welcome the President’s focus on
the future strategy of the Mechanism as it transitions
to becoming a fully residual institution. We commend
the detailed work being done in that respect and look
forward to the Mechanism’s proposals.
Finally, I must say a few words in response to
the representative of Russia’s unfounded allegations
against the United Kingdom authorities in relation
18/24

12/06/2023

to Karadžić. The United Kingdom is proud of its
assistance to the Mechanism in enforcing sentences
and encourages other States to do so as well. Karadžić
is not being mistreated in any way. He has exactly
the same treatment as any other prisoner. He has
been subject to some time-limited, proportionate and
lawful restrictions on his contacts externally, but that
followed his misuse of those privileges to publish
articles that pushed political messages, genocide denial
and the glorification of war crimes — and he has been
informed of that. Underpinning all of that is Karadžić’s
own failure and that of his supporters to recognize that
he has been convicted of some of the most heinous
crimes witnessed in Europe, including the genocide
in Srebrenica.
Mr. Pérez Loose (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank President Gatti Santana and Prosecutor
Brammertz for their briefings, and I am pleased to
welcome to this meeting the representatives of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Croatia, Rwanda and Serbia.
I would like to begin my statement by expressing
my country’s support for the role of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals in
rendering justice and protecting the rights of victims
of war crimes and genocide. Its work is a fundamental
component in the fight against impunity for the grave
violations of international law perpetrated in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia.
With regard to what we have heard today, I would
like to highlight three points.
First, we note with satisfaction that since the
presentation of its previous report (see S/PV.9217), the
Mechanism has made decisive progress in fulfilling its
judicial functions. That included the judgment issued
by the Appeals Chamber on 31 May in the case of
Prosecutor vs. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović,
which constituted a milestone in the history of
international justice, marking the conclusion of all the
trials before the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), and which was issued during
the month of the thirtieth anniversary of the historic
decision adopted by the Security Council to establish
that Tribunal.
We take note of the judgment issued by the Trial
Chamber on 6 June in the Prosecutor v. Félicien Kabuga
case and will closely follow the next procedural steps
arising from that decision.
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

We would also like to welcome the appointment of
Judge Lydia Mugambe Ssali, who will replace Judge
Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya, who unfortunately passed
away in January.
Secondly, we emphasize the essential role of
the cooperation of States in enabling the Mechanism
to fulfil its functions and therefore urge all States to
intensify their cooperation with the Mechanism and
to provide the necessary assistance. We cannot forget
that we have a collective responsibility to ensure that
such horrendous crimes as genocide and war crimes
do not go unpunished. The arrest on 24 May in South
Africa of Fulgence Kayishema, who was indicted
for organizing the murder of approximately 2,000
Tutsi refugees during the 1994 genocide, was a clear
result of effective cooperation between States and the
Mechanism. We thank South Africa for its cooperation
in complying with its obligations under international
criminal law, and we congratulate the Office of the
Prosecutor on its work and encourage it to continue
investigations to ascertain the whereabouts of the three
remaining fugitives. The Mechanism should continue
to help States strengthen their national investigative
and prosecutorial capacities so that they can meet their
responsibilities for ensuring justice and accountability
for crimes committed on their territory.
Thirdly, we support the initiatives that the President
has proposed in order to continue the Mechanism’s
transition from a purely operational court to a genuinely
residual body. We are aware of the challenges that the
work will entail in terms of downsizing staff, executing
sentences, protecting witnesses and preserving
archives. The establishment of a panel of judges to
assess the character and duration of the Mechanism’s
remaining judicial functions, together with their
potential transfer, is an outstanding initiative that my
delegation supports. Achieving a smooth transition
will be one of the most effective ways to preserve the
legacy of the International Tribunals for Rwanda and
the former Yugoslavia.
In conclusion, we would be remiss if we failed to
express our concern about the increase in the denial of
genocide, historical revisionism and the glorification of
war criminals, which seeks to dehumanize the victims
and deprive them of justice. Ecuador condemns and
rejects all such practices, which undermine efforts to
achieve reconciliation, cohesion and inclusion in the
communities concerned.

S/PV.9344

The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United Arab Emirates.
I would like at the outset to thank Judge Graciela
Gatti Santana, President of the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and Mr. Serge
Brammertz, Chief Prosecutor, for their valuable
briefings. I welcome the representatives of Croatia,
Rwanda, Serbia and Bosnia and Herzegovina to this
meeting. We also offer our sincere condolences on the
passing of Judge Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya.
The United Arab Emirates reaffirms the important
role played by the Mechanism in carrying out the
residual functions of the International Tribunal for
the Former Yugoslavia and the International Criminal
Tribunal for Rwanda. The Mechanism’s contributions
have been instrumental in achieving justice, protecting
the rights of victims of war crimes, genocide and ethnic
cleansing and combating impunity. We would like to
take this opportunity to reiterate that the international
community must address the root causes of such crimes,
which are often fuelled by hate speech, discrimination
and racism.
We take note of the appeal judgment in The
Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović
and once again express our condolences to the victims’
families and our solidarity with the survivors and
others affected. We continue to follow the progress
made by the Mechanism in fulfilling its core functions,
including the trial proceedings of the Kabuga case,
which we hope will be concluded right on time.
We would like to emphasize that States bear the
primary responsibility for holding crime perpetrators
accountable, while at the same time we acknowledge
the complementary role played by international bodies
in achieving international justice. We also appreciate
the efforts led by the Mechanism’s judges and the
Office of the Prosecutor to streamline and conclude
its pending work. We commend the ongoing efforts
to strengthen the Mechanism’s effectiveness and
efficiency and reduce its workload. We urge for an
increase in its focus on future planning, guided by the
Security Council’s vision that the Mechanism should be
a temporary and effective body whose functions should
diminish over time.
The United Arab Emirates urges all States,
particularly those directly concerned, to comply with
their obligations in cooperating with the Mechanism

23-1654419/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

and supporting its tasks. Upholding justice is the most
fitting way to honour victims. Cooperation with the
Mechanism has been shown to have significant success,
as demonstrated by the recent arrest of the fugitive
Fulgence Kayishema, the result of joint efforts by the
Mechanism’s fugitive-tracking team and the South
African authorities.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
that strengthening international justice and the rule
of law, based on the Charter of the United Nations,
is imperative for the international community to
effectively achieve peace and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I would like to thank Judge
Graciela Gatti Santana, President of the International
Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals, and its
Chief Prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, for their extensive
briefings. I also want to thank the members of the
Security Council for their statements. We appreciate
the cooperation between the Mechanism and the
Government of Rwanda. We commend the Prosecutor
for the recent arrest of the genocide fugitive Fulgence
Kayishema, one of those on the most-wanted list of
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, who
had been on the run for 22 years. We would also like
to express our condolences on the passing of Judge
Elizabeth Ibanda-Nahamya of Uganda.
We thank the Residual Mechanism for the
consolidated progress report and its personnel’s
continued efforts to seek justice for the crime of
genocide. We welcome the cooperation that led to
Kayishema’s arrest, provided by the law-enforcement
agencies of South Africa, Mozambique and Eswatini,
together with United Nations investigators. We are
especially grateful to South Africa for the role that
it played in the process. Rwanda continues to thank
countries that have extended their cooperation to the
Office of the Prosecutor and to Rwandan prosecutions.
It is important to highlight that the Mechanism
has officially confirmed Rwanda’s ability to
conduct genocide trials in complete compliance with
international due-process standards. In recent years,
as Prosecutor Brammertz emphasizes in his report,
Rwanda has effectively carried out trials and appeals
for cases referred to it by the Mechanism. Nonetheless,
considering the substantial volume of appeals, we
20/24

12/06/2023

continue to welcome the ongoing partnership and
support provided by the Mechanism. We also hope
that the staff of the Office of the Prosecutor will
help the Rwandan authorities overcome the ongoing
challenge of tracking down more than 1,000 genocide
fugitives and achieve further justice for the victims
and survivors in Rwanda. As of June, Rwanda has
issued 1,148 indictments against genocide suspects in
33 countries and INTERPOL’s General Secretariat. In
view of that, we call upon countries where indictments
have been issued to redouble their efforts in arresting
the remaining fugitives within their jurisdiction.
Justice for the victims and survivors of the genocide
against the Tutsi is not merely about prosecution; it is
about timely justice. Every delay in the process equates
to justice denied. It is unfortunate that the pace of justice
is slowed by a lack of cooperation from some Member
States, despite clear Security Council mandates and
judiciary instruments urging such cooperation. Such
delays not only hinder the pursuit of justice but also
impede the opportunity for criminals to face trial and
be held accountable for their crimes. A recent instance
highlighting that issue is the Trial Chamber of the
Residual Mechanism’s decision ruling that Félicien
Kabuga is unfit to continue standing trial — a deeply
disheartening outcome for the survivors, victims and
the people of Rwanda as a whole.
Despite the provision in article 28, paragraph
3, of the Mechanism’s statute for assisting national
authorities in the prosecution of serious violations of
international humanitarian law, we observe a reluctance
by some States to cooperate. That inaction, in the face
of available options for deportation, extradition or
conducting trials within their territories, hinders the
fight against impunity.
We extend our gratitude to the countries that
have demonstrated their commitment to justice by
extraditing or prosecuting fugitives on their soil. They
include Belgium, France, the United States of America,
Uganda, the Netherlands, Canada, Norway, Germany,
Denmark, Sweden, Malawi, the Republic of the Congo,
Finland and Switzerland. Their action reinforces the
belief that the pursuit of justice is not insurmountable,
but merely requires the political will to act.
Each year in April, Member States stand with us as
we commemorate the genocide against the Tutsi. They
show us compassion and acknowledge our resilience.
However, when we send indictments, our appeals are
often met with silence. We need Member States to
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

demonstrate solidarity in our pursuit of justice, as they
do when we commemorate.
Rwanda and Rwandans have come a long way from
the dark events of 1994. However, having prominent
figures and perpetrators of genocide remaining active
and the spread of genocide ideology and incitement
threatens the hope of a truly peaceful society. We ask
that members join us in making “never again” a reality.
As I conclude, let us reflect on the plight of the
survivors, whose peace is continually disturbed by the
knowledge that perpetrators are still at large. They, and
indeed all of us, yearn for the day when justice will
no longer be delayed, the guilty will finally answer for
their actions and the victims can find solace in knowing
that their suffering has not been forgotten.
Let me reiterate that the fight against impunity
is not a task that Rwanda should shoulder alone. It
is a collective responsibility that we, as the global
community, must undertake. We plead with all Member
States to consider the gravity of the crimes committed
during the genocide against the Tutsi, the prolonged
suffering of the survivors and the potential instability
that the ongoing impunity poses. Each day that a fugitive
remains free is another day that justice is delayed. And
as we all know, justice delayed is justice denied.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Alkalaj (Bosnia and Herzegovina): I thank
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Ms. Graciela Gatti Santana,
and Prosecutor Serge Brammertz for the briefings
related to the progress report of the work of the
International Residual Mechanism. We appreciate the
detailed projection of the remaining tasks, pursuant
to the requirements set out in resolution 2637 (2022).
The continuation and proper completion of the work
of the Mechanism remain essential in concluding
this historical chapter in the history of international
criminal justice.
On that note, I wish to make the following remarks.
In May 1992, we joined the family of nations with
our restored independence — one that came at a high
and bloody cost. We never allowed ourselves to be split
in two or be attached to the “whatever greater”, which
was the plan. And so we were brutally attacked, from
both outside and inside. For that precise reason, again
in May 1993, by establishing the International Tribunal

S/PV.9344

for the Former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the Security Council
made an unprecedented and historical contribution
to justice, both in Bosnia and Herzegovina and at
the international level. Those developments were of
consequential importance for Bosnia and Herzegovina
and international criminal justice alike.
As we marked the thirtieth anniversary of ICTY
this past May and as we welcome the final verdict in
the case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and Franko
Simatović, I find it opportune to acknowledge the role
of the Tribunal in irreversibly changing the landscape of
international humanitarian law through its precedentsetting decisions on genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity. More important, it contributes to an
indisputable historical record — a crucial element in
combating denial and revisionism.
In the case Prosecutor v. Jovica Stanišić and
Franko Simatović in particular, it finally spelled out
what even the International Court of Justice elegantly
skirted — the direct responsibility of Serbian State
officials for the crimes committed in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the 1990s and the existence of a
joint criminal enterprise
“shared by certain senior political, military and
police leaders in Serbia for a common criminal
purpose to forcibly and permanently remove,
through ethnic cleansing, the majority of non-Serbs
from large areas of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Croatia”.
It has been proven beyond reasonable doubt that
mass murder in Srebrenica was genocide. And now it
has been proven beyond reasonable doubt that a civil
war never occurred, but it was a brutal aggression on my
country, as independent and sovereign, by its neighbour.
And while family members and the victims can never
see their loved ones again, justice has prevailed. After
that, it is a bit more difficult to deny the undeniable. It is
difficult but apparently still very possible, as evidenced
by the unimaginable that recently surfaced, which
demonstrated cruelty, shamelessness and inhumanity.
When asked if it was worth the jail time, war criminal
Dario Kordic answered that every second was worth it
and that he would do it all over again.
Denials and efforts to rewrite history will continue
to fail. Efforts to justify the unjustifiable will fail.
And there is a special place in history, alongside the
worst of humankind, for all those either committing
war crimes or glorifying war criminals. They are

23-1654421/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

much the same — the ugliest of diseases. But for so
long as it is being tolerated without consequences, we
become accomplices in renewed attacks on victims,
never allowing wounds to heal. Moreover, as so bluntly
demonstrated in the very words of Dario Kordic,
it raises the very real risk of similar atrocities being
committed again in the future.
The day 25 May was once celebrated as the Relay of
Youth. On that day in 1995, a shell fired from positions
held by the Bosnian Serb army hit the Gate area of
Tuzla, wiping out 71 young lives. The youngest was
a two-and-a-half-year-old boy, called Sandro Kalesić.
General Djukic, who ordered the shelling of the Tuzla
Gate area, was sentenced to 20 years in prison in 2014
by the Bosnian State court. Shortly after, he escaped to
Serbia. Today Djukic is a retired General of the Army
of Republika Srpska. He is in Serbia, where he has
been avoiding serving a well-deserved prison sentence
ever since.
That not only damages the fragile process of
rebuilding trust and opening future-oriented relations
between our countries, but it also perpetrates narratives
that go against every civilized norm and the principles of
humanity, justice and the rule of law. The day of reckoning
is unavoidable. And maybe, just maybe, it will finally
set the countries that made up the former Yugoslavia
on a more honest path toward true reconciliation.
Forgiveness can come only with atonement.
About 3,000 suspected perpetrators of war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed
in the former Yugoslavia have yet to face justice.
Of the total number of all unresolved cases, in
Bosnia and Herzegovina alone more than 35 per cent
concern persons unavailable to the domestic criminal
prosecution authorities, and 63.3 per cent of those
persons are located in Croatia, Montenegro or Serbia.
The assistance from the Mechanism and the Office of
the Prosecutor in that regard is critical, but the main
responsibility for delivering meaningful justice now
lies with national judicial institutions. Effective and
open regional cooperation among prosecution offices is
also crucial. The unavailability of suspects or accused
persons not only undermines our courts’ general
effectiveness in carrying out their heavy responsibility,
but it also promotes impunity and hinders reconciliation
processes in the region.
For our part, we are committed to investigating,
prosecuting and punishing all who are responsible for
war crimes, regardless of the offenders’ nationality,
22/24

12/06/2023

ethnicity, religion or political or other affiliation. The
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as
well as the country’s lower-level prosecutor’s offices,
are taking all necessary measures to investigate all
war crimes that remain unresolved and to prosecute all
potential perpetrators for their personal or command
responsibility. On 30 March, the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina formed a supervisory
body for monitoring the implementation of the revised
national strategy for the processing of war crimes. A
specific sublegal framework has been established,
which will contribute to the implementation of the
strategy’s goals by improving the efficiency and quality
of the processing of war crimes. In that regard, the
normative framework that established control over the
management and influx of newly registered cases of war
crimes has already resulted in a visible reduction in the
number of unresolved cases of war crimes registered
within the judicial system.
In addition, the coordination by the High Judicial
and Prosecutorial Council of Bosnia and Herzegovina
of the activities of the Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and the Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has improved the functionality of the Mechanism for
the transfer of proceedings in accordance with strategic
objective 3 of our revised strategy, contributing to a
better dispersal of war-crime cases by levels of justice
according to each case’s legal complexity. Further to
the issue, we continue working on intensifying all our
efforts in the search for the more than 6,000 persons
who remain missing in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Cooperation between institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and those of neighbouring countries in the
exchange of information is equally critical.
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s cooperation with
the International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals has been stable and complete. We will
continue that close collaboration towards our mutual
goal of implementing our national strategy for the
processing of war crimes, advancing investigations
and prosecutions and clearing the existing backlog.
We will neither falter nor tire, whether in our support
for the Mechanism in completing its work or in our
determination to deliver much-deserved justice for
crimes committed in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Finally, on a personal note, as my term of duty
comes to an end and as this is my final address to the
Security Council in my present capacity, I would like
to thank all Council members for their continuing
23-16544

12/06/2023

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

contribution to ensuring peace, justice and prosperity
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Serbia.
Mr. Stevanovic (Serbia): After that political speech
by the Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I will
try to speak about the relevant cases today before the
Security Council.
With the end of the proceedings in the case of
Stanišić and Simatović, which began more than two
decades ago, there is no longer a single case before
The Hague branch of the Mechanism concerning
serious violations of international humanitarian law
on the territory of the former Yugoslavia. We would
like to express our expectation that the Mechanism will
function in the future as it was designed to by resolution
1966 (2010) and reaffirmed in resolution 2637 (2022),
that is, “to be a small, temporary and efficient structure,
whose functions and size will diminish over time”.
However, in his report, the Prosecutor of the
Mechanism mentioned alleged challenges that threaten
to undermine the ability of the Mechanism to complete
its work. In that context, the case of Jojić and Radeta is
mentioned again. There is no need to repeat here what
has already been stated at previous Council meetings,
or the reason for the Mechanism’s decision to deny
the transfer of that case for contempt of court to the
judiciary of the Republic of Serbia. In the context, we
can only remind all Council members of paragraph 11
of resolution 2637 (2022), which clearly states that the
Security Council
“[c]alls upon the Mechanism, as part of its
completion strategy, to provide options regarding
the transfer of its remaining activities in due course”.
Furthermore, proceedings before national judicial
authorities can promote justice and strengthen
confidence in national judicial systems. We want to
indicate the readiness of the judicial authorities of
Serbia to take over any case concerning contempt of
court or false testimony, with a full guarantee that the
proceedings will be conducted in accordance with the
requirements of the proper administration of justice
and with full respect for both the Mechanism and the
rights of witnesses and the accused. Today we also
repeat our request and express my country’s readiness
for the prison sentence imposed by the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to be carried out in
Serbia under the Mechanism’s supervision.

S/PV.9344

Additional obstacles standing in the way of ending
the work of the Mechanism include the continued refusal
to return extensive documentation to my country. Once
returned, those documents will be open not only to the
Mechanism but to historians, researchers and national
judicial authorities. We see no reason why they are
still in the Mechanism’s possession or why, despite our
continuing insistence, the process for returning them
has not even begun.
I also want to bring the Council’s attention to what
we perceive as a very questionable understanding of
prosecution regarding the legal framework for regional
cooperation in criminal matters. For example, in the part
of the report referring to cooperation between Serbia
and Croatia, the Office of the Prosecutor states that it
has previously noted the standstill in the long-standing
bilateral negotiations between Croatia and Serbia on
establishing an agreement on a framework for war
crimes cases and that the status quo in effect ensures
nothing but impunity. It is pertinent here to cite examples
such as the acquittals of Ramush Haradinaj for serious
crimes in the territory of our province of Kosovo and
Metohija; of Naser Orić for serious crimes in Podrinje;
and Ante Gotovina for serious crimes on the territory
of Croatia. Those acquittals are part of the Mechanism’s
legacy as well, and they significantly bolster impunity,
especially for crimes committed against people of
Serbian ethnic origin in our province of Kosovo and
Metohija, in Croatia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
As has been mentioned, the Office of the Prosecutor
ignored the fact that Serbia and Croatia are both members
of the Council of Europe, which has an adequate legal
framework for cooperation in criminal matters. That is
ensured both through our national legislation and the
application of the European Convention on Extradition
and the European Convention on Mutual Assistance
in Criminal Matters, which take precedence over any
bilateral agreement regulating the matter of mutual
legal assistance in criminal matters. The absence
of a bilateral agreement therefore cannot in any way
be qualified as the Prosecutor did in his report. As
regards the complaint by the Office of the Prosecutor
of the Mechanism about the denial of crimes and the
glorification of convicted persons, we feel once again
compelled to clearly state my country’s position.
The Republic of Serbia has ended many proceedings
in which it supported severe punishment for crimes
committed on the territory of the former Yugoslavia,
primarily against its citizens or ethnic Serbs. A large
number of proceedings and investigations are ongoing.

23-1654423/24

S/PV.9344

International Residual Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals

My country absolutely rejects any accusation either of
the denial or glorification of crimes.
After the end of the final proceedings before the
Mechanism, my Government expressed its hope and
expectation that effective cooperation will be achieved
between Serbia and the Mechanism in the manner
prescribed by the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council. In that vein, we also expect that the Mechanism
will act in accordance with the principles of the Charter
of the United Nations. Long live Serbia.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Šimonović (Croatia): I would like to thank
the President of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Judge Gatti Santana, and
Prosecutor Brammertz for their reports and today’s
briefings. We also use this opportunity to express our
condolences to the family of deceased Judge Elizabeth
Ibanda-Nahamya.
The Mechanism has finally passed its final
judgment for crimes perpetrated in Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina during the 1990s. That verdict against
Jovica Stanišić and Franko Simatović, former top
Serbian security service officials, who participated
in a joint criminal enterprise led by late Serbian
President Slobodan Milošević, with the participation
of the Serbian rebel leaders from Croatia and Bosnia
and Herzegovina, establishes a clear link between the
Serbian leadership and the atrocity crimes committed
in Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Although
Milošević died in detention before his verdict and
Stanišić and Simatović were regrettably not convicted
for a long list of additional crimes they were involved
in, we sincerely hope the judgment will bring some
comfort to the victims and contribute to healing and
reconciliation, as well as to sustainable peace and
stability in the region.
We regret that the President of the Mechanism was
compelled to raise once again with the Security Council
Serbia’s failure to arrest and transfer Petar Jojić and
Vjerica Radeta to The Hague. The intimidation and
bribing of witnesses are serious crimes, and acting in
accordance with the Mechanism’s arrest warrant is a
national obligation under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations.

24/24

12/06/2023

Croatia remains fully committed to complying
with its obligations under resolution 1966 (2010),
namely, constructive, transparent, non-politicized
and evidence-based judicial cooperation with other
neighbouring States on matters related to war crimes.
To that end, we need to reiterate that meaningful and
productive cooperation is not a one-way process and that,
alongside transparency and openness, good practices
and international legal standards must be upheld.
We stress that Croatia is still waiting for Serbia’s
response to its invitation to the fourth and final round
of negotiations for a bilateral agreement on processing
war crimes. We are convinced that the provisions of
such bilateral agreement would prevent further misuse
of the instrument of mutual legal assistance and
help to finally end the harmful practice of initiating
politically motivated processes that do not comply with
international legal standards.
The denial of the findings and disrespect for the
legal qualifications of the Tribunal are continuing
and require our full attention. The glorification of
war criminals and the denial of committed crimes,
including the genocide in Srebrenica, are unacceptable
as they increase the suffering of the victims, hamper
reconciliation and destabilize the region. They also
confuse, if not poison, future generations.
In that regard, we have to raise again the issue
of insufficient cooperation in the tracing of missing
persons and mortal remains. Determining the
whereabouts of 1,807 missing Croatian citizens is
our long-standing priority. Regrettably, we need to
stress that the lack of political will in Serbia to share
information and to enable access to archives still
remains the greatest obstacle to progress in resolving
those cases. To that end, we reiterate that establishing
the fate of the missing persons, as well as finding mortal
remains and their proper burial, are essential for closure
and reconciliation. In addition to its call for improved
bilateral cooperation, Croatia urges the Mechanism to
prioritize its support for tracing missing persons and
mortal remains during its remaining short mandate.
In conclusion, let me reaffirm our strong support
for the important work of the Mechanism and its
successful completion.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

23-16544
