A/65/PV.46

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fifth session

46

th plenary meeting
Monday, 8 November 2010, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Agenda item 87
Report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
Note by the Secretary-General transmitting
the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/65/140)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.10)
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency, to introduce the
report of the Agency for the year 2009.
Mr. Amano (International Atomic Energy
Agency): This is my first report to the General
Assembly as Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency. A constant theme of my first
year in office has been the pursuit of objectives related
to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the
promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a
balanced manner. I am trying to change the widespread
perception of the Agency as simply the world’s
“nuclear watchdog”, because that term does not do
justice to our extensive activities in other areas,
especially in nuclear energy, nuclear science and
applications, and technical cooperation.
Today, I will review the highlights of the
Agency’s work in the past year and share some
thoughts on current issues. I will start with nuclear
energy. In March, the International Conference on
Access to Civil Nuclear Energy, which took place in

Paris, illustrated the growing international interest in
nuclear power as a clean and stable source of energy
that can help to mitigate the impact of climate change.
I expressed my conviction that access to nuclear power
should not be limited to developed countries but should
be available to developing countries as well.
Some 60 countries are considering introducing
nuclear energy. We expect up to 25 new countries to
bring their first nuclear power plants on line by 2030.
Many of the countries that already have nuclear power
are planning or building new reactors or extending the
operational life of existing reactors. While it is up to
the Member State to decide whether or not to opt for
nuclear power, the Agency has a key role to play in
ensuring that the expansion in nuclear power takes
place in an efficient, responsible and sustainable
manner. When countries express an interest in
introducing nuclear power, we offer advice in many
areas, including on how to put the appropriate legal
and regulatory framework into place and how to ensure
the highest standards of safety and security, without
increasing proliferation risks.
The Agency continues to assist countries that are
expanding existing nuclear power programmes. It is in
those countries that the most new nuclear power plants
will be built and where the lifetime of existing plants is
being extended. Our work with those countries is
focused on areas such as operational safety and
security, improving nuclear waste disposal and
decommissioning old reactors.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

10-62124 (E)

*1062124*

A/65/PV.46

The Agency signed an agreement with the
Russian Federation in March to establish a lowenriched uranium bank in Angarsk, which is intended
to provide assurance of supply for nuclear power
plants. Some IAEA member States have proposed other
mechanisms for assurance of supply.
In view of the increasing interest of many
countries in introducing nuclear power, I would like to
encourage international lending institutions to consider
being more open in their approach to funding nuclear
power projects. I also believe that the benefits of
nuclear power in mitigating the negative effects of
climate change deserve wider recognition in the
relevant international forums.
I would like to touch upon nuclear applications
next. The work of the IAEA in areas such as health
care and nutrition, food security, the environment and
water resource management is extremely important for
many member States. I made cancer in developing
countries a high priority for my first year in office.
Some 665 people in developing countries die of cancer
every hour — nearly three times as many as in
developed countries. Around 70 per cent of cancers in
developing countries are diagnosed too late for lifesaving treatment. In many low-income countries, there
is not a single radiation therapy machine. Since 1980,
the IAEA has delivered over $220 million worth of
cancer-related assistance to developing countries. Our
special focus on cancer this year has already started to
bear fruit. I believe we have succeeded in raising
awareness of the problem of cancer in developing
countries to a higher political level.
Our cooperation with the World Health
Organization is going from strength to strength.
Pledges and donations to our Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy are running at record levels. We are
also seeing a very strong commitment by developing
countries to our activities, which has led to an
improvement in the quality of some of our cancerrelated technical cooperation projects.
The availability of water for sustainable
development is also a growing concern. As member
States make increased efforts to meet that challenge,
they need better scientific knowledge of their water
resources. Nuclear technology is also very useful in
that area. We have initiated a new IAЕA Water
Availability Enhancement Project, which is aimed at
helping member States acquire such knowledge.

2

Turning now to nuclear safety and security, we
have seen a very significant improvement in the safety
performance of the nuclear industry since the
Chernobyl disaster nearly 25 years ago. That reflects
factors that include improved design, better operating
procedures, a strengthened and more effective
regulatory environment and the emergence of a strong
safety culture. While it is the responsibility of States to
ensure nuclear safety, the IAEA promotes an integrated
approach to safety, focusing on management systems,
effective leadership and safety culture. The Agency
also promotes international cooperation, providing
review services to member States and supporting
knowledge networks and training. While recognizing
that nuclear security is the responsibility of States, the
Agency continues to assist States in developing a
sustainable nuclear security capacity.
In April 2010, the Nuclear Security Summit in
Washington, D.C., attended by leaders from
47 countries, reaffirmed the essential role of the
Agency as part of the international nuclear security
framework. It also pledged to ensure that the Agency
has the resources to assist States in strengthening
nuclear security. Adherence to the relevant
international legal instruments on nuclear security has
gradually increased. However, while it has been five
years since the adoption of the Amendment to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material, progress towards its entry into force remains
slow. I encourage the parties to the Convention to work
towards accelerating the entry into force of the
Amendment.
I take great pride in the fact that the Agency’s
technical cooperation activities are making a real
difference in the lives of many people in developing
countries. As I mentioned, we make nuclear techniques
available to help fight cancer, boost food production,
combat animal diseases and improve the management
of scarce water resources, to name just a few areas.
Capacity-building is at the heart of our work in
technical cooperation. The ultimate goal is to make
countries self-sufficient, to help them establish or
maintain a sustainable, highly specialized and trained
human resource base in all areas of nuclear science and
applications.
The IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative, announced
this year by the United States, with a generous
contribution of $50 million over a five-year period, has

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

resulted in increased funding for some of our technical
cooperation activities, especially in the area of nuclear
power infrastructure for countries embarking on new
nuclear power programmes. I welcome a pledge of
support from Japan and encourage other countries that
are able to do so to contribute to that endeavour.
Turning now to nuclear verification, I have
continued to report regularly to the Board of Governors
on the implementation of the Agency’s safeguards
agreements. I have stressed that all safeguards
agreements between States and the Agency and other
relevant obligations should be implemented fully. In
that connection, the nuclear programme of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea remains a
matter of serious concern. The Agency has had no
inspectors in the country since April 2009. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has not
permitted the Agency to implement safeguards in the
country since December 2002, and it has not
implemented the measures called for in Security
Council resolutions 1718 (2006) and 1874 (2009). I
call on all parties concerned to make concerted efforts
for a resumption of the Six-Party Talks at an
appropriate time.
In the case of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
Agency continues to verify the non-diversion of
declared nuclear material, but the Islamic Republic of
Iran has not provided the necessary cooperation to
permit the Agency to confirm that all nuclear material
in Iran is devoted to peaceful activities. The
cooperation needed includes, among others, full
implementation of the relevant resolutions of the IAEA
Board of Governors and of the Security Council.
Turning now to the Middle East, I submitted a
report on Israeli nuclear capabilities to the IAEA
General Conference in September, as requested by the
General Conference in 2009. I also held consultations
on convening a forum on the relevance of the
experience of existing nuclear-weapon-free zones to
the establishment of such a zone in the Middle East,
but there was no convergence of views among member
States on that issue.
The Agency is supporting the establishment of
nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions of the
world. The Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) in May 2010 endorsed the convening of a
conference in 2012, to be attended by all States of the

10-62124

Middle East, on the establishment of a zone free of
nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass
destruction in that region. Having been personally
involved in the NPT process since 1995, I was very
pleased that the 2010 NPT Review Conference
produced some concrete results. I hope that the
proposed 2012 conference will take place with the
participation of all relevant States and that it will lead
to a productive outcome.
Finally, I would like to reiterate that the Agency
will continue to implement all aspects of its mandate in
a balanced manner in order to address the varying
interests of member States and facilitate the safe and
secure peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan to introduce
draft resolution A/65/L.10.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): Pakistan’s recent election
as Chair of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) Board of Governors for the 2010-2011 period
is a singular honour and a manifestation of the
international community’s acknowledgement of
Pakistan’s credentials and the role it can play with
regard to the matters within the ambit of the Agency.
We look forward to working closely with the IAEA
member States, the Director General and his staff to
further our collective interests in a cooperative and
equitable manner.
An expression of deep appreciation for Director
General Yukiya Amano is in order for his efforts to
promote nuclear science and technology, which is the
primary mission of the IAEA. The role of the IAEA in
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy is
indispensable. The Agency is uniquely placed to
facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology to
developing countries. The global renaissance of
nuclear power generation has enhanced the scope of
the Agency’s contribution to meeting the needs and
challenges of the twenty-first century. We are confident
that the Agency will ensure equitable access to nuclear
materials, technology and equipment for peaceful
purposes. As one of the earliest member States of the
Agency, Pakistan has long been a strong advocate of
utilizing nuclear technology for peace, progress and
prosperity for all.
Over the years, Pakistan itself has benefited
immensely from the expertise provided by the Agency
in the form of expert missions, including the

3

A/65/PV.46

Operational Safety Review Team, Assessment of
Safety-Significant Events Team missions, and the
Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme.
Pakistan attaches the highest importance to the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme. We have
contributed to it in the form of training, provision of
experts and hosting of seminars and workshops. We
would like to stress the need for enhanced and assured
resource allocation for technical cooperation activities,
technology transfer and training facilities for
developing countries. We also would like to emphasize
the importance of further strengthening and expansion
of the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme
through, inter alia, greater involvement of developing
countries
in
the
Programme’s
design
and
implementation.
Safety and verification issues are important
pillars of the IAEA mandate. We share the view that all
States should comply fully with their safeguards
obligations and international commitments. Fulfilment
by all States of their legal obligations is the most
important step towards maintaining the credibility of
the safeguards regime. A balance between the Agency’s
regulatory, promotional and safety functions will
ensure its continuing relevance in the context of
promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nonproliferation.
There is a need for greater understanding and
cooperation among the member States of the Agency to
advance its mandate on the basis of impartiality, equity
and professionalism. Efforts are also required to
correct the public perception of the IAEA as being just
a nuclear watchdog agency. The Agency’s primary role
in the promotion of peaceful uses of nuclear science
and technology needs to be re-emphasized.
Pakistan has established a strong and independent
nuclear safety and security infrastructure. The Pakistan
Nuclear Regulatory Authority, an independent entity,
has been in place for almost a decade now. Pakistan is
a party to several international conventions and
actively participates in the nuclear safety and security
activities and programmes of the Agency. Pakistan is
also contributing to IAEA databases such as the Illicit
Trafficking Database, the International Nuclear and
Radiological Event Scale and the International
Reporting System for Operating Experience.
Endowed with limited indigenous energy
resources, Pakistan has long been a strong advocate of

4

building nuclear power plants. Pakistan was one of the
earliest countries to launch a programme of nuclear
power generation. Back in 1965, when Pakistan signed
for its first commercial nuclear power plant, it was the
fifteenth country in the world and only the second
developing country to start a nuclear power
programme. Our first nuclear power plant, KANUPP,
started operation in 1972. The second power plant, the
Chashma Nuclear Power Plant, Unit 1, has been in
operation since 2000, while the second unit will be
commissioned next year.
Pakistan has the experience of more than 45 years
of safe reactor operation and a technical and
engineering infrastructure to maintain and provide
technical support to those plants. With a sizeable
civilian nuclear programme, a well-trained pool of
experts and decades of experience in nuclear
operations in the areas of power generation, health,
medicine, agriculture, biotechnology and industrial
applications, Pakistan is in a unique position to share
its knowledge and expertise in a number of areas,
under IAEA safeguards, including through training
placements and expert missions.
Pakistan has also been participating in the IAEA
International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors
and Fuel Cycles since its inception. Like other member
States, we congratulated the IAEA on the tenth
anniversary of that very valuable programme in
September 2010.
The Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission has
been given a mandate by the Government of Pakistan
to install 8,800 megawatts of nuclear energy by 2030
as part of our Energy Security Plan. The primary
objectives of the Plan are to offset shortages in power
generation to meet the exponential rise in the energy
requirements of a growing population and an
expanding economy. Nuclear power generation is
therefore an indispensable component of our national
energy security strategy. The Plan envisages setting up
several additional nuclear power reactors to increase
the share of nuclear power in the energy mix from the
current 0.8 per cent to 4.2 per cent by 2030.
In addition to utilizing nuclear energy for power
generation, Pakistan has also focused on applications
of ionizing radiation and radioisotopes in the fields of
health, agriculture and industry. The Pakistan Atomic
Energy Commission currently manages 14 nuclear
medical centres catering to around half a million

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

patients every year, most of them free of cost. Four
additional centres are under construction. Using its
research reactor, the Pakistan Atomic Energy
Commission produces domestically most of the
radioisotopes required for medical purposes. Recently,
a molybdenum production facility was commissioned.
Besides meeting the requirements of the country’s
nuclear medical centres and hospitals, that facility will
have spare capacity for export to other countries.
The entry into effect of the amendment to article
VI of the Statute will enhance the representative
character of the IAEA Board of Governors, thereby
contributing to a more effective role for the Agency.
We hope the Agency secretariat will strengthen its
outreach activities to achieve that objective.
In Pakistan’s capacity as Chair of the IAEA
Board of Governors, allow me now to introduce, under
agenda item 87, the draft resolution entitled “Report of
the International Atomic Energy Agency”, contained in
document А/65/L.10, on behalf of Albania, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Central African
Republic, Chile, Congo, Costa Rica, Croatia, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Eritrea,
Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia,
Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malaysia, Malta, Monaco, Mongolia, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea,
Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation,
Serbia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Trinidad and
Tobago, Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America
and Uruguay, as well as on behalf of Pakistan.
The result of consultations in Vienna, the
consensus text notes with appreciation, as in previous
years, the report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (A/65/140); takes note of the resolutions
adopted at the fifty-fourth regular session of the IAEA
General Conference held from 20 to 24 September;
reaffirms the General Assembly’s strong support for
the Agency’s indispensable role in encouraging and
assisting the development and practical application of

10-62124

atomic energy for peaceful uses, in technology transfer
to developing countries and in nuclear safety,
verification and security; and appeals to Member States
to continue to support the Agency’s activities. It is the
hope of the sponsors that the draft resolution will, as it
was last year, be adopted by consensus. It is also open
to further co-sponsorships.
Mr. Janssens de Bisthoven (Belgium): I have the
honour to speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
The candidate countries Turkey, Croatia and the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia; the countries of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidates Albania, Montenegro and Serbia; as well as
the Republic of Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align
themselves with this statement.
I would like to thank the Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) for his
presentation of the Agency’s report for 2009
(A/65/140), as well as the delegate of Pakistan for his
introduction of the draft resolution (A/65/L.10) on the
report. The European Union member States are cosponsors of the draft resolution. We thank the Chair of
the IAEA Board of Governors for his efforts, and we
sincerely hope that the draft resolution will be adopted
by consensus.
The IAЕА was created more than five decades
ago to promote “Atoms for Peace”, with the mandate to
increase the contribution of nuclear energy to peace,
health and prosperity, to ensure that nuclear activities
are not diverted to military purposes, to spread a
culture of safety and rigorous safety standards
throughout the world, and, more recently, to avert the
risk of nuclear terrorism. Today, the Agency is faced
with a number of compelling challenges, in particular
nuclear proliferation and compliance issues. In that
context, the European Union would like to thank IAEA
Director General Yukiya Amano and the IAEA
secretariat for their professional and impartial work.
The European Union assures them of its unfailing
support.
The year 2010 marks an important milestone for
the nuclear non-proliferation regime, which has been
given new impetus. Committed to effective multilateral
action against the proliferation of weapons of mass
destruction, the European Union warmly welcomes the
consensus reached at the 2010 Review Conference of
the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) in May this year. The action

5

A/65/PV.46

plan (see NPT/CONF.2010/50) agreed on for all three
pillars of the NPT – non-proliferation, disarmament
and peaceful uses – as well as the agreement on the
process for implementation of the 1995 NPT resolution
on the Middle East, including a conference to be
convened in 2012, demonstrates our common resolve
not only to uphold but also to strengthen the nuclear
non-proliferation regime.
The 2010 NPT Review Conference reaffirmed the
role of the IAEA in verifying and assuring compliance
by States with their safeguards obligations, with a view
to preventing the diversion of nuclear energy from
peaceful uses to nuclear weapons. We now need to
begin implementing the NPT action plan, building on
the results of the Review Conference and continuing
the spirit of consensus and cooperation that
characterized the negotiations. With regard to the
Agency’s mandate, we will be particularly keen to
ensure that the IAEA operates in an effective and
efficient manner and has adequate resources. The
European Union is fully committed to the
implementation of the action plan and will fully
support the Agency’s efforts to that end. The European
Union invites all member States to engage actively
with the Agency in that regard.
The Agency’s system of safeguards is a
fundamental
component
of
the
nuclear
non-proliferation regime and plays an indispensable
role in the implementation of the NPT. The European
Union reiterates its view that the measures contained in
the Additional Protocol form an integral part of that
system and that comprehensive safeguards agreements,
together with the additional protocols, constitute the
current IAEA verification standard. The European
Union calls for the universalization of those two
essential instruments of the IAEA safeguards system
without delay, as a means to strengthen the nonproliferation regime, enhance security worldwide and
increase the confidence needed for international
cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to
reach its full potential.
The European Union reaffirms its understanding
of the role of the United Nations Security Council as
the final arbiter of international peace and security in
order to take appropriate action in the event of noncompliance with NPT obligations, including safeguards
agreements.

6

The European Union attaches the utmost
importance to a high level of nuclear safety worldwide.
International cooperation is crucial for promoting the
global nuclear safety network.
Nuclear security is an essential programme of the
Agency, and the European Union commends the IAEA
for its activities aimed at preventing and combating
nuclear terrorism. The NPT Review Conference and
the Nuclear Security Summit emphasized the important
role of the IAEA in fostering international cooperation
in nuclear security, establishing a comprehensive set of
nuclear security guidelines and assisting member
States, upon their request, to enhance nuclear security.
The European Union is of the firm view that each
country has the right to define its own energy strategy.
For those countries that consider including, or plan to
include, nuclear power in their energy strategies, the
Agency has a key role to play in assisting them to
ensure that the development and operation of nuclear
power takes place under the most stringent legal,
operational safety, security and non-proliferation
conditions.
The European Union welcomes the Agency’s
activities to increase the contribution made by nuclear
technology to peace, health and economic
development.
The European Union has always been a strong
supporter of the technical cooperation programme, to
which it is one of the main contributors. We recognize
that addressing the global challenges of hunger,
disease, poverty and water resource management and
creating a cleaner and safer environment are
particularly significant for developing countries, and
the European Union values the efforts of the Agency in
those areas.
The European Union reiterates its full support for
the IAEA and is pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution on the report of the International Atomic
Energy Agency before the Assembly.
Mr. Abdelaziz (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I wish
to begin by expressing the appreciation of the
delegation of Egypt to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), for his presentation of the key elements of the
report of the Agency on its activities in various fields.
The report reflects the continued effectiveness of the
Agency in fulfilling its mandate in enhancing the

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

balanced interests of member States in the three main
pillars of its activities: nuclear technology, nuclear
safety and security, and verification.
In that context, and to repeat our continued
support for the role of the Agency in all three pillars,
Egypt joins, as it does every year, in co-sponsoring the
draft resolution entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency” (A/65/L.10).
The IAEA plays a central role in the exercise of
the inalienable right provided to non-nuclear-weapon
States by article IV of the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) to
acquire and use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes.
The final document of the NPT Review Conference
reconfirmed that right last May, stressing the
importance of respecting the decisions and policies of
non-nuclear-weapon States relating to their acquisition
of nuclear energy for development goals, and to the
peaceful use of nuclear energy to implement such
plans, without restrictions, by means of international
cooperation to acquire the required nuclear
technologies and material.
While a large number of non-nuclear-weapon
States did not benefit from their right to nuclear energy
in the past, the situation is changing in the face of the
qualitative and quantitative increase in the energy
needs of countries of the developing world, including
Egypt, imposed by international crises such as the
energy and climate change crises.
Thus in 2006 Egypt decided, based on our
national, scientific and practical capabilities, to enter
the field of nuclear energy. We started the process in
March 2010 by adopting national legislation
establishing a regulatory authority responsible for
nuclear and radioactive safety, which reports to the
Prime Minister. That was part of the preparations under
way to build the first Egyptian nuclear reactor, in the
context of the first phase of Egypt’s nuclear energy
programme for generating electricity. The larger plan
includes building four nuclear reactors for electricity
generation by the year 2025. Therefore, and in view of
the IAEA’s increasing role in enhancing sustainable
development and effectively assisting non-nuclearweapon States party to the NPT to meet their growing
needs for nuclear energy, Egypt looks forward to
increasing cooperation with the Agency in this
important field.

10-62124

Egypt remains among the leading States that have
provided unlimited support to the IAEA since its
establishment, believing in the role of the Agency in
the field of verification of nuclear non-proliferation
and its role in promoting the benefits of the peaceful
use of nuclear energy and supporting development
ambitions and international needs in a broad range of
fields.
However, the effectiveness of the comprehensive
safeguards system remains limited in light of the fact
that it is not universal, especially in the Middle East.
Intensified international efforts are required to
guarantee the implementation of the Comprehensive
Safeguards System in all States of the region, without
exception. To attain the goal of universalizing the
comprehensive safeguards system, especially in
non-nuclear-weapon States, it is essential that the
Agency’s role be strengthened in verifying compliance
of nuclear-weapon States with regard to commitment to
nuclear disarmament.
It is also essential to make more significant
progress in universalizing the NPT itself, especially in
the Middle East, through the accession of Israel to the
Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon State. That will enable
non-nuclear-weapon States to accept additional
obligations, which may enhance the non-proliferation
regime and lead to more balance in obligations in a
non-discriminatory manner at both the regional and
international levels.
On the regional level, all States of the Middle
East region have joined the Comprehensive Safeguards
System with the exception of Israel, which continues to
conduct suspicious nuclear activities outside any
international control, disregarding tens of international
calls and resolutions demanding its accession to the
NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State. That undoubtedly
increases the risk of nuclear proliferation in the Middle
East in a manner that hinders the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region.
Egypt sees promising prospects for significant
progress in the field of universalizing the NPT in our
region and for the universalization of the application of
Comprehensive Safeguards there through the honest
and balanced implementation of the detailed action
plan adopted by the 2010 NPT Review Conference and
through the immediate start of preparations for
convening the international conference in 2012 to
launch regional negotiations aimed at the establishment

7

A/65/PV.46

of a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons
of mass destruction in the Middle East. In that context,
Egypt reaffirms the importance of the role mandated by
the 2010 NPT Review Conference to the IAEA in
implementing the Action Plan and renews its intention
to work seriously with the Agency and with other
concerned parties to secure the success of the 2012
conference and its achieving the anticipated results.
On the international level, Egypt welcomes the
signature of the New START agreement between the
United States of America and the Russian Federation
and the subsequent trilateral agreement between the
IAEA and both countries. Through the trilateral
agreement a large amount of weapons-grade fissile
material from previous nuclear programmes will be
subject to verification by the Agency and be downblended for peaceful use in power reactors, thus
ensuring that such material will not return to military
nuclear programmes.
Egypt looks forward to expanding the application
of that framework to cover larger and more
comprehensive forms of quantities of weapons-grade
material and to include all other nuclear-weapon States
in order to bring elements of transparency,
irreversibility and effective verifiability of progress
into the field of nuclear disarmament. That will help
the NPT regime to recover its balance and allow the
Agency to play a real role in this crucial area.
The Agency has the central role as the sole
international forum mandated to work in the
multilateral context on developing and supervising the
application of the highest standards of nuclear safety
and security in nuclear energy reactors and on
contributing to the ability of developing countries to
safely benefit from nuclear energy. Bearing that in
mind, Egypt took part in the Nuclear Security Summit
held in Washington last April and participates in all the
preparatory meetings for the next summit in order to
contribute to any international effort aimed at dealing
with such extremely sensitive issues. Our success in
achieving progress on those issues will be difficult
without true international joint efforts based on
strengthening the NPT regime and realizing its
universality, on the one hand, and achieving more
progress in nuclear disarmament efforts, on the other.
In the area of technical cooperation, Egypt has
opened its nuclear facilities and laboratories to States
in the Arab region and the African continent and has

8

placed its experience in this field at their service, as we
believe in the importance of international cooperation
activities in the peaceful use of nuclear energy. In that
context, Egypt stresses the priority of IAEA technical
cooperation activities, both for Egypt and for other
developing countries that benefit from programmes on
the use of nuclear technologies in health, agriculture,
food, water resources, radioactive isotopes and
radiation technologies, inter alia.
While Egypt supports expanding the Agency’s
activities in the area of the production of radioactive
isotopes required to cure cancer, and while we
currently cooperate with the Agency to begin the
operation of a new medical radioactive isotopes
production facility for that purpose, my country also
welcomes the development and upgrading of the
Agency’s technical cooperation strategy aimed at
supporting the realization of the development
objectives of member States and identifying the vital
activities to which nuclear technology can effectively
contribute in the short and intermediate terms.
Consequently, we reaffirm the importance of securing
and increasing financing for the international
cooperation activities of the Agency, given that such
activities are among its central functions, according to
its Statute.
In conclusion, I reiterate that Egypt intends to
intensify and increase cooperation with the Agency
within our continued effort to enhance our national
capabilities in the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to
benefit from the Agency’s full support in our national
efforts in this important field.
Mr. Benítez Versón (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba welcomes and supports the important role of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). The
application of nuclear techniques contributes to
mitigating soil deterioration, desertification, warming
of the atmosphere and other natural phenomena that
affect the production of food and the life of man on
Earth.
We give high priority to cooperation between
developing countries. In that context, Cuba salutes the
twenty-fifth anniversary of the Regional Cooperative
Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and
Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean,
known as ARCAL.
The technical cooperation pillar of the IAEA
should be strengthened and should receive the

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

resources it needs on an unconditional basis, in
accordance with its priority.
Our commitment to technical cooperation is
strong, as can be shown through the following
examples, to cite just a few. First, Cuba strictly
complies with its obligations under the IAEA technical
cooperation programme. In 2009, we achieved an
implementation rate for national programmes of 85 per
cent, which was higher than the general and regional
average. Secondly, our country participated broadly in
the coordinated research programmes. In 2009, Cuban
researchers took part in 29 research contracts under
those programmes. Thirdly, Cuba strictly complies
with its financial commitments to the IAEA Technical
Cooperation Fund, including a contribution of 100 per
cent of expenses for national participation.
The economic, commercial and financial
blockade, which the Government of the United States
of America has imposed on Cuba for over 50 years,
affects the activities of the IAEA in our country and is
in violation of the Statute of the Agency. Up to
December 2009, the embargo has caused Cuba
economic losses of over $100.154 billion, calculated in
a very conservative fashion. Because of the embargo,
the IAEA is having difficulties in purchasing
specialized equipment for projects in Cuba, since
American companies or companies with American
share capital cannot sell that equipment for use in
Cuba, since they face the possibility of sanctions.
Similarly, Cuban citizens have difficulties when it
comes to participating in training programmes
organized in the United States. That impacts the
implementation of programmes linked to the fight
against cancer, which is a priority for the IAEA.
By denouncing here once again the unjust and
unlawful embargo — which was condemned in this
Hall just a few days ago by the overwhelming majority
of the States Members of the United Nations — Cuba
recognizes at the same time the constant efforts of the
IAEA secretariat to seek alternatives and find solutions
to that situation.
The IAEA certified once again that Cuba strictly
complies with its commitments in the area of
safeguards, confirming us as a country with no
undeclared nuclear material or activities.
We note with profound concern the climate of
mistrust that has been encouraged with regard to the
IAEA verification work in the Islamic Republic of Iran

10-62124

and the Syrian Arab Republic as a result of geopolitical
interests and double standards known to all. We
confirm that verification activities should first respect
the sovereignty and national interests of member
States. Also, they should include impartial professional
action by the inspectors and the rest of the personnel of
the IAEA secretariat, free from any pressure or
interference that would undermine the Agency’s
effectiveness and credibility.
We call on the secretariat of the IAEA to continue
working to promote a climate of trust, understanding
and transparency, based on objectivity and truth. In that
context, we reaffirm the need to respect the inalienable
right of all States to the use of nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes.
We confirm our support for the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula and for a solution negotiated
by the actors involved.
We also reiterate our support for the
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the
Middle East. The call for an international conference in
2012 to establish such a zone, approved at the eighth
Review Conference of the Parties to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), is an important step in
that direction. We urge Israel to adhere to the NPT
without delays or conditions. Israel must put all of its
nuclear installations under the broad safeguards of the
IAEA.
On the subject of nuclear fuel supplies, we stress
that the issue must be addressed in an inclusive and
transparent way that leads to consensus adoption of
any decisions. Cuba rejects any attempt to use the
supply of nuclear fuel as a means of political or
economic coercion or as a mechanism to establish the
monopoly of a few over the distribution of nuclear
fuel.
I would like to conclude by stressing the common
responsibility that we all have to bequeath a safer
world to future generations. That is why nuclear
disarmament cannot continue to be a goal constantly
postponed and subjected to conditions. Cuba will stand
firm in the battle for a better world, free of nuclear
arms.
Mr. Hermoso (Philippines): At the outset, the
Philippines would like to express its deep appreciation
for the work done by Director General Yukiya Amano
and the secretariat of the International Atomic Energy

9

A/65/PV.46

Agency (IAEA). The Philippines welcomes the report
of the IAEA and recognizes the importance of the
Agency. At the same time, the Philippines reaffirms its
strong support for the Agency’s crucial role in assisting
its member States in the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy, the transfer of technology to developing
countries and facilitating nuclear knowledge-sharing,
as well as in nuclear safety, verification and security.
Through its cooperation with the IAEA, the
Philippines has been developing the necessary human
resources and physical infrastructure for the utilization
of nuclear technologies to help meet the challenges
many of us face today, particularly in food security,
environmental resource management and human
health. The Philippines believes that science and
technology can help us achieve our Millennium
Development Goals and places great importance on the
various applications of nuclear technology, especially
in the area of food security, where Philippine
cooperation with the IAEA in agriculture has a direct
bearing on the Philippine Government’s programme to
ensure affordable food for the tables of Filipino
families.
The Philippines and IAEA also have extensive
links in other areas of technical cooperation. There has
been much success in increasing industrial
productivity, irradiation of food exports, providing
access to clean drinking water and addressing
environmental challenges.
The Philippines and the IAEA also cooperate in
the important field of cancer therapy, namely, the
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, or PACT.
The Philippines is pleased that the Agency made that a
priority activity, given the rise in the number of cancer
patients, particularly in the developing world. My
delegation believes that collaboration with the PACT
will lead to enhanced cancer training capabilities in the
region, in the context of the regional cancer training
network. The Philippines urges member States to
continue to support the Programme through additional
contributions.
The 2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the
Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) underlined the
important role of the IAEA in helping countries
achieve their Millennium Development Goals through
its technical cooperation programme and its various
activities in nuclear power and non-power applications.
Similarly, the Review Conference reaffirmed the role

10

of the IAEA in safeguards verification, with a view to
preventing the diversion of nuclear energy from
peaceful uses, and in the promotion of nuclear safety
and nuclear security.
The Philippines subscribes to the report’s
assessment that the use of nuclear energy will expand
in the coming decades. It will be an overarching force
that will create opportunities as well as challenges for
member States and the IAEA. With that coming
expansion, nuclear safety and nuclear security are
therefore vital and should be given high priority.
The Philippines had the distinct honour of
presiding over the 2010 NPT Review Conference and
looks forward to working with other delegations in
moving forward and implementing the follow-on
actions set out in the Final Document (see
NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)) related to the work of the
Agency.
The Philippines actively participated in the
negotiation of the resolutions mentioned in the report
and believes that they can provide sufficient direction
to the activities that the Agency will carry out in the
coming year. The resolutions reflect member States’
ongoing priorities with regard to the different aspects
of the Agency’s work, taking into consideration current
realities, particularly the limitations in resources vis-àvis the growing demands of member States for
technical assistance.
However, the Philippines believes that the IAEA
can contribute to addressing global concerns only if it
pursues its activities in a balanced manner. We have
consistently stressed the importance of addressing the
long-standing concern of developing countries in
achieving a balance between the Agency’s promotional
role as outlined in article II of its Statute and its
activities in nuclear safety, verification and security.
The Philippines continues to recognize that the
challenges and issues confronting the Agency are
complicated by political realities. The member States
of the Agency need to overcome their differences if we
are to advance our common objectives. The
Philippines, for its part, remains committed to working
together in the spirit of mutual trust, respect,
transparency and constructive dialogue.
Mr. Kleib (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the
progress that the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) has achieved so far in accelerating and

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity in the world. In that regard, we
commend the able leadership of its Director General,
Ambassador Yukiya Amano. We are confident that
under the framework of its three pillars, the Agency
will continue to play a key role as a catalyst for
sustainable development by promoting peaceful uses of
nuclear energy while minimizing the risk of nuclear
proliferation.
The progress in the betterment of people’s lives
due to the critical application of nuclear science and
technology cannot be emphasized enough. We are
pleased that the Director General has put more weight
on the promotion of nuclear technology, particularly
for cancer control. The role of the IAEA in addressing
the world food crisis last year and its work in
improving agricultural productivity and quality through
scientific and technical means are also extremely vital.
In our view, those important roles of the IAEA will
strengthen its technical reputation, in contrast to the
overwhelming perception that the Agency exists
merely as a nuclear watchdog. In that regard, we stand
ready to support the Director General’s approach.
In the efforts of developing countries to utilize
nuclear technology for the benefit of humanity, the
Agency makes an indispensable contribution that
should continue to be supported internationally. We
underscore the utmost importance of the technical
cooperation programme as a vital instrument for the
transfer of nuclear science and technology, particularly
to developing regions. In that respect the Agency’s
technical cooperation should be made more robust and
operational on its own merits, and should not in any
way be politicized.
We welcome the IAEA Peaceful Uses Initiative
and laud all countries that have pledged their support
to contribute to that effort. It is our hope that a
significant portion of the funds for the Initiative will be
used to finance the request-based technical cooperation
projects.
In that regard, Indonesia commends the fact that
the 2010 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review
Conference, in action 54, gave its clear support to the
IAEA for making every effort and for taking practical
steps to ensure that the Agency’s resources for
technical cooperation activities are sufficient, assured
and predictable (see NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)). That
decision provides a sound basis for the Agency to

10-62124

strengthen
the
planning,
programming
implementation of its technical cooperation.

and

Indonesia will again have the privilege of being a
member of the IAEA Board of Governors next year. We
intend to utilize that opportunity to further expand the
Agency’s focus in facilitating the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy in the world, especially in developing
countries. Since becoming an IAEA member in 1957,
Indonesia has been steadfast in its commitment to the
Agency’s technical cooperation. Indonesia itself has
benefited significantly from IAEA cooperation in the
areas of food, agriculture, health, water resources
management and other peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
While we look forward to enhancing our
engagement with the IAEA, we hope for greater
collaboration and support by the Agency in the
application of nuclear science and technology in the
region. As part of our commitment to nuclear safety,
we continue to support the Asian Nuclear Safety
Network (ANSN). In April 2010, Indonesia hosted the
third Nuclear Safety Strategy Dialogue meeting of
ANSN. At that meeting, the participant countries
achieved mutual understanding on the utilization of
human and information technology networks, among
others, to continuously improve effective and
sustainable nuclear security in the region.
The IAEA report shows that the Agency has
devoted its special attention to assisting Member States
in meeting their energy needs, responding to concerns
about climate change and helping them to ensure food
security and access to clean water. Among those
critical applications, the report demonstrates how
health care can be improved through the use of nuclear
techniques and accordingly save lives.
In that context and as a reflection of our deep
appreciation of such efforts by the Agency, Indonesia is
pleased to join others in co-sponsoring the draft
resolution regarding the work of the IAEA
(A/65/L.10).
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation would like to thank the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano, for his report on the work
of the IAEA over the past year.
We note with appreciation that the IAEA has
done much work to promote peaceful uses of nuclear
energy and to prevent proliferation of nuclear weapons.

11

A/65/PV.46

In carrying out its technical cooperation programme,
the IAEA has actively assisted member States in
developing nuclear energy and using it for peaceful
purposes. It continues to improve the guideline
documents in the field of nuclear security and safety
and to assist member States in strengthening relevant
capabilities. The IAEA has also made efforts to
promote the universality of safeguards agreements and
the additional protocol and has earnestly performed its
safeguards function. We are glad to see that the role of
the IAEA has been widely recognized and supported by
member States.
Over the past year, with the fast development of
China’s nuclear energy, cooperation between the IAEA
and China has been further enhanced.
In the field of technical cooperation, the nuclear
energy special programme has been steadily
implemented. In June 2010, China signed the 20102015
China
Technical
Cooperation
Country
Programme Framework with the IAEA, which lays out
a solid blueprint for future cooperation.
In the field of nuclear safety, by drawing on the
standards and norms developed by the IAEA, China
has put in place relevant legislation and a regulatory
system that is in line with international practice. This
year, at China’s invitation, for the first time the IAEA
sent an Integrated Regulatory Review Service mission
to China to review its nuclear safety regulatory
framework.
Also in the area of nuclear safety, China supports
the essential role of the IAEA and has actively
participated in the development of relevant guideline
documents, which have been applied to its nuclear
practices. China signed with the IAEA a Practical
Cooperation Arrangement on nuclear security, which
expands cooperation in such fields as the establishment
of security legislation and standards, capacity-building
and personnel training, as well as nuclear security for
major public events. China will also cooperate with
relevant countries to set up a centre of excellence for
nuclear security in China.
In the area of safeguards, China strictly fulfils its
safeguards obligation, in accordance with the
safeguards agreement and the additional protocol
signed with the IAEA. China supports the Agency’s
efforts to enhance its verification capacity and to
promote the effectiveness and the universality of the
international safeguards regime.

12

China appreciates the great assistance provided
by the IAEA on developing nuclear energy over the
years and is willing to further enhance its cooperation
with the Agency in all relevant fields. At the same
time, China is ready to provide the necessary assistance
to other countries through the IAEA by sharing the
experience that it has accumulated in developing
nuclear energy.
With the rapid development of global nuclear
energy, the IAEA’s role is becoming ever more
important. It is our hope that with the support of all
member States, the IAEA’s functions in all fields will
be further strengthened and that it will focus its work
on the following aspects.
First, the Agency should strengthen technical
cooperation and assistance so as to assist member
States in benefiting from the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy. It should take into account the opinions of
member States, especially those of developing
countries, and take steps to meet their needs for
technical assistance.
Secondly, it should continue to foster the
development of global nuclear safety and security
legislation, regulation and a standards system, assist
member States in enhancing their relevant capability,
and strengthen the confidence of the public in
developing nuclear energy.
Thirdly, it should continue to play an active role
in addressing sensitive hot-spot nuclear issues.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only way towards a
peaceful resolution of the Korean peninsular and
Iranian nuclear issues. We hope that the IAEA and the
Director General will make full use of their advantage
and play a constructive role in restarting and promoting
relevant dialogue and negotiation processes.
Ms. Sodov (Mongolia): My delegation would like
to thank Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
presenting the annual report on the work of the Agency.
I also wish to thank the representative of Pakistan for
introducing the draft resolution entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”, contained in
document A/65/L.10, in Pakistan’s capacity as
Chairman of the Board of Governors of the IAEA.
Mongolia fully supports the report and is cosponsoring the draft resolution.

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

The IAEA today plays an important role in
dealing simultaneously with freedom from fear and
freedom from want. The Final Document of the 2010
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Review Conference
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)) and the consideration of
disarmament issues in the First Committee vividly
demonstrate the role that the Agency plays, and is
expected to play, in promoting a peaceful and secure
future for humankind.
The report of the Agency and the outcome of its
fifty-fourth General Conference, held in September in
Vienna, show that the Agency is set to play an everincreasing role in the economic and social development
of the international community, especially in
developing countries, in promoting the Millennium
Development Goals. The renewed interest in nuclear
energy places additional responsibilities on the Agency
for strengthening nuclear security and the safest use of
nuclear energy and its other applications. My
delegation highly commends the efforts of the Agency
in assisting developing countries through its technical
cooperation programme in the areas of the peaceful
uses and development of nuclear technology.
I would like to express my Government’s
gratitude to the Agency and its dedicated staff,
especially its Department of Technical Cooperation and
the Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy (PACT)
Office for their contribution in promoting the Agency’s
noble mission in that area. Like other countries,
Mongolia attaches great importance to that programme,
especially its efforts to promote early detection of
cancer.
This year, Mongolia has been designated as the
eighth PACT Model Demonstration Site (PMDS)
country. That allows it to combine the country’s
resources with the expertise of the Agency, the World
Health Organization (WHO) and other partners and
stakeholders to combat the growing epidemic of
cancer, which has become the second cause of
mortality in my country.
I would like, therefore, to take this opportunity to
express my Government’s gratitude to the IAEA and its
Director General for the support that they are providing
in that important field. Mongolia is ready to continue
to work and support the Agency’s efforts to assist
developing countries in the field of human health,
particularly in nuclear medicine and diagnostic
radiology.

10-62124

A week ago, Director General Yukiya Amano
paid a visit to Mongolia and we exchanged views on
further developing Mongolia-IAEA cooperation. He
also attended a workshop of the PMDS countries on
issues related to primary measures to prevent cancers
and the role of medical first services, organized by
IAEA-PACT, the WHO and the Ministry of Health of
Mongolia. The results of the workshop will make an
important contribution to the exchange of experience
and knowledge in that important area of fighting
cancer.
For Mongolia, like for many other agrarian
countries, the agricultural sector is the major economic
area that defines the welfare and prosperity of its
people. Therefore, my delegation welcomes the joint
Agency-Food and Agricultural Organization of the
United Nations programmes to boost crop and
livestock production, and to ensure food quality, safety
and security, all of which represent the basic needs of
any people. My delegation thus agrees that it is
extremely important that the Agency continues to help
Member States to reach the MDGs by improving
agricultural productivity.
As a member of the Agency, Mongolia is trying
to play an important role in promoting the noble goals
we share that are enshrined in its Statute. At present,
Mongolia is serving on the Board of Governors and is
working to contribute to its fruitful work.
Mongolia also had the honour of chairing the
fifty-fourth IAEA General Conference, which adopted
many important resolutions and decisions in pursuit of
the Agency’s near, mid-term and long-term objectives
aimed at peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate
Mongolia’s active support for IAEA activities and their
objectives.
Mr. Dabbashi (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Allow me, at the outset, to thank
Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
introducing the report of the Agency (A/65/140) and
his commendable efforts as Director General of the
Agency.
My delegation emphasizes the important role of
the IAEA and its internationally sanctioned mandate to
carry out a number of very important duties in the area
of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. These duties are

13

A/65/PV.46

based on the three pillars of nuclear supervision and
verification, safety and technical cooperation.
We commend the assistance that the Agency
provides to developing nations in the area of peaceful
uses of nuclear energy, and Libya aspires to more
intense and effective cooperation in the future with the
Agency in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
especially in the fields of medicine and desalination.
The selective approach being imposed on the
Agency’s resolutions and decisions by some of the
major influential Powers has brought disappointment to
many Member States. There has been more verification
and supervision of certain specific countries and their
activities, while a blind eye is turned to other countries.
This is a flagrant injustice which erodes confidence in
the credibility of the Agency and its work as well as of
the intentions of some of the major Powers.
In the Middle East region, we note that the Israeli
entity has a large nuclear arsenal that threatens the
peace and security of the region. Nonetheless, that
entity remained outside IAEA supervision. The agency
remains unable to take any effective position that
would make the Israeli authorities also subject their
nuclear facilities to IAEA supervision.
That is basically due to the fact that Israel has not
joined the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), something
the international community must seek to achieve in
every possible way.
We believe that it is high time to implement the
decision of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension
Conference, relative to the establishment of a nuclearfree zone in the Middle East.
Regrettably, while the Agency ignores the known
danger of the Israeli nuclear threat, it deploys greater
efforts to pursue the peaceful nuclear activities of other
States where, thus far, there is no evidence at all that
those States seek to acquire nuclear weapons.
In that context, Libya reiterates and emphasizes
the right of all States to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy and to the development of its technology. We
also call for the peaceful settlement of all disputes on
nuclear programmes among the member States of the
NPT to be negotiated in good faith and through
consultations and dialogue.
My delegation expresses its disappointment that
the mandate of the Agency does not include the nuclear

14

States that have large arsenals of nuclear weapons,
weapons concerning which the entire international
community is calling for their rapid and complete
elimination, as stipulated in article VI of the NPT.
It is thus urgent and important that the
international community deploy all efforts possible to
strengthen the role of the IAEA and to review its
mandate, so that it will cover all countries, without
exception or discrimination, in conformity with a strict
and effective international approach that includes
verification and supervision of the reduction by nuclear
States of their nuclear weapons until they are totally
eliminated. It must also include a balanced
implementation of the pillars of the NPT, namely, nonproliferation, nuclear disarmament and the peaceful use
of nuclear energy.
In conclusion, my delegation emphasizes the
importance of the Agency’s technical assistance to
States parties to the NPT. To that effect, we call on all
States parties to expand their technical cooperation in
order to support the Agency with all the resources
possible, so that it can most effectively play its role in
that respect, given its importance in helping developing
nations to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear
energy in implementing development programmes. We
appeal to advanced countries to facilitate the export of
nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to developing
nations, including to my country, aspiring to use it in
the fields of medicine, agriculture, energy production
and other fields, which is a right stipulated in the NPT.
Ms. Martina (Ukraine): The year 2010 marks an
important milestone for the international nuclear nonproliferation regime. The consensus reached at the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
action plan for nuclear disarmament based on all three
pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) demonstrate the resolve of all
States not only to uphold but also to strengthen the
nuclear non-proliferation regime.
Ukraine has always been committed to effective
multilateral action against the proliferation of weapons
of mass destruction. We believe that we made a
valuable contribution to the success of the 2010 NPT
Review Conference, chairing Main Committee II of the
Conference, which dealt with non-proliferation issues.
We are particularly glad that States managed in 2010 to
secure an agreement on further steps to implement the

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

1995 NPT resolution on the Middle East
(NPT/CONF.1995/32 (Part I), annex), including a
conference on the topic to be convened in 2012. That is
why it is of utmost importance to build upon the results
of the 2010 NPT Review Conference and to avoid
trends that might undermine the success achieved.
Ukraine strictly fulfils its obligations under our
safeguards agreement and the additional protocol.
Since January 2006, a comprehensive safeguards
agreement and additional protocol has been in force in
Ukraine. We continue to work with the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to establish the
necessary conditions to start the implementation of
IAEA integrated safeguards in Ukraine.
Each country has the right to define its own
energy strategy. We are convinced that human
resources development, including education and
training, is of vital importance for the safe, secure and
peaceful use of atomic energy.
It is well known that both the Convention on
Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safety
of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of
Radioactive Waste Management were developed, inter
alia, as the result of lessons learned from the
Chernobyl disaster and that both Conventions provide
Governments
with
valuable
instruments
for
streamlining national activities in order to achieve the
highest safety levels. We consider that participation in
such instruments provides strong incentives and is in
the best interest of any country with or planning to
have its own nuclear power programme. Ukraine calls
upon States embarking on a nuclear power programme
to become contracting parties to those Conventions
without delay or hesitation. We are also of the view
that the Agency’s comprehensive set of safety
standards is fundamental for any nuclear programme
and any nuclear technology application. We note with
satisfaction the recent establishment of the
International Nuclear Safety Centre as well as the
International Seismic Safety Centre.
In May this year, the IAEA presented the final
report of the Joint European Community-IAEAUkraine project on the comprehensive safety
assessment of all operating Ukrainian nuclear power
plants. For the past two years, the Agency has
conducted a number of missions to all 15 Ukrainian
nuclear power reactors, covering issues of design
safety, operational safety and waste safety. The legal

10-62124

and governmental infrastructure has been assessed via
the full scope of the Integrated Regulatory Review
Service mission as well. We are pleased to note the
positive conclusions of that in-depth review and
consider such missions to provide unprecedented and
extremely valuable tools for many other countries
striving to embark on the development of nuclear
energy. We would like to encourage other countries
both with mature and with emerging nuclear power
programmes to consider conducting such missions and
assessments.
I would like to inform delegations that Ukraine
participates in the work of the International Uranium
Enrichment Centre in Angarsk (Russia), which is the
first such type of joint enterprises and which may serve
as an example for future activities in this field.
Nuclear security is an essential programme of the
Agency. Ukraine commends the IAEA for its activities
aimed at assisting States in preventing and combating
nuclear terrorism.
On 12 April 2010, the President of Ukraine,
Viktor Yanukovych, and the President of the United
States, Barack Obama, reaffirmed in a joint statement
their shared vision of a world free of nuclear weapons,
pledged to work together to prevent nuclear
proliferation and to realize the goal of securing all
vulnerable nuclear materials. President Yanukovych
announced Ukraine’s decision to get rid of all stocks of
highly enriched uranium by the next Nuclear Security
Summit, and our partners will provide the necessary
technical and financial assistance to support that effort.
The activities related to the transportation of
highly enriched uranium from Ukrainian research
reactors have already begun. We intend to remove a
substantial part of those stocks by the end of the year.
The meaning of our voluntary step is crystal clear —
Ukraine takes non-proliferation seriously. We expect
that our example will serve as a pattern for others. Our
decision is also a proof of our commitment to
implementing Security Council resolution 1887 (2009).
Ukraine welcomes the IAEA’s role in nuclear
security
competence
development.
We
pay
considerable attention to the issue at the national level,
and this year, with the graduation of 48 nuclear
security engineers from the Sevastopol National
University of Nuclear Energy and Technology, we have
reached one of the important milestones. We commend
the Agency for its invaluable support to Ukraine in

15

A/65/PV.46

developing training and education facilities at
Sevastopol National University for nuclear security
purposes, and confirm our willingness to contribute to
the implementation of the IAEA nuclear security
education programme.
Ukraine also appreciates the considerable
activities of the Agency to strengthen nuclear security
measures at major public events, particularly the
support being provided to Ukraine and Poland in
preparation for the 2012 Union of European Football
Associations Championship.
We recognize the importance of supporting
research on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy,
especially safety, waste management, radiation
protection, the safety and efficiency aspects of
advanced technology, as well as the importance of
enhancing international cooperation in these fields.
Fundamental to these activities is the maintenance of
competence and know-how across the nuclear sector.
We view positively the increase in IAEA research
activities concerning innovative reactor technologies
and fuel cycles. Ukraine offers relevant expert services
to the IAEA on a free-of-charge basis within the
International Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors
and Fuel Cycles.
Ukraine will continue further active cooperation
with the IAEA on the development and implementation
of regional programmes addressing the issues of nonpower use of nuclear technologies, namely, medical
applications, dosimetry and mitigation of the
consequences of the Chernobyl catastrophe.
Ukraine has always been a strong supporter of the
IAEA Technical Cooperation Programme, which
constitutes an important statutory function of the
Agency. Ukraine considers the implementation of the
IAEA Programme to be the cornerstone of international
cooperation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy.
I take this opportunity to gratefully acknowledge
the work done by the IAEA in planning and
implementing technical cooperation programmes and
activities, which reflect the needs of different countries
and different regions. Addressing the global challenges
of hunger, disease, poverty and water resource
management and the creation of a cleaner and safer
environment are of particular significance to
developing countries. Ukraine values the efforts of the
Agency in those areas.

16

Regional and national technical cooperation
projects have contributed significantly to the safety and
effectiveness of the peaceful use of nuclear energy in
Ukraine. As of now, we can point to tangible and
sustainable results of our cooperation, particularly
regarding safety improvements at our nuclear power
plants. We also highly appreciate the results already
achieved in improving the quality and effectiveness of
nuclear medicine, radiotherapy and medical physics. I
would particularly like to mention the modern
equipment and training for nuclear oncology and
radiotherapy with which we have been provided.
Human health will remain one of the priorities for our
technical cooperation programme in future.
I take this opportunity to draw the attention of
delegations to an important event for Ukraine next
year — the commemoration of the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the Chernobyl catastrophe. My
country’s strategy to address the lingering after-effects
of the Chernobyl catastrophe is aimed at fostering the
region’s long-term development and providing people
with the support they need to maintain safe and healthy
lives. I would like to inform the Assembly of the
initiative of the President of Ukraine, co-sponsored by
Belarus and the Russian Federation, to convene an
international conference under the theme “Twenty-five
years after the Chernobyl accident: safety for the
future” in April 2011 in Ukraine to mark progress
towards the goal of returning to normal life and to
address the issue of the safe uses of nuclear energy. We
look forward to the broad participation of interested
States and international institutions in the conference.
Ukraine, with the support of the international
community, is still restoring the Chernobyl site. As the
major projects enter the construction phase, substantial
sums — estimated at €750 million — will be required
to complete them. International solidarity will be
essential to raising the necessary funds. We count on
the support of donors and States at the upcoming
pledging event on that occasion to help us bring the
Chernobyl projects to a successful conclusion.
Finally, we would like to join other delegations in
welcoming the IAEA report to the sixty-fifth session of
the General Assembly (see A/65/140) and in expressing
high appreciation for the work of the IAEA Director
General and the Agency.
Mr. Ruey (Singapore): The Singapore delegation
would like to thank the Director General of the

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr.
Yukiya Amano, for his comprehensive annual report
(see A/65/140). We are pleased to co-sponsor the draft
resolution (A/65/L.10) before the Assembly today.

fully with the IAEA in order to allow a conclusive
determination of the nature of their nuclear activities.
We hope that full cooperation will be rendered to the
IAEA in areas where it is lacking.

The IAEA has played an important role in
promoting the safe, secure and peaceful uses of nuclear
science and technology. Its verification activities and
nuclear security programme are integral to the
advancement
of
nuclear
disarmament
and
non-proliferation. We believe that the IAEA should
remain the global focal point for nuclear cooperation,
in line with its three pillars of science and technology,
safety and security and safeguards and verification.

Recognizing the importance of the IAEA’s work,
Singapore ratified its Additional Protocol and the
modified small quantities protocol in March 2008. In
August, we were pleased to host an IAEA workshop on
additional protocols and trade. In that month, we were
honoured to receive Director General Amano in
Singapore
under
the
Singapore
International
Foundation’s Distinguished Visitors programme.
Singapore hopes to continue contributing actively to
the work of the IAEA as a member of the Board of
Governors for the term 2010-2012.

There has been much movement on the nuclear
disarmament and non-proliferation agenda this past
year. Amid the political commitments made, we must
not forget the practical side of the equation, which is to
ensure that these commitments are implemented. In
this regard, the IAEA plays a vital role by monitoring
whether progress is made, and Singapore thus
welcomes the Final Document of the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
The importance of the IAEA’s role is also
growing more evident in the context of broader trends
towards the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The AsiaPacific’s demand for energy, in particular, has
increased with the region’s rapid economic
development and can only become more pronounced.
Thirty-four of the 55 nuclear power reactors currently
under construction are located in Asia. Singapore
supports the right of States to use nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes, as guaranteed under the NPТ.
However, we also believe that this right must be
balanced by the grave responsibility of careful
consideration of safeguards issues and full compliance
with non-proliferation obligations. In this regard,
Singapore urges all States that have not done so to sign
the comprehensive safeguards agreement and the
Additional Protocol with the IAEA, so as to enhance
global and nuclear security.
States also have a responsibility to strengthen the
non-proliferation regime and should demonstrate their
seriousness about this by supporting the IAEA
safeguards and verification regime. The efficacy of the
IAEA ultimately depends on the participation and
cooperation of member States. As we have said
previously, we call on parties to the NPT to cooperate

10-62124

Several countries in our region have indicated
that they either will be or are pursuing nuclear energy
programmes. Singapore is also preparing a prefeasibility study to explore whether nuclear power
should be included as part of our energy mix. In this
regard, we reiterate our support for greater regional
cooperation
to
complement
and
strengthen
international and national efforts in the area of nuclear
safety and security.
Within the Association of Southeast Asian
Nations (ASEAN), we have recognized the IAEA’s role
and expertise in promoting nuclear safety and security.
We also appreciate the IAEA’s participation in the
ASEAN Regional Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, held in Singapore
in July. Among other things, forum participants agreed
that the objective of a multilateral fuel cycle was to
promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and that
this was complementary to a global non-proliferation
regime.
As the issues of safety and security are important
to all countries seeking nuclear power, Singapore will
continue to work with all IAEA member States to
strengthen international and regional standards, and to
strengthen our own commitments. We have thus
decided to join the IAEA’s Illicit Trafficking Database,
and are now working towards acceding to the
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear
Material and its 2005 amendment. We hope that all
Member States will continue working towards
establishing effective regulatory, administrative and
legislative infrastructures as they explore the option of
nuclear power for generating energy.

17

A/65/PV.46

In conclusion, Singapore continues to view the
role of the IAEA as indispensable and relevant. In
particular, as more countries explore the use of nuclear
energy, we need to continue to support the Agency’s
work on the three main pillars of safeguards and
verification, safety and security, and science and
technology. As Singapore continues its work on the
IAEA Board of Governors in the two years ahead, we
would like to reiterate our full support for the Agency’s
role and work, and we look forward to working with
IAEA member States to advance that work.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): At the outset, I would like to convey my
gratitude to the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano,
for his introduction of the Agency’s report (see
A/65/140). The Russian Federation greatly values the
IAEA’s work to improve and strengthen the global
non-proliferation regime and to ensure the broad and
safe use of nuclear energy.
The Agency is making a substantial contribution
to resolving issues relating to reliable energy supplies,
combating global climate change, and improving
human health and well-being throughout the world. It
is important that the IAEA pursue its involvement in
the interests of broadening international cooperation in
the area of peaceful uses of atomic energy. The future
development of nuclear energy and its large-scale use
for economic development ends requires the united
efforts of interested States in achieving a systemic
approach to resolving the complex issues connected
with such activities. The IAEA must continue to
dispose of all the resources and authority necessary to
fulfilling its mandated activities. Russia has
demonstrated and will continue to demonstrate full
support for the Agency’s activities, as reaffirmed
during the recent visit of the IAEA Director General to
Moscow.
Regarding the IAEA’s activities, we cannot fail to
mention the unique nature of the Agency’s verification
mechanism, which permits very effective monitoring of
States’ implementation of their non-proliferation
obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). We believe it important
that the Agency’s monitoring capabilities continue to
expand,
including
by
ratifying
the
IAEA
comprehensive safeguards agreement and its additional
protocol as universally recognized standards of

18

verification and implementation by States of their
nuclear non-proliferation obligations.
Russia participates actively as a financial donor
in projects to strengthen the IAEA’s safeguards system,
including the allocation of resources to implement
national scientific and technical support programmes
for the Agency’s safeguards activity. We fully endorse
the Agency’s efforts in the area of technical
cooperation and assistance to developing countries. We
welcome its large-scale efforts to assist participating
States in setting up and improving the physical
protection of nuclear materials and facilities, which
undoubtedly promotes strengthened physical nuclear
security worldwide. We advocate the broadest possible
participation of States in the relevant mechanisms.
In the context of the large-scale development of
atomic energy, the Russian Federation attaches great
importance to the following issues: the development of
a new architecture for peaceful nuclear cooperation,
based on multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel
cycle; the guaranteed provision of nuclear fuel cyclerelated services; and solutions to the problem of
disposing of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste.
On the basis of these priorities, Russia proposed
an initiative for developing a global atomic energy
infrastructure and creating international nuclear fuel
cycle service centres. We are pleased to note that our
initiative has been taken up and proved to be a genuine
contribution to resolving the issues of the provision of
unbiased access for all NPT-participating States to the
fruits and benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear
energy, subject to the implementation in good faith of
all non-proliferation commitments. It offers States an
opportunity to enjoy the benefits of nuclear energy and
to meet their nuclear fuel needs without creating
expensive and — from the proliferation perspective —
insecure nuclear fuel cycle elements.
Within the framework of this initiative, in 2007
Russia, together with the Republic of Kazakhstan,
created the International Uranium Enrichment Centre
through a publicly traded company, the Angarsk
Electrolytic Chemical Combine. In 2008, the Centre
received all the necessary authorization and licences to
launch operations as a supplier of services and
materials. Last year, the Centre was joined by Armenia,
and this August by Ukraine. A breakthrough in
establishing a new architecture for global nuclear
cooperation was reached with the signing — pursuant

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

to a November 2009 decision of the IAEA’s Board of
Governors — of an agreement between Russia and the
Agency on the creation on our territory of an assured
bank of low-enriched uranium under the direction of
the IAEA, aimed at helping States that encounter
difficulties with nuclear fuel supplies for non-traderelated reasons. This project opens up the possibility of
implementing similar initiatives in order to provide
conditions favourable to meeting the lawful interests of
States in developing atomic energy and simultaneously
to end the duplication of sensitive nuclear technologies
all over the world.
I would like to emphasize that the principles for
the creation of safeguarded supplies are based on
article IX of the IAEA’s Statute. The rights of Agency
member States, including those relating to the
development of their own production capacities in the
nuclear fuel cycle area, are neither infringed nor
restricted. Gaining the right to receive low-enriched
uranium from the assured supply does not mean having
to renounce the right to creating and developing one’s
own fuel cycle. The material can be supplied to any
non-nuclear State member of the IAEA that is in
compliance with its safeguards agreement and has
placed its global nuclear activity under IAEA
safeguards.
One example of international cooperation
successfully implemented under the aegis of the
Agency is the implementation of the International
Project on Innovative Nuclear Reactors and Fuel
Cycles, initiated by Russia. We support the efforts of
the Agency secretariat to finance the Project from its
regular budget and urge all participating States to
finance it directly from assessed contributions. The
Russian Federation has decided to contribute
23 million roubles per annum for the years 2008-2012
for the long-term financing of the project.
Regarding regional proliferation challenges, we
welcome the practical contribution of the IAEA to
finding multilateral solutions. We pay tribute to the
Agency’s efforts to implement safeguards agreements
in Iran and Syria and to use its expert capacities to
guarantee the sustainable operation of the nuclear nonproliferation regime.
The Russian Federation sees no alternative to a
political and diplomatic settlement with regard to the
Iranian nuclear programme. We hope for more active
cooperation between Iran and the Agency and for the

10-62124

full implementation by Tehran of Security Council and
IAEA Governing Board requirements. We urge Iran to
respond constructively to the proposal to resume
negotiations with the 5+1 group, and hope that such
negotiations will begin soon.
I should like to reaffirm our support for draft
resolution A/65/L.10 on the report of the IAEA. As a
sponsor of the draft resolution, Russia fully shares the
evaluation of the importance of the Agency’s work and
is convinced that it will continue to strengthen
international security and work towards solving the
issue of reliable energy supply.
Mr. Kodama (Japan): At the outset, I should like
to thank the Director General of the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), Mr. Yukiya Amano,
for presenting the annual report of the IAEA (see
A/65/140).
This year, the international community has
embarked on a new stage of critical importance to the
realization of a world without nuclear weapons. In
May, the Review Conference of the Parties to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
(NPT) agreed on an action plan, which was
incorporated into the Final Document adopted at the
Conference. This agreement presented us all with an
opportunity to restart nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation efforts based on the spirit of
cooperative multilateralism. Japan believes that all the
States members of the IAEA should now make
combined efforts to steadily implement the action plan,
in concert with the Agency.
Japan is determined to be at the forefront of the
efforts of the international community aimed at
attaining a world without nuclear weapons. To that end,
Japan co-hosted, with Australia, a foreign ministers’
meeting on nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation
here in New York in September to discuss concrete and
practical measures to reduce nuclear risks in the world
as an interim milestone in our endeavours to realize our
common goal. The States that participated share this
purpose, and Japan, in cooperation with those
countries, intends to lead international efforts in this
regard.
Japan welcomed the visit of Director General
Amano to Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August, and
regards it as a highly important step forward that will
contribute to the growing momentum being built
towards a world without nuclear weapons. We are

19

A/65/PV.46

greatly looking forward to his follow-up efforts. He
indicated in a symposium in Nagasaki that the Agency
will be able to contribute to nuclear disarmament in the
implementation stage.
As a member of the Board of Governors since the
foundation of the Agency, Japan has worked jointly
with the Agency to promote the peaceful uses of
nuclear energy, thus making a significant contribution
to the Agency’s activities. Japan will make further use
of the knowledge and experience that it has acquired in
the civilian uses of nuclear energy and in strengthening
and improving the efficiency of the safeguards system,
with a view to assisting developing countries through
the Agency’s Technical Cooperation Programme.
The IAEA has been playing an essential role in
the social and economic development of the world by
applying nuclear science and technology. Japan highly
appreciates this role of the Agency. In June, the
Government of Japan made a cabinet decision on “The
new growth strategy: blueprint for revitalizing Japan”.
As one of the main pillars of this strategy, Japan will
actively promote green innovation — that is,
innovation in the environment and energy sectors to
create a low-carbon society in Japan. Japan is
convinced that nuclear energy is key to attaining stable
supply, environmental compatibility and economic
efficiency at the same time, and thus to fuelling
innovation.
The Nuclear Security Summit was held
successfully in April. Japan greatly welcomes this
achievement and is now preparing for the
establishment of an integrated support centre for
nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear security, to
follow up on its announcement at the Summit. Through
the activities of the centre, Japan, in cooperation with
the Agency, will contribute to meeting needs, such as
those in human resource development, for
strengthening nuclear security, especially in Asian
countries.
Japan firmly believes that technical cooperation
should continue to be one of the core missions of the
IAEA. Japan, taking advantage of its own long history
and achievements in the application of radiation
technology — such as medical applications, including
cancer therapy — attaches importance to technical
cooperation activities. Many States members of the
Agency have significant needs, and Japan will continue

20

to make technical and personnel contributions in these
areas.
However, the worrisome reality is that there is a
shortage of human resources to support the peaceful
uses of nuclear energy. While attaching importance to
the Agency’s efforts for the development of such
human resources, Japan will contribute to those efforts,
more mindful of the utilization of its own experts in the
Agency.
Needless to say, strengthening and improving the
efficiency of IAEA safeguards is especially vital to the
enhancement of the non-proliferation regime. Japan
believes that the most realistic and effective way to
strengthen the IAEA safeguards is the universalization
of the additional protocol that more than 100 States
have concluded with the Agency. In concert with the
Agency and its member States, Japan will further
contribute to the universalization of the additional
protocol through such activities as hosting the Asian
Senior-level Talks on Non-Proliferation and making
contributions to the IAEA’s seminars.
The North Korean nuclear question continues to
pose a grave threat to the peace and security of East
Asia and to the international community as a whole, as
well as a serious challenge to the NPT regime.
Regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, it is urgent and
indispensable that Iran allay the concerns and gain the
confidence of the international community. Japan will
continue to act, including by steadily implementing the
relevant Security Council resolutions, with a view to
settling these nuclear issues in concert with the
international community.
Today, the IAEA is expected to fully carry out its
core missions under its Statute, while facing a great
number of important challenges vis-à-vis the national
security of each country and the human security of
each living person. As I stated earlier, Japan will make
further contributions to the Agency’s activities by
drawing on its knowledge and experience with regard
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, with full
international
confidence
with
regard
to
non-proliferation. On this occasion, Japan calls upon
all States members of the Agency to give the highest
priority to maximizing common interest and addressing
challenges through constructive cooperation.
Mrs. Aitimova (Kazakhstan): Kazakhstan wishes
to congratulate Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), on

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

his very comprehensive and forward-looking report
(see A/65/140). We fully endorse his vision to change
the general image of the Agency from that of simply
the world’s nuclear watchdog, with verification and
security functions, to that of an entity focusing on
nuclear energy, nuclear applications and technical
cooperation.
As a member of the IAEA, Kazakhstan is proud
of its record of collaboration with the Agency and will
continue to work to strengthen it through our own
nuclear energy, non-proliferation and disarmament
policies, and also by promoting those policies at the
regional and global levels. My country is a major
producer of uranium ore and has the fuel fabrication
capability to further expand its involvement in the
peaceful uses of nuclear energy within the framework
of IAEA safeguards and the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
Kazakhstan collaborates with the Russian Federation in
making its uranium available for enrichment at the
International Uranium Enrichment Centre in Angarsk,
Siberia, for use as nuclear fuel in power reactors.
Currently, we are also working on the Kurchatov
Nuclear Technologies Park, under the surveillance of
the IAEA.
My delegation has been following with great
interest the initiative of the IAEA to develop a new
framework for utilizing nuclear energy based on
multilateral approaches to the nuclear fuel cycle in
order to reduce the further spread of sensitive nuclear
fuel cycle technologies. We endorse the Agency’s
criteria that any mechanism devised should be nonpolitical, non-discriminatory and available to all
safeguards-complying member States, so that no State
should be required to give up its rights under the NPT.
This proposal may seem difficult to realize today, but
nonetheless initial efforts can be made in that direction.
Kazakhstan has offered to host an IAEA nuclear
fuel bank for the use of those unable to acquire
supplies of nuclear fuel on the market. We hope that
there will be a positive unified decision in the near
future, considering that the country has voluntarily
renounced its nuclear weapons. Our national atomic
energy company, Kazatomprom, is in the process of
creating a vertically integrated establishment with a
complete nuclear fuel cycle, in accordance with IAEA
standards.

10-62124

Together
with
Kyrgyzstan,
Tajikistan,
Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan has
established a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central
Asia, which came into force in August 2009. The zone
is an additional contribution to our efforts towards a
world free of nuclear weapons and thus is an important
regional confidence-building and security measure. We
have not only signed but strictly abide by the IAEA
safeguards agreements and additional protocol in an
open and transparent manner.
Kazakhstan supports the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East as a
solution for peace in the region, and has therefore
endorsed the recommendation of the May 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT that a conference
be convened in 2012. We will work collaboratively
with other member States towards its successful
outcome.
Kazakhstan also works rigorously to meet
international standards regarding the security of
nuclear facilities so as to reduce the risk of nuclear
terrorism and the smuggling of nuclear weapons or
nuclear and radioactive materials in the region. It also
gives very high priority to addressing the
environmental concerns that are unique to Central Asia
due to the fact all of the region’s five States have
hosted nuclear weapons infrastructure and now
confront common ecological problems related to
radiation.
We consistently implement the International
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear
Terrorism, as well as Security Council resolution 1540
(2004), in order to strengthen measures to combat the
illicit trafficking of nuclear and other materials. As a
member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the
Zangger Committee, Kazakhstan maintains the strictest
control over its equipment and installations that enrich
uranium and reprocess spent nuclear fuel.
Kazakhstan conscientiously implements the
recommendations of the Nuclear Security Summit held
in April in Washington, D.C., and will fully cooperate
in the next security summit in Seoul in 2012. This year,
my country ratified and acceded to four major nuclear
security conventions and is reviewing a draft law to
accede to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage. We are decommissioning the BN-350
nuclear reactor and, with the support of the United
States Department of Energy, implementing a project to

21

A/65/PV.46

convert the second research reactor to produce radio
isotopes from low-enriched uranium. My country
welcomes the proposal to strengthen the infrastructure
of the IAEA Incident and Emergency Centre as the
global focal point for international preparedness and
response to nuclear and radiological safety or securityrelated incidents.
In view of the growing importance of nuclear
energy, Kazakhstan has an agreement with the IAEA on
technical cooperation for the years 2010-2015 to
develop nuclear energy for nuclear education, medicine
and agriculture, research reactor safety, nuclear
technology,
and
radioisotope
and
radiation
applications. We welcome the Agency’s nuclear
research in health care, nutrition, food security and the
environment, as well as in resource management for
collective global human security.
An issue of great importance to us is that
Kazakhstan, though a stalwart and responsible member
of the IAEA, is being denied the opportunity to
participate in the work of elective bodies due to the
existing rules of procedure. In fully supporting the
early entry into force of the amendments to article VI
of the IAEA Statute, Kazakhstan is confident that a
solution will be found so that we may participate fully
in its activities.
Kazakhstan is among the sponsors of draft
resolution A/65/L.10, “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”, regularly contributes to the
IAEA budget, makes voluntary contribution to the
Technical Cooperation Fund and stands ready to fulfil
its financial obligations.
As members are aware, my country closed down
the Semipalatinsk nuclear test site, the second largest
in the world, on 29 August 1991. On the initiative of
my country, the General Assembly declared 29 August
as the International Day Against Nuclear Tests, which
is observed in countries around the world, creating
awareness of the need for a world free of nuclear
weapons.
We share the prevailing view that the entry into
force of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty is
essential to the effective functioning of the NPT. In this
context, my delegation thanks the Agency for its
participation in our many activities.
To conclude, we extend our full support to the
Director General in addressing all aspects of the

22

Agency’s mandate in a balanced manner in order to
respond to the varying needs and interests of member
States, and look forward to another cycle of productive
collaboration to address the global issues of nuclear
technology.
Mr. Taboul (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I should
like at the outset to convey my gratitude to the Director
General of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) for his annual report to the General Assembly
(see A/65/140), which includes programmes and plans
developed by the Agency to promote the transfer of
technology for peaceful purposes, uphold the global
nuclear safety and security regime and ensure the
safety and security of nuclear power facilities. It also
outlines the greater role that the Agency continues to
play in the field of cooperation in the use of nuclear
energy for peaceful purposes and development.
We take this opportunity to commend the efforts
of Mr. ElBaradei and to wish every success to his
successor, Mr. Amano.
The Sudan attaches great importance to the
report’s reference to the application of nuclear
technology in enhancing food security, combating
insect pests and effectively managing water resources,
as well as to technologies for new irrigation systems
and large-scale agricultural projects. That is why the
increasing cooperation of the Agency with UNICEF in
the educational and agricultural fields, as well as with
the World Health Organization, is clearly of special
importance.
Assistance to developing States in developing
their national technologies complements the Agency’s
efforts in the implementation of technical cooperation
plans and projects. We hope that cooperation will be
developed within the framework of the Agency’s health
programmes, including the revitalization of and
support for regional and continental projects to combat
malaria and similar deadly diseases in Africa, and to
enable the continent to achieve social and economic
development, including the realization of the
Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and the
internationally agreed development agenda.
The delegation of the Sudan reiterates the right of
all States, including my own, to develop programmes
and research and generate nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination and in line with
international standards and terms of reference. My
delegation reiterates the need for all countries to

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

refrain from exerting pressure on the Agency and from
interfering in its activities in order to protect its vital
role and credibility. We therefore call for more justice
and equity in resolving the Agency’s problems
vis-à-vis certain countries through dialogue and
negotiation.

the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). As
we have done in the past, we have co-sponsored the
draft resolution to emphasize our strong support for the
Agency and its invaluable role in accelerating and
enlarging the contributions of atomic energy to peace,
health and prosperity throughout the world.

The delegation of the Sudan wishes to reiterate its
firm position of support for the aspirations of all
geographical regions to nuclear-weapon-free zones
pursuant to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT), one of the basic pillars of the
international peace and security architecture. We are
concerned that the Middle East is still far from
achieving this objective. It has struggled to do so for
decades because Israel, the only nuclear State in the
region, refuses to submit its nuclear programmes to the
IAEA safeguards regime and continues to ignore the
repeated appeals of the international community in this
regard. Israel’s commitment to implementing the NPT
and its Additional Protocol is crucial to reducing
tension in the region and would blaze a trail towards
achieving regional security and international peace.

To that end, we look forward to continuing to
work with member States to ensure that the IAEA has
the necessary resources to address the growing array of
challenges it faces and to respond to the increasing
number of requests for support that it receives from
member States. In addition, the United States strongly
commends the IAEA’s technical excellence and
impartiality in the conduct of its statutory treaty and
advisory duties to member States.

My delegation enthusiastically hopes that the
IAEA will maintain its support for the right of
developing countries to the peaceful use of nuclear
energy under the Agency’s full supervision. We are
convinced that nuclear energy production for peaceful
purposes will achieve great results for development,
given the cost and scarcity of other means of
generating power. The high costs of alternative energy
sources push developing countries to seek cheaper and
more efficient means. We believe that the enhanced
cooperation and assistance of developed States to
developing States in this field and through alternative
energy sources would mitigate the dangers of resort to
nuclear energy.
In our view, it is logical that the Agency should
prompt the developed States to cooperate with the
developing countries in this field. My delegation
therefore welcomes the efforts of the IAEA and all
developed States to strengthen cooperation with
African States in the peaceful use of nuclear energy in
the fields of health and medicine, along with the use of
alternative energy that would contribute to the
achievement of the MDGs.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): The
United States supports the adoption of the draft
resolution (A/65/L.10) on the report (see A/65/140) of

10-62124

We thank Director General Amano for his
excellent report to the General Assembly and express
appreciation for the important initiatives he has
undertaken in his first year at the helm of the IAEA.
The United States looks forward to continuing to work
with the Agency’s secretariat and Member States to
advance the IAEA’s work across its three pillars.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We thank Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA), for his participation in this
debate and the presentation of the IAEA’s annual report
(see A/65/140).
Our country supports the work of the IAEA as a
specialized
agency
in
verification,
technical
cooperation and the peaceful use of nuclear energy and
in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. It
also appreciates the cooperation between the IAEA and
its States members. We welcome the introduction of
the draft resolution entitled “Report of the International
Atomic Energy Agency”, contained in document
A/65/L.10, by Ambassador Raza Bashir Tarar of
Pakistan on behalf of the Chair of the Board of
Governors of the IAEA.
The outcome of the International Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Energy held in Beijing in April
stated that nuclear energy will increasingly contribute
to humankind’s future sustainable development.
Nuclear technology can limit the impact of human
diseases and contribute to animal health and pest
control. When applied to agriculture and food, nuclear
technology can rid humankind of the adverse effects of

23

A/65/PV.46

climate change and help with food security at the
regional and global levels.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has
benefited from the technical and financial cooperation
provided by the IAEA through various projects
developed in our country in recent years. Among these
projects I would highlight the strengthening of the
national regulatory infrastructure for controlling
radioactive sources; the strengthening of the national
preparedness and response system for radiological
emergencies; the strengthening of the national
regulatory infrastructure for the safe management of
radioactive waste in Latin American States; and the
strengthening and upgrading of technical capacities to
protect the health and safety of workers exposed to
ionizing radiation.
In the framework of the close cooperation
between the IAEA and the Venezuelan Government, in
March 2009 the former Director General of the
Agency, Mr. Mohamed ElBaradei visited our country
for the first time. On that occasion, he held important
meetings with various Government ministers and the
President of the National Assembly. He also paid a
visit to the Luis Razetti Hospital, which specializes in
the treatment of cancer. We take this opportunity to
reiterate our appreciation for the work done by
Mr. ElBaradei as Director General of the IAEA.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was
elected as a member of the IAEA Board of Governors
for 2009-2010. In this framework, we support the
sovereign right of all States to work for the
development of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes,
nuclear
non-proliferation,
disarmament
and
verification. Nuclear energy development represents a
rational alternative to the growing demand for
electricity in Venezuela. Our country depends on
hydroelectric power from the Guri Dam to produce
70 per cent of this energy. Natural and climatic factors
affect reservoirs and can cause serious electricity
crises, as happened recently.
Furthermore, the development of nuclear energy
in Venezuela will allow our country to progress
towards full energy sovereignty. It would minimize
dependence on hydroelectric power and fossil fuels in
parallel with the need to mitigate the negative effects
of climate change. In this context, on 15 October the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela signed a cooperation
agreement with the Russian Federation to develop

24

nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in Venezuelan
territory. The agreement provides for cooperation in the
development of a nuclear power programme and the
construction and operation of a research reactor to
produce radioisotopes for peaceful uses in medicine
and industry, as well as a nuclear power plant.
The cooperation between Venezuela and Russia is
conducted pursuant to the laws of the States parties and
to international agreements to which both States are
parties, in compliance with the principles of
universally
accepted
international
law
and
recommendations of the IAEA. The agreement signed
between Russia and Venezuela is an expression of the
sovereign right of countries to develop nuclear energy
for peaceful purposes and to optimize its advantages as
future sources of alternative energy. The completion of
this bilateral cooperation agreement is governed by the
highest principles guiding Venezuela’s international
politics, namely, independence, equality among States,
self-determination and non-interference in the internal
affairs of States.
Based on the pacifist tradition of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela, our Constitution establishes our
duty as Venezuelans to promote peaceful cooperation
among nations and to promote nuclear disarmament.
Venezuela supports the sovereign right of all States to
develop nuclear industry for peaceful purposes, in
accordance with the provisions of articles I, II and IV
of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear
Weapons (NPT). Thus, Venezuela rejects any attempt
to nullify the nature and scope of these provisions
through actions that violate the integrity of the NPT.
Venezuela recognizes that the International
Atomic Energy Agency is the sole competent authority
for verification, which must be based exclusively on
technical and objective considerations.
We continue to note with concern that a group of
countries has pursued its efforts to pressure the Islamic
Republic of Iran to relinquish its legitimate right to
develop peaceful uses of nuclear industry, seek
technological independence and diversify its energy
sources. Such pressure should cease in order to open
the way to a negotiated political solution to this
impasse, which must take into account the interests of
both the Islamic Republic of Iran and of the
International Atomic Energy Agency.
The treatment of this matter in other forums that
are unfamiliar with the technical nature of the IAEA

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

safeguards system has resulted in the use of biased,
discriminatory and subjective criteria that could affect
the authority and credibility of the Agency. My country
is concerned that inappropriate practices that violate
the principle of the legal equality of States are
becoming entrenched. It is therefore necessary to
promote measures to build confidence and address
these issues in a fair and balanced manner.
Venezuela regrets that the State of Israel is the
only country in the Middle East that has not acceded to
the NPT or indicated its intention to do so. Israel must
accede to the Treaty without further delay and submit
its nuclear facilities to the IAEA safeguards regime.
My country hopes to see the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. The
conference to be held in 2012 will be a valuable
opportunity to achieve results in this regard. The
International Atomic Energy Agency has a fundamental
role to play.

authority as well as resources to sustain the capacity
needed for this purpose.
In this context, we strongly support the
universalization of the comprehensive safeguards
agreement and its additional protocol. Together, these
instruments now constitute the contemporary standards
for ensuring confidence in States parties’ compliance
with their obligations arising from the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT). My
delegation urges those States parties that have not yet
done so to conclude and bring into force the
comprehensive safeguards agreement and its additional
protocol without delay. We would also like to draw
attention to the growing importance of the ratification
of the revised small quantities protocol by relevant
States, in particular those introducing nuclear power.

Mr. Kim Bonghyun (Republic of Korea): At the
outset, my delegation would like to express its
appreciation to Mr. Yukiya Amano, Director General of
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for
his first annual report (see A/65/140) and statement on
the Agency’s activities and achievements over the past
year. We highly commend the Director General for
having adeptly guided the Agency in its range of
extensive activities since assuming office. We fully
support draft resolution A/65/L.10, and would like to
take this opportunity to address several issues
pertaining to the report.

The IAEA has a unique role to carry out in
supporting member States’ efforts to establish
comprehensive national nuclear security regimes
through
capacity-building,
human
resource
development and other forms of assistance. The
Nuclear Security Summit held in Washington, D.C., in
April reaffirmed the essential role of the IAEA and
mobilized support for the Agency’s continued efforts to
have at its disposal the appropriate structures,
resources and expertise to carry out its mandated
activities. My delegation believes that global nuclear
security will greatly benefit from international
cooperation and that the IAEA, with its technical
expertise, can make a significant contribution to
strengthening the international security framework.

We commend the Agency for its professionalism
and impartiality in promoting the safe, secure and
peaceful use of nuclear science and technology. This is
a vital task whose success will lead to the realization of
the IAEA’s overarching objective: the accelerated and
enlarged contribution of atomic energy to peace, health
and prosperity throughout the world.

The Republic of Korea, as announced on several
occasions, will host the plenary meeting of the Global
Initiative to Combat Nuclear Terrorism and the next
Nuclear Security Summit in 2012. My Government
will consult closely with the IAEA and other member
States with a view to achieving productive outcomes
that contribute to international efforts in this field.

However, the ever-increasing demand for the
expanded use of nuclear energy poses considerable
challenges to the Agency. Today more than ever, we
need credible assurances that all nuclear materials are
used solely and entirely for peaceful purposes. We are
of the view that the IAEA is the sole competent
authority to verify the non-diversion of declared
nuclear materials and the absence of undeclared
nuclear activities and facilities. It follows, then, that
the IAEA should be equipped with the appropriate

The nuclear renaissance cannot be sustainable
without a high standard of nuclear safety performance
and the proper application of safety standards at all
steps of the fuel cycle. We welcome the Agency’s
assistance to countries embarking on or expanding
their existing nuclear power programmes in developing
appropriate infrastructure, facilitating human capacitybuilding and strengthening relevant regulatory systems.
We also hope that the Agency will continue to assist
member States in improving their national radiation,

10-62124

25

A/65/PV.46

transport and waste safety infrastructure and capacitybuilding. In order to continue promoting nuclear safety
learning and cooperation on a global and regional
basis, the Republic of Korea, in cooperation with the
Agency, is offering overseas training and graduate
courses in specific fields, such as site selection, design,
construction and operation through the International
Nuclear Safety School of the Korea Institute of Nuclear
Safety.
My delegation would like to emphasize that the
peaceful resolution of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea nuclear issue is vital not only to
securing lasting peace and prosperity on the Korean
peninsula and in North-East Asia, but also to
preserving the integrity of the international
non-proliferation regime.
We welcome the adoption of a resolution on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea at the IAEA
General Conference in September, as well as the fact
that the IAEA is continuing to engage in the matter
despite the absence of Agency inspectors in Yongbyon,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The 2009
annual report underlined once again that the Agency
has been unable to implement safeguards in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea since
December 2002 and is therefore not in a position to
draw any safeguards conclusions regarding the country.
However, the absence of IAEA inspectors does
not mean that there is nothing for the Agency to do
there. On this point, we welcome the emphasis
repeatedly placed by Director General Amano on the
authority of Security Council resolutions regarding the
implementation of the Agency’s safeguards agreement
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Although the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
is currently refusing to cooperate with the IAEA, my
delegation hopes that the Agency will be able to
resume an active role in the process of denuclearizing
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The Republic of Korea has consistently held the
position that all States that have not yet ratified or
acceded to the NPT should immediately do so as
non-nuclear-weapon States in order to achieve the
Treaty’s universality. The Republic of Korea is
committed to the NPT’s goal of a world free of nuclear
weapons and supports international efforts to bring
about progress in the establishment of a nuclearweapon-free zone in the Middle East. We therefore

26

welcome the reaffirmation at the 2010 Review
Conference of the Parties to the NPT of the importance
of the 1995 Middle East resolution and the agreement
to convene a conference in 2012 to discuss its
implementation. We hope to find the best way to
sustain momentum towards the establishment of a
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East by
building upon the outcome of the 2010 NPT Review
Conference. It is our firm belief that the IAEA,
bolstered by a spirit of confidence and compromise,
will play a facilitating role in the process of
establishing the Middle East as a zone free of nuclear
weapons.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to
reiterate its support for the work of the International
Atomic Energy Agency and that it is pleased to
co-sponsor draft resolution A/65/L.10 on the report of
the IAEA.
Mr. Langeland (Norway): Norway is pleased to
co-sponsor the draft resolution (A/65/L.10) on the
report of the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) (see A/65/140). My Government attaches great
importance to the IAEA. Besides being a key guardian
of our collective non-proliferation regime, the IAEA is
an important partner in promoting social and economic
development while ensuring the safety and security of
peaceful nuclear programmes. Through its extensive
technical cooperation programme, the Agency is
providing assistance to developing countries in
promoting health, food security and environmental
monitoring. As such, the Agency plays an important
role in contributing to the achievement of the United
Nations Millennium Development Goals.
Nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament are
closely linked. We cannot achieve the goal of
eliminating nuclear weapons, as set out by the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT),
unless there is confidence in the integrity of the
non-proliferation regime. The Final Document of the
2010 Review Conference of the Parties to the NPT
(NPT/CONF.2010/50 (Vol. I)) contains clear commitments
on both disarmament and non-proliferation. It is vital
that we provide the Agency with the legal tools
necessary to implement its non-proliferation mandate.
Norway therefore reiterates its call for the
universalization
of
the
IAEA comprehensive
safeguards agreements and the additional protocol. It is
only through the full implementation of these two
instruments that the Agency will be able to conclude

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

that nuclear activity in any given country is for
peaceful purposes only. Norway also urges all
countries with outstanding proliferation issues to
cooperate fully with the Agency in resolving these
matters and in demonstrating the entirely peaceful
nature of their nuclear programmes.
The NPT Review Conference also underlined the
importance of international cooperation with regard to
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It should be noted that
the majority of countries around the world, including
Norway, do not produce electricity from nuclear power
plants. But we recognize that, as the demand for energy
increases, more countries may come to identify nuclear
energy as an attractive option. The role of the IAEA
would then become even more critical in the years to
come.
Norway has made substantial voluntary
contributions in support of the IAEA’s work in
strengthening nuclear safety and security in developing
countries, and to the establishment of a nuclear fuel
bank. It is imperative that we, the member States,
provide sufficient and predictable funding so that the
Agency can fulfil its important mandate. Equally
important is that the international community should
demonstrate full political support to the IAEA. My
delegation expects that the draft resolution before us
today will be adopted by consensus.
Mr. Abay (Ethiopia): Let me begin by thanking
Ambassador Yukiya Amano, Director General of the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), for the
report (see A/65/140) he presented on the work of the
Agency. My delegation would also like to express its
support for the draft resolution (A/65/L.10) on the
IAEA’s annual report.
Ethiopia strongly believes that the work of the
IAEA for the safe, secure and peaceful uses of nuclear
science and technology is a paramount contribution to
the maintenance of international peace and security.
We acknowledge that the Agency’s growing role in
promoting the socio-economic development of member
States through its technical cooperation is bringing
tangible progress to our efforts to reduce poverty and
achieving the Millennium Development Goals. In this
regard, my delegation would like to commend the
activities of the IAEA in assisting member States in the
peaceful use of nuclear energy through the
development of effective and efficient programmes
aimed at improving scientific, technological and

10-62124

regulatory capabilities. It is obvious that the IAEA’s
programme has helped many countries meet energy
needs, improve health, combat poverty, protect the
environment, develop agricultural sectors, manage
water resources and optimize industrial processes.
Hence, there is sufficient reason to believe that all
these have contributed considerable support to our
efforts to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
My country is one of the States benefiting from
the IAEA’s activities under the Agency’s Technical
Cooperation Programme. Our major project with the
Agency is aimed at eradicating the tsetse fly from the
Southern Rift Valley regions of Ethiopia with an
integrated pest management approach. The project is
currently being implemented within the framework of
the
Pan-African Tsetse
and Trypanosomiasis
Eradication Campaign initiative, with the support of
the African Development Bank together with the
Ethiopian Government.
It is worth mentioning that the technical
cooperation between Ethiopia and the Agency in the
area of human health has also resulted in the
establishment of a modest national infrastructure for
the application of nuclear medicine and radiotherapy.
Our technical cooperation with the IAEA to apply
isotope techniques in managing our water resources is
also well under way. I would, however, like to call
upon the Agency to continue its efforts, particularly to
support Ethiopia and other developing countries in
combating cancer through sustainable cancer therapy
programmes by implementing more integrated national
and regional programmes.
My delegation is also most appreciative to the
IAEA for dedicating this year’s Scientific Forum to the
theme “Cancer in developing countries: Facing the
challenge”. We consider the Forum to be an important
medium in consolidating the global effort to address
the ever-growing problem of cancer. It is also our firm
belief that the forum will come up with relevant
outcomes that will enhance the efforts of the IAEA and
its member States in addressing this health hazard.
We firmly believe that we must assure the
Agency’s programmes of sufficient and predictable
resources and, more importantly, a balanced
distribution of those resources to the Agency’s
activities relating to safeguards, nuclear safety and
technical cooperation. Ethiopia is also of the view that
the Technical Cooperation Programme is playing a

27

A/65/PV.46

crucial role in transferring nuclear technology to
developing countries.
As a representative of one of the founding
members of the Agency, I would like to reaffirm
Ethiopia’s commitment to the peaceful use of nuclear
technology by respecting global and regional
instruments that are designed to control radioactive and
other nuclear materials by promoting the peaceful use
of nuclear applications.
In conclusion, allow me to reiterate our profound
appreciation to the IAEA, particularly its Board of
Governors, for its dedication to strengthening essential
technical cooperation activities between the Agency
and my country. Ethiopia will continue to do its level
best to enhance this positive spirit of cooperation with
the Agency, as well as with all the development
partners that have so far made generous contributions
to our development endeavours in this domain.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): Today,
the General Assembly was briefed by Mr. Yukiya
Amano, Director General of the International Atomic
Energy Agency on the Agency’s main activities for the
year 2009. His informative report (see A/65/140)
indicates that the Agency is developing its activities in
many areas of nuclear technology in the interests of the
human community.
The IAEA was established with the basic purpose
of accelerating and enhancing the contribution of
atomic energy to peace, health and development
throughout the world. The Agency has therefore a real
responsibility, now more than ever before, to assist
member States in using nuclear energy effectively and
efficiently for peaceful purposes.
Nuclear energy today has found an important
place in everyday human life. Today, atomic energy is
widely used in agriculture, industry and medicine, in
particular cancer treatment. The use of atomic energy
and its advanced applications, especially in the field of
renewable sources of energy, has increased on a broad
scale.
Despite the global economic crisis in 2009, as
reported by the Agency, both energy demand and
interest in nuclear power continue to grow. The
increasing construction and operation of nuclear
reactors in electricity production around the globe
indicate that more and more States are pursuing nuclear
energy as a component of their energy mix in the new

28

century. The new global trend towards decreasing the
use of fossil fuel and the encouragement of States to
adopt clean-air policies are yet added incentives for the
further development of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes.
The essential role of the Agency in the
development of activities to enhance the capacity of
member States to use nuclear energy is also
acknowledged by the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), which in its article IV
imposes an obligation on States parties to facilitate the
fullest possible exchange of equipment, materials and
technological information for peaceful purposes.
Furthermore, States parties are urged to enhance their
cooperation in developing nuclear energy without
discrimination or restriction.
Unfortunately, the level of cooperation with
developing nations on the part of the countries that are
the main suppliers of nuclear high technology has yet
to be promising. Indeed, nuclear cooperation between
the suppliers and recipients has always been marked by
restriction, hindrance and disruption. Furthermore, it is
an unfortunate fact that being a party to the NPT and
the IAEA safeguards agreement not only has not
facilitated the nuclear cooperation between States
parties prescribed under the Treaty, but has even served
to create impediments to the peaceful uses of energy. It
is even true that non-parties are more richly rewarded
with nuclear cooperation than are States parties. The
recent trend of bypassing NPT obligations, particularly
by the Nuclear Suppliers Group when it cooperates
with non-NPT parties, which could lead to more
proliferation, is a dangerous development.
In the case of Israeli clandestine nuclear
activities, which are completely outside any IAEA
monitoring, nuclear exchanges and transfers of
advanced nuclear materials, equipment and technology,
facilitated by the United States and its partners, have
contributed and continue to contribute to the
proliferation activities of that regime, which is
endangering global and regional peace and security. If
anything, failure to accept the NPT and safeguard
obligations should burden outsiders to the NPT with
the most severe restrictions, rather than provide them
with impunity.
The 189 States parties to the NPT at the 2010
Review Conference, aware of the threat posed by
Israel’s secret nuclear activities, recalled the

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

reaffirmation by the 2000 NPT Review Conference of
the importance of Israel’s accession to the Treaty and
the placement of all its nuclear facilities under
comprehensive IAEA safeguards and called on that
regime, the only non-party to the NPT in the Middle
East, to accede to the Treaty as a non-nuclear-weapon
party at an early date.
What has been done by the IAEA on this
important issue? The answer is disappointing.
In addition, the 2010 NPT Review Conference
adopted
by
consensus
conclusions
and
recommendations for follow-up actions, some of which
relate directly to the Agency’s activities. In this
context, I would like to recall that the Conference
called for continued efforts within the IAEA to enhance
the effectiveness and efficiency of its Technical
Cooperation
Programme;
to
strengthen
the
Programme’s capacity to assist developing States
parties in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; and to
take practical steps to ensure that IAEA resources for
technical cooperation activities are sufficient, assured
and predictable. In today’s presentation by the Agency,
we expected to hear the Agency’s future plans on such
important issues.
One of the neglected tasks of the IAEA involves
its involvement in the nuclear disarmament process.
The IAEA Statute stipulates that the Agency should
conduct its activities “furthering the establishment of
safeguarded worldwide disarmament”. The 2010 NPT
Review Conference adopted, however insufficiently,
certain actions in this regard. For instance, the
Conference resolved that the nuclear-weapon States
would commit to declaring to the IAEA all fissile
material designated by each of them as no longer
required for military purposes; to placing such material
as soon as practicable under IAEA or other relevant
international verification; to arranging for the
disposition of such material for peaceful purposes; and
to ensuring that such material remains permanently
outside military programmes.
In this context, all States were encouraged by the
Conference to support the development of appropriate
legally binding verification arrangements within the
context of the IAEA in order to ensure the irreversible
removal of fissile material designated by each nuclearweapon State as no longer required for military
purposes. The Conference also called for the wider

10-62124

application of safeguards to peaceful nuclear facilities
in the nuclear-weapon States.
The question now is: What is the Agency’s plan
in this important area? It is obvious that the Agency
needs to be more active in that regard.
In conclusion, since reference was made to Iran’s
peaceful programme, I would like to point out the
following. While all of the IAEA reports repeatedly
confirm that the Agency continues to verify the
non-diversion of declared nuclear material in Iran, it
seems that the Agency’s recent reports have been
prepared under pressure from outside, using unusual
language with regard to the safeguards obligations. The
Agency has to basically confirm that it has already
verified non-diversion of the declared nuclear material;
that all declared nuclear material is accounted for and
continues to be used for peaceful purposes, as already
reported by the Agency’s inspectors; and that that has
always been the case over the past several years.
Reporting so much technical detail about Iran’s
peaceful nuclear activities proves that the Agency has
full access to all nuclear material and facilities in the
Islamic Republic of Iran, including through frequent
inspections through the Agency’s containment and
surveillance efforts. Therefore, claiming that Iran has
not provided the necessary cooperation is incorrect and
misleading. It has to be noted that additional requests
are beyond the provisions of the NPT comprehensive
safeguards and that they have been made under the
pretext of illegal resolutions of the Security Council.
As a last point, I should reiterate that the people
and Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran are
determined to exercise their inalienable right to nuclear
technology for peaceful purposes and to build on their
own scientific advances in developing various peaceful
aspects of this technology, including the fuel cycle.
Iran is steadfast in its commitment to its obligations
under the NPT and does not request anything more
than being allowed to exercise its inalienable rights.
In the meantime, we have always declared our
readiness for talks based on justice and mutual respect.
Just recently, Iran welcomed the return of the 5+1
group to the talks. In a reply letter from the Head of the
Office of the Secretary of the Supreme National
Security Council of the Islamic Republic of Iran, the
willingness of the 5+1 group to return to the talks with
Iran was acknowledged and appreciated. In that letter,
the desire to resume talks on the basis of Mr. Jalili’s

29

A/65/PV.46

letter to Ms. Ashton, dated 6 July 2010, from
10 November 2010 on and in a place and on a date
convenient to both sides, was reiterated. We are
waiting to see the other parties demonstrate their
goodwill and real intention to engage in meaningful
and successful talks.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.
We shall now proceed to consider draft resolution
A/65/L.10.
Before giving the floor to the speaker in
explanation of vote before the voting, may I remind
delegations that explanations of vote are limited to
10 minutes and should be made by delegations from
their seats.
Mr. Kim Yong Jo (Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea): The delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea would like to explain its position on
draft resolution A/65/L.10, entitled “Report of the
International Atomic Energy Agency”.
The report of the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) (see A/65/140) and IAEA General
Conference resolution GC(54)/RES/12 of September
2010 show that the IAEA persists in its unfair attitude
towards the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula. As
already clarified in so many cases and on so many
occasions, the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula is
the direct outcome of the hostile nuclear threat policies
of the United States against the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. For the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, the nuclear threat goes beyond
abstract notions to practical experiences. The nuclear
issue was created by the introduction of nuclear
weapons into the Korean peninsula by the United
States in the late 1950s. Its nuclear threat against the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea lasted for more
than a half century.
As everybody knows well, no conventional
weapon represents a deterrence to any kind of nuclear
threat from a third party. The nuclear threat from the
United States has, in a word, resulted in the creation of
our nuclear deterrence.
In order to revive the process of the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, what is most
important is to build confidence between both sides —
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
United States, which are the main parties to the nuclear

30

issue on the Korean peninsula. Confidence-building
between both sides — the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and the United States — is urgent as
it has become the master key to addressing the present
issue.
To this end, first of all, a peace treaty aimed at
putting an end to the state of ceasefire between the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the United
States should be concluded, if possible, as soon as
possible. The conclusion of a peace treaty is the best
way to realize the denuclearization of the Korean
peninsula. If durable peace mechanisms had been set
up earlier on the Korean peninsula, neither the nuclear
nor the denuclearization issue would have arisen. The
conclusion of peace treaties will certainly help to ease
the present confrontations between the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the United States and
accelerate the process of the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula.
As long as the IAEA continues either to take
measures or to adopt resolutions that take up the issues
from only one side, while unfairly turning its face from
the real nature of the issues, it will never resolve the
nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula. Proceeding
from this point of view, the delegation of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea strongly
opposes resolution GC(54)/RES/12 concerning the
nuclear issue of the Korea peninsula, adopted at the
General Conference of the IAEA on 24 September.
With regard to the argument of Japan and South
Korea concerning the nuclear issue on the Korean
peninsula, the delegation of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea totally rejects in strong terms their
allegations because they are entirely based on their
intentional misunderstanding and neglect of the root
cause of the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula.
The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote before the vote.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/65/L.10.
I should like to announce that, since the
introduction of the draft resolution, Georgia and the
Republic of Zambia have become sponsors.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/65/L.10?

10-62124

A/65/PV.46

Draft resolution
(resolution 65/9).

A/65/L.10

was

adopted

The Acting President: May I take it that it is the
wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 87?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The Acting President (spoke in French): Before
adjourning the meeting, I would like to inform Member
States that consideration of agenda item 69, entitled
“Strengthening of the coordination of humanitarian and

10-62124

disaster relief assistance of the United Nations,
including special economic assistance”, and its
sub-items (a) to (d), which was scheduled for Monday,
15 November 2010, has been postponed to a later date
to be announced.
Also, the specific meeting focused on
development, under agenda item 115, entitled “Followup to the outcome of the Millennium Summit”, which
was scheduled to take place on Monday, 22 November
2010, has been postponed to a date in the resumed
session, to be announced.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

31
