SECURITY COUNCIL
OF FIC IAL RE CO RD S
SECOND YEAR

CONSEIL DE SECURITE
,)
j.'

PROCES-YERB'AUX OFFICIELS
DEUXIEME ANNEE

No. 55
[

~2nd and 153rd meetings

152eme et 153eme seances

8 July 194 7

( 44 p.)

8 juill et 1947

Lake Success
New Yor k

TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE DES MATIERES
Cent-cinquante~deuxieme seance

Hundred and fifty-second meeteng
Page

Pages

203. Provisional agenda
1217
204. Adoption of the agenda
1217
205. Report of the Commission for Conventional Armaments
1218
206. Re-examination of applications for
membership in the United Nations...... 1229

203. Ordre du jour provisoire
1217
1217
204. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
205. Rapport de la Commission des armements de type classique
1218
206. Nouvel examen des demandes d'admission comme Membres des Nations
Unies
1229

Hundred and fifty-third meeting

Cent-cinquante-troisieme seance

207. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question
1232

207. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque
1232

Documents

Documents
Annex

The following documents, relevant to the hundred and fifty-second and the hundred and
fifty-third meetings, appear as follows:

Officia: Records of the Security COUl.cil:
-First Year, Second Series, Supplement No. 4

7

Report of the Committee on the Admission
of New Members (document 8/133).

Second Year, Supplement No. 5.................... 13
Resolution of the 8ecurity Council concerning the implementation of the resolutions of the General Assembly regarding
the principles governing the general regulation and reduction of armaments and
information on armed forces of the United
Nations (document 8/268/Rev. 1).
Second Year, Supplement No. 14.................. 37
Lettel dated 25 June 1947 from the Chairman of the Commission for Conventional
Armaments to the President of the Security
Council and enclosed report (document
S/387).
Second Year, Special Supplement No. 2
Report of the Commission of Investigation
concerning Greek Frontier Incidents to the
Security Council (document S/360) .

Annexes

Les documents se rapportant aux cent-cinquante-deuxieme et cent-cinquante-troisi,eme seances figurent dans les publications
suivantes:
Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securite:
Premiere Annee, Deuxieme Serie, Supple7
ment No 4
Rapport du Comite des demandes d'admission de nouveaux Membres (document
S/133) .
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 5.............. 13
Resolution du Conseil de securite concernant la . lise en reuvre des resolutions
de l'AssemLee generale relatives aux principes regissant la reglementation et la reduction generales des armements et aux
renseignements sur les forces armees des
Nations Unie~ (document S/268/Rev. 1).
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement No 14.......... 37
Lettre, en date du 25 juin 1947, adressee
au President du Conseil de gecunte par le
President de la Commission des armements de type classique, et rapport y annexe (document 8/387).
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement Special No 2
Rapport presente au Conseil de securite
par la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus a. la frontiere grecque
(document 8/360).

The PRESIDENT: This is all right, We just
do not give any instructions to the Committee;
the Committee Will be free to make its decisions.
As there is no objection, I shall transfer to the
Committee on the Admission of New Members
the letter of the Secretary-General requ~sting us
to re-examine the applications for J1:lembership
of certain States.
We have exhausted the second point of our
agenda. The next point is the Greek question.
However, in view of the late hour, I shall adjourn the meeting.
The next session will be at 3 p.m. this afternoon, and the Greek question,is on the agenda.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): C'est
tres bien. Nous ne donl1ons aucune instruction
au Comite; le Comite sera libre de ses decisions.
Comme it n'y a pas d'objections, je transmettrai au Comite des demandes d'admission de
nouveaux Membres la lettre du Secretaire general nous demandant d'examiner a nouveau les
demandes d'admission d'un certain nombre
d'Etats.
Nous avons acheve l'examen du deuxieme
point de notre ordre du jour. Le point suivant
est la question grecque, mais en raison de l'heure
tardive je vais suspendre la seance.
La prochaine reunion aura lieu cet apres-midi
a 15 heures, pour l'examen de la question
grecque.

The meeting rosl at 12.50 p.m.

La seance est levee a 12 h. 50.

HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD Me~'!:N~

CENT-CINQUANTE-TROISIEME SEANCE

Held at Lak~ Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 8 July 1947, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le ma,di 8 juillet 1947, a 15 heures.

President: Mr. O. LANGE (Poland).

President: M. O. LANGE (Pologne).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Australia, Belgium, Brazil, China, Colombia, France, Poland, Syria, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom, United
States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
Australie, Belgique, Bresil, Chine, Colombie,
France, Pologne, Syrie, Union des Republiques
socialistes sovietiques, Royaume-UIli, Etats-Unis
d'Amerique.

207. Continuation of the discussion on the
Greek question

207. Suite de la discussion sur la question
grecque

At the invitation of the President, the representatives of Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, and
Yugoslavia took their seats at the Council table.

Sur l'invitation du President, les representants
de l'Albanie, de la Bulgarie, de la Grece et de
la Y ougoslavie prennent place .a la table du
Conseil.

The PRESIDENT: The first speaker asking for
recognition is the representative of the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Le premier orateur qui demande la parole est le representant de l'Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques.

Mr. GROMYKO (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (translated from Russian): The Security Council has again resumed discussion of
the Greek question. We now have before us the
Commission's report. l This contains a large
amount of factual data collected by the Commission on the spot in accordance with the
Council's instructions. This documentation relates both to frontier incidents as such, which
was the question originally raised by the Greek
Government, and a description of the situation
in Greece, especially in its northern regions.
Thus, the Council now has the opportunity of
appraising the situation objectively and of discovering the real reasons for the strained relations which have arisen between Greece and its
neighbours, including the reasons for the incidents on the northern Greek frontiers.

M. GROMYKO (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Le Conseil
de securite a repris l'examen de la question
grecque. Nous disposons maintenant du rapport
de la Commissionl • Ce rapport contient un
grand nombre de faits que la Commission, sur
les instructions du Conseil de securite, a reunis
sur les lieux. Cette documentation se rapporte
d'une part aux incidents de frontiere proprement
dits, question que le Gouvemement grec avait
originalement soumise au Conseil de securite;
elle contient d'autre part une description de la
situation qui s'est developpee en Grece, notamment dans les regions septentrionales de ce pays.
Le Conseil de securite a done maintenant la
possibiliie d'apprecier la situation d'une maniere
objective et de tirer au clair les causes reelles des
relations tendues qui existent entre la Grece et
ses voisins, et en particulier les causes des incidents qui se sont produits a la frontiere nord de
la Grece.

1 See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, Special Supplement No. 2.

1 Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil d, securitl,
Deuxieme Annee, Supplement special No 2.

In this connexion, I think it appropriate to
point out that, in considering the Commission's
report, we should draw the conclUsions which
actually emerge from the material submitted by
the Commission and should avoid conclusions
which would not be supported by the facts and,
still more, which would conflict with those facts.
I think this remark appropriate because, at the
very outset of our consideration of the Commission's report, attempts ~re being made either to
distort the meaning of the material collected by
the Commission, or to ignore these data completely and get the Council to take decisions
which would be contrary to the facts.
I shall comment on the more important quesnoIis dealt with in the Commission's report.
1.

FRONTffiR INCIDENTS

l

A c::e propos, je crois bon de noter qu'en
examinant le rapport de la Commission nous
devrions en tirer les conclusions qui se degagent
reellement d.es documents presentes par la Commission et eviter les conclusions qui ne seraient
pas etayees par des faits et, a plus forte raison,
celles qui seraient contraires aux fait<;. Cette observation me semble de mise, parce que, des le
debut de l'examen du rapport de la Commission,
on tente lioit d'alterer le sens des documents
qu'elle a reunis, soit de ne tenir aucun compte
des faits produits, afin d'obtenir que le Conseil
de securite prenne des decisions en contradiction
avec les faits.
Je m'arreterai aux plus importantes des questions dont traite le rapport de la Commission.
1.

l

INCIDENTS DE FRONTffiRE

It is necessary, first of all, to get an idea of
Tout d'abord, il faut voir clair dans ce qu'on
the so-called frontier incidents, to find out what appelle Ies incidents de frontiere. Il importe de
kind of incidents they are and who, if they are savoir en quoi ils consistent et, s'il est vrai qu'ils
actually occurring, is responsible for provoking •se produisent, qui sont ceux qui les provoquent.
them. We all know that this is th.e particular Ainsi que 1'0n sait, c'est precisement cette quesquestion the Greek Government raised before tion des incidents que le Gouvernement grec a
the Security Council - the question of frontier soumise au Conseil de securite, et c'est apropos
incidents - and that it was pr,ecisely in con- de l'etude de cette question que le Conseil a
nexion with the consideration of this question decide de creer une commission chargee d'enthat it was decided to set up a commission to queter sur les incidents.
investigate the incidents.
I would remind you that, during an earlier
Je vous rappe11erai qu'au cours de l'examen
discussion of this question in the Security Coun- de cette question qui a eu lieu au Conseil de
cil, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania brought securite, la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie
forward counter-charges against Greece and ont, a leur tour, accuse la Grece et ont cite des
cited cases of frontier incidents being provoked cas d'incidents de frontiere qui avaient ete proby Greek militarists. The Governments of these voques par les militaristes grecs. Les Gouverne-:
countries repeatedly drew the Security Council's ments de ces pays ont, a plusieu~ reprises, attire
attention to instances of frontier incidents pro- l'atttntion du Conseil de securite sur les incivoked by Grel1ce even whi!t;. the Commission of dents de frontiere provoques par la Grece alors
Investigation waS operating and informed the meme que la Commission d'enquete poursuivait
Security Council of new incidents.
ses travaux, et ils ont informe le Conseil de
securite de ces nouveaux incidents.
Having set up the Commission, the Security
Apres avoir cree cette Commission, et darn;
Council awaited its report and has until now l'attente de son rapport, le Conseil de secUlite
abstained from considering. the question as to s'est abstenu jusqu'a present d'examiner la queswho was responsible for these incidents. Now tion de savoir qui etait responsable de ces incithat the Commission's report has been submitted, dents. Maintenant que le rapport de la Comwe should, as I have already pointed out, con- mission nous a ete presente, nous devons, comn£e
sider this whole matter of frontier incidents and je l'ai deja fait remarquer, nous efforcer de voir
draw conclusions· in conformity with the facts. clair dans toute cette question des incidents de
frontiere et tirer de cet examen des conclusions .
qui soient conformes aux faits.
As regards the incidents, it sho,uld first be
Quant aux incidents, il importe tout d'abord
borne in mind that most of them represent in- d'avoir present a l'esprit que la plupart d'entre
significant episodes which, in normal conditions, eux sont des episodes insignifiants qui, dans des
if normal relations prevailed between the coun- conditions normales, si les :relations entre ces pays
tries concerned, would have passed unnoticed or, etaient normales, auraient passe inaper~us et
in any case, could not have been a subject for qui, en tout cas, n'auraient pu faire 1'0bjet d'un
consideration by the Security Council. A per- examen par le Conseil de securite. En prenant
usal of the part of the report devoted to inci- connaissance de la partie du rapport qui a trait
dents confirms that most of them fall into that aux incidents, on se rend compte que la plupart
category. In most cases there have been no lives de ces incidents sont bien de cet ordre-Ia. La plulost and comparatively little material damage part n'ont entralne ni pertes en vies humaines,
suffered by either side. We all know that inci- ni degats materiels taut soit peu considerables
I

-This
-and subsequent subheadings in Mr. Gromyko's
1

statement are an integral part of his text.

1 Ce sous-titre et les sous-titres suivants font partie
integrante du texte de M. Gromyko.

dents of this kind happen even between counti'ies which are on the best of terms.

pour l'une ou I'autre partie. Or, on sait bien
que de tels incidents se produisent meme entre
des pays qui entretiennent les relations les plus
cordiales.
Le Gouvemement de la Grece tente d'incriThe Greek Government is trying to accuse
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania of helping miner la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et I'Albanie en
Greek partisans, The Greek Government is try- pretendant que ces pays soutiennent les partisans
grecs. Le Gouvernement grec accuse ces pays:
ing to accuse these countries of:
1. D'admettre des partisans grecs sur leur
1. Allowing Greek partisans to cross into
territoire;
their territory;
2. D'aider ces partisans a repasser la fron2. Helping partisans to return to Greek territiere pour rentrer en territoire grec;
tory from these countries;
3. D'armer les partisans et de leur donner
3. Arming partisans and giving them miliune instruction militaire;
tary training;
4. D'accorder une assistance medicale aux
4. Giving medical aid to Greek guerrillas
who have found shelter on the territories of these partisans grecs qui ont trouve refuge sur le territoire de ces pays.
countries.
Ainsi donc, dans la question soulevee par le
Thus, the Greek Government has raised the
question not simply of incidents, but of incidents Gouvernement grec, il ne s'agit pas simplement
allegedly connected with the afi.<.:tance given to d'incidents, mais d'incidents qui seraient lies a
Greek partisans by the three countries in ques- l'assistance fournie aux partisans grecs par les
tion. It has turned the question of incidents into , trois pays precites. Le Gouvernement grec a
a wider problem, namely, the problem of the transforme la question des incidents en une quesalleged support given by these countries to the tion plus large, celle de l'appui que ces Gouvernements auraient donne au mouvement des parGreek partisan movement.
tisans grecs.
Considerons tout d'abord les faits exposes dans
Let us, first of all, take the facts set out in the
le
rapport de la Commission, et voyons dans
Commission's report and see to what extent the
Greek Government's charges against Yugoslavia, quelle mesure les accusations portees par le GouBulgaria and Albania are well· founded. Ac- vernement grec contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulquaintance with the facts shows that there is garie et I'Albanie S011t fondees. L'etude des faits
absolutely no justification for the charges made montre que les accusations formulees par le Gouby the Greek Government that people fleeing vernement grec en ce qui concerne l'admission,
from Greece to other countries for shelter have sur le territoire des pays voisins de la Grece, de
been allowed to enter countries bordering on personnes fuyant la Grece en quete d'un asile,
Greece. Tens of thousands of Greeks, who have sont denuees de tout fondement. Il est vrai que
fled from their country to escape police persecu- des dizaines de milliers de Grecs, qui avaient fui
tion and arbitrary treatment at the hands of leur pays pourechapper aux persecutions de la
various kinds of bands, have indeed found shelter police grecque ainsi qu'aux exactions de bandes
in these countries. But these people - men and de toute espece, se sont refugies sur le territoire
women, old people and children - are fleeing de ces pays. Mais c'est pour sauver leur vie que
from Greece to find shelter and refuge in neigh- ces gens - hommes, femmes~ vieillards et enbouring countries, in order to save their own fants - quittent la Grece et cherchent asile et
lives. Are there any grounds for accusing or refuge dans les pays voisins. Y a-t·illieu d'incrieven reproaching the Governments of countries miner ou meme simplement de critiquer les Gouwho give refuge to such people? Attempts to vernements qui accordent un asile aces gens?
blame the Governments of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria Les tentatives qu'on fait de mettre en accusation
and Albania for giving shelter to Greek refugees la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie pour
are quite unjustified. In giving shelter to such avoir accorde asile aux refugies grecs, ne saupeople these countries are acting in conformity raient se justifier. En accueillant ces personnes,
with established and well-known principles of ces pays agissent conformement a des principes
international law which civilized mankind has bien etablis de droit international, principes connus de tous, et respectes depuis longtemps par
long respected.
l'humanite civilisee.
It may well be asked how the Greek GovernIl est permis de se demander comment, se10n
ment thinks persons seeking shelter in neighbour- le Gouvernement grec, auraient dO etre accueiling countries should be received? The Greek lis les gens qui cherchaient un refuge dans les
Government surely does not think that these peo- pays limitrophes de la Grece. Le Gouvernement
ple, who have had to leave their homes in grec estimerait-il que ces gens, forces de quitter
Greece, should be welcomed at the frontier with leurs foyers en Grece, auraient dO etre accueillis
machine-gun fire? Obviously, such a situation is a la frontiere a coupe de mitrailleuses? Il est clair
inconceivable. If so, then the actions of Yugo- que cela serait inc~ncevable. Par consequent, en
slavia, Bulgaria and Albania in giving shelter to donnant asile aux refugies grecs, la Yougoslavie,
Greek refugees are corect and, a<; I have already la Bulgarie et l'Albanie ont agi correctement et,
pointed out, they are in full conformity with the comme je l'ai deja dit, en pleine conformite des
recognized norms of international law.
normes reconnues du droit international.

The Greek Governm.ent also tries to prove
that Greek partisans who have found shelter in
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania are .crossing
the Greek frontier from those countries. This
charge, however, is absolutely unproved. .The
Greek representatives failed to p,dduce any facts
in support of this charge. The only source used
by the Greek Government and its representatives
attached to the Commission, in attempting to
prove that this charge was well founded, is the
evidence of certain witnesses recommended by
the Greek Government. A study of their evidence, however, shows that it does not in fact
contain any confirmation of this charge. In deciding the question as to how far evidence from
these sources can be relied upon the two following important points should be noted:

1. These witnesses usually gave confused and
contradictory evidence. For instance, they mentioned places which are not on the frontier. Very
often the evidence of certain of these witnesses
is refuted by that of others. Here are some typical examples: The witness 'Mantzourakis stated
that he passed through Khaskovo when crossing
from Bulgaria to Greece, whereas this place is
not on the route described by the witness. The
witness Ciparigovski shifted the village Gobrovo,
which is 40 kilometres away from the frontier,
up to the frontier itself. Harismidis could not
name the place where he allegedly was in Yugosalvia and did not know at which point he entered Greece. The witness Papailias was not an
eye-witness but merely heard that partisan units
were crossing into Greece in the Dragos district.
The witness Zahos revoked all his previous evidence as false, being, on his own admission, evidence given as a result of threats and beatings
from the Greek gendarmerie.
The witnesses Kostoudis, Atanasov and others
completely refute the evidence of Greek Government witnesses about partisans crossing from
the neighbouring countries into Greece.
2. The moral qualities of the witnesses who
testified in favour of the Greek authorities are
such that they cannot inspire confidence, since
these witnesses were usually recruited by the
Greek police and gendarmerie either from criminal elements, or from persons sentenced to death
by the Greek authorities and bribed by promises
that their lives would be spared if they testified
in favour of the Greek authorities.
Later on I shall take up separately the evaluation of the testimony of witnesses. I shall merely
point out now that the evidence of the witnesses
recommended by the Greek authorities, alleging
that there had been cases of groups of Greek
partisans crossing the frontiers between Greece
and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, cannot
be taken seriously for the above reasons.

Le Gouvernement grec s'efforce egalement de
demontrer qu'il se produit des cas de franchissement de la frontiere grecque par des partisans
qui avaient trouve refuge en territoire yougoslave, bulgare et albanais. Mais cctte accusation
est absolument denuee de fondement. Les representants grecs n'ont pu' citer aucun fait pour
etayer cette accusation. La seule source des temoignages que le Gouvernement grec et ses representants a la Commission ont invoques pour
prouver le bien-fonde de cette accusation, ce
sont les depositions de temoins presentes par le
Gouvernement grec lui-meme. Ces depositions
montrent cependant qu'en realite elles ne contiennent rien qui puisse confirmer ces accusations. Pour qu'on puisse' juger dans quelle mesure on peut retenir les temoignages provenant
de cette source, il me semble necessaire de signaler deux faits importants:
1. D'une fa~on generale, ces temoins ont fait
des depositions confuses et contradictoires. Ils
ont mentionne par exemple des localites qui ne
se trouvent pas sur la frontiere. Tres souvent les
temoignages des uns contredisaient les declarations des autres. Void quelques exemples typiques: le temoin Mantzourakis a declare qu'il
etait passe par Khaskovo pour se rendre de Bulgarie en Grece; or cette iocalite ne se trouve pas
sur l'itineraire decrit par ce temoin. Le temoin
Ciparigovski situe le village de Gobrovo a la
frontiere, alors qu'cn realite ce village se trouve
a une distance de 40 kilometres de la frontiere.
Harismidis n'a pas ete capable de nommer le
lieu ou i1 se serait trouve en Yougoslavie et ne
savait pas par ou il etait entre en Grece. Le temoin Papailias n'est pas un tem()ID oculaire; iI
a simplement entendu dlCe que des detachements
de partisans penetraient en Grece dans la :region
de Dragos. Le temoin Zahos a repudie lui-meme
ses depositions anter;i~~ures en les declarant mensongeres; elles seraient dues, d'apres lui, aux menaces et aux coups de la gendarmerie grecque.
Les temoins Kostoudis, Atanasov et d'autres
encore refutent entierement Its depositions des
temoins du Gouvernement grec concemant le
passage en Grece de partisans venant de pays
limitrophes.
2. La moralite des temoins qui ont depose en
faveur des autorites grecques n'est pas de nature
a inspirer confiance. D'une fa~on generale, ces
temoins ont ete recrutes par la police et la gendarmerie grecques soit parmi des criminels de
droit commun, soit parmi des personnes qui
avaient ete condarnnes a mort par les autorites
grecques et qu'on a subomees en leur promettant
la vie sauve au cas ou eUes temoigneraient en
faveur de ces autorites.
Tout a l'heure, j'examinerai plus en detail la
valeur que l'on peut attribuer aux depositions
des temoins. Pour l'instant, je me bomerai a indiquer que les depositions des temoins presentes
par les autorites grecques, selon lesquelles des
groupes de partisans auraient franchi les frontieres greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et grecoalbanaise, ne sauraient etre prises serieusement
en consideration, et cela pour les raisons que je
viens d'exposer ci-dessus.

1236'
With regard to the charges made by the Greek
Government ag-ainst Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania that' _Je countries are allegedly engaged in arming and giving military training to
Greek refugees on their territories, these charges
are also absolutely unproved and altogether
groundless. To prove this charge, too, the Greek
Government refers to the same untrustworthy
evidence. The depositions of witnesses on this
point also were in every case conflicting and
confused and served to expose both the witnesses
themselves and the people who had provided
them.
Can any significance be attached to the testimony of, for instance, the witnesses Kontopanos,
Zafiris and Gatsios, who alleged that a special
manual for the military instruction of Greek partisans had been published in refugee camps on
the territories of Yugoslavia. and Albania? These
persons were muddled in their evidence and
could not reply to such elementary question as,
for example, where and when this ,manual was
published.

Quant aux accusations que le Gouvernement
de la Grece a porteescontre la Yougoslavie, la
Bulgarie et l'Albanie, et selon lesquelles ces pays
fournissent des armes et donnent une instruction
militaire aux refugies grecs qui se trouvent sur
leurs territoires, ces accusations sont, elles aussi,
denuees de toutes preuves et de tout fondement.
Pour les etayer, le Gouvernement gree se refere
e.lcore une fois a ees memes temoignages qui ne
sont pas dignes de foi. Sur ce point egalement,
les depositions etaient tres souvent confuses et
eontradictoires, et demasquaient les temoins euxmemes aussi bien que eeux qui les avaient presentes.
En effet, quelle importance peut-on attacher
aux depositions de temoins tels que Kontopanos,
Zafiris et Gatsios, d'apres lesquels un manuel
special d'instruction militaire avait ete publie a
l'usage des partisans grecs se trouvant dans des
camps de refugies en Yougoslavie et en Albanie?
Les temoins se sont embrouilles dans leurs depositions et n'ont pas su repondre aux questions les
plus eIementaires; ils n'ont pas su dire, par
exemple, ou et quand ce manue! aurart ete publie.
On pourrait relever encore d'autres contid.dictions et absurdites dans les depositions de ces
temoins. D'ailleurs, ce fameux manuel traitait
en fin de compte non pas tant des methodes de
la guerre de partisans que de l'art de la guerre
reguliere. 11 est permis de se demander s'il n'a
pas ete imprime a Athenes et s'il n'etait pas destine a enseigner les methodes a employer pour
la lutte contre les partisans grecs.

A number of other contradictions and absurdities could be cited in the evidence of such
witnesses on this question, to say nothing of the
fact that, apparently, this notorious manual
dealt not so much with the art· of partisan warfare as with the operations of regular troops.
One might well ask whether this manual was not
printed in Athens and whether it was not intended for instruction in fighting Greek partisans.
The Greek Government's accusations that
Les accusations portees par le Gouvernement
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania were arming grec contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'AlbaGreek partisan units are equally unfounded. nie, et selon lesquelles ces pays auraient arme
Here again the Greek authorities used the same des detachements de partisans grecs, sont aussi
sources as proof. No facts were adduced in sup- peu fondees. La encore, les autorites grecques en
port of this charge. For instance, it is really im- quete de preuves ont puise a la meme source.
possible to take seriously the testimony of Val- Mais aueun fait confirmant ces accusations n'a
tadoros, who was under sentence of death, that ete produit. En effet, on ne saurait prendre au
he went to a point ne~r the Yugoslav frontier, serieux les depositions du condamne a mort Valto fetch arms, while in the same breath he de- tadoros, qui a declare qu'il s'etait rendu en un
clared that there were no arms there. The same certain endroit, pres de la frontiere yougoslave,
may be said of the evidence of the witness Vas- pour y prendre livraison d'armes, mais qu'il n'y
siliou, who declared that he had received a rifle avait pas trouve d'armes. On poun'ait en dire
from some man named Lazaros, that is to say, de meme de la deposition du temoin Vassiliou,
a Greek. Not a single witness testified that he qui a declare avoir re~u un fusil d'un certain
had been armed by the Yugoslav, Bulgarian or L~zaros, c'est-a-dire d'un Grec. Aucun temoin
Albanian authorities. And yet this is the very n'a dit avoir ete arme par les autorites yougoquestion about which the G1'eek Government is slaves, bulgares ou albanaises. Et pourtant, c'est
kicking up most fuss.
autour de cette question que le Gouvernement
gre, fait le plus de bruit.
So much for the charges levelled by the Greek
Les choses en sont donc la pour ce qui est des
Government against the neighbouring countries accusations portees par le Gouvernement grec
to the effect that these countries are arming anrl, contre les pays limitrophes de la Grece, selon
training groups of Greek partisans and are help. lesquelles ces pays armeraient et entrameraient
ing them to cross from their own territory into des groupes de partisans grecs et les aideraient a
Greece.
franchir la frontiere pour penetrer en Grece.
There is, however, one class of incidents which
11 y a cependant une categorie d'incidents qui
deserves attention and to which, for some reason merite d'etre etudiee mais a laquelle, je ne sais
or other, proper importance is not attached here. trop pourquoi, on n'attache pas ici assez d'imI means the incidents provoked by the Greek portance. Je veux parler des incidents provoques
authorities and the Greek military clique. There par les autorites grecques et par les militair~

#2

1237
have been not a few such incidents on the GreekYugoslav frontier and on the Greek-Bulgarian
and Greek-Albanian frontiers. The total number of such incidents in 1946 alone amounted to
36 on the frontier between Greece and Yugoslavia, 33 on the frontier between Greece and
Bulgaria, and 111 on the frontier between
Greece and Albania. The figures are impressive,
as you can see.
It should be noted that many of the incidents
provoked by Greeks were pre-arranged. Thus,
of the 172 incidents provoked by Greeks between
15 February 1945 and 1 January 1947 on the
Albanian frontier, 81 relate to firing across and
passing across the Albanian frontier by Greek
soldiers; 33 relate to firing on Albanian territory
from Greek frontier posts; and 27 relate to
flights of Greek aeroplanes over Albanian territory. Of this total number of incidents, the
Commission investigated only four and it was
established that they were all provoked by
Greeks.
The incident of 7 July 1946 at Radat Kakavia
(Skipis) consisted of an incursion by a group of
Greek soldiers into Albanian territory, which led
to a lively exchange of firing. The Albanian witness Nikolaos Tsamis confirmed that the Greek
authorities organized a series of provocative attacks in the Skipis district, which lasted a whole
week. The captured Greek soldier Iotakis directly stated in his testimony that the incident
was provoked on the initiative of the Greek military authorities. In the Likojani region a detachment of Greek soldiers crossed the frontier
on 2 June 1946 and attacked an Albanian frontier patrol. This was confirmed by eye-witnesses,
who stated that the Greeks systematically organized provocations in that district.
An even larger nl1mber of similar examples
could be cited, including those which took place
in 1947. Incidents are still being provoked on
the Albanian frontier by the Greek military
clique. The Albanian representative told the
Commission on 7 May of ten incidents which
occurred in only the first half of 194'7, and in
which Greek soldiers fired on Albanian territory
and Greek aeroplanes flew over Albanian territory. On 22 May Prime Minister Enver Hoxna
informed the Security Council that on 21 May,
without any reason, three Greek aeroplanes
machine-gunned two Albanian villages, killing
two of the inhabitants and wounding eight. 1
Of the 36 incidents provoked by Greek militarists on the Greek-Yugoslav frontier in 1946,
30 relate to firing on Yugoslav territory and the
crossing of the Yugoslav frontier by Greek soldiers. There were many case of flights by Greek
aeroplanes over Yugoslav territory, and simultaneously shots were fired at Yugoslav frontier
posts. Unfortunately, the Commission for some
reason ot other did not investigate a single one
of the incidents proposed by the Yugoslavs, but
1

See d~ent S/359/Corr. 1.

grecs. Beaucoup d'incidents de ce genre se 'sont
produits a la frontiere greco-yougoslave, ainsi
qu'aux frontieres greco-bulgare et greco-albanaise. Ri. qu'en 1946, il y en a eu en tout
36 a la frontiere greco-yougoslave, 33 a la frontiere greco-bulgare et 111 a la frontiere grecoalbanaise.
mIne vous le voyez, il s'agit de
chiffres impressionnants.
On notera que panni les incidents provoques
par les Grecs, beaucoup avaient ete prepares
d'avance. Voici quelques exemples: sur les 172
incidents provoques par les Grecs entre le 15
fevrier 1945 et le ler janvier 1947 a la frontiere
albanaise, il y a eu echange de coups de feu et
franchissement de la frontiere albanaise par des
soldats grecs dans 81 cas; clans 33 cas, le territoire albanais a essuye le feu de postes grecs;
dans 27 cas, des avions grecs ant survoIe le territoire albanais. Sur le chiffre total des incidents,
quatre seulement ant fait l'objet d'une enquete
de la Commission, et il a ete constate que dans
chacun de ces cas l'initiative venait du cote grec.
Au cours de l'incident de Radat Kakavia
(Skipis), qui s'est produit le 7 juillet 1946, un
groupe de soldats grecs a penetre en territoire
albanais; il en a resulte un vif echange de coups
de feu. Le temoin albanais Nikolaos Tsamis a
confirme que les autorites grecques avaient organise pendant toute une semaine, dans la region
de Skipis, une serie d'actes de provocation. L~
soldat grec Iotakis, qui avait ete fait prisonnier,
a declare nettement que cet incident avait ete
provoque par les autorites militaires grecques.
Le 2 juin 1946, un detachement de soldats grecs
a franchi la frontiere albanaise dans la region
de Likojani et a attaque une patrouille albanaise. Cela a ete confirme par des temoins GCUlaires qui ant declare egalement que, dans cette
region, les Grecs se livraient systematiquement a
des actes de provocation.
On pourrait citer d'autres exemples encore, e~
notamment les incidents qui se sont produits en
1947. Les militaristes grecs continuent a provoquer des incidents a la frontiere albanaise. Le 7
mai, le representant albanais a porte a la connaissance de la Commission dix incidents qui
s'etaient produits dans la premiere moitie de
1947 et au cours desquels le territoire albanais
a essuye le feu des Grecs et a ete survo!e par des
avions grecs. Le 22 mai, le Premier Ministre
Enver Hoxha a informe le Conseil de securite
que, le 21 mai, trois avions grecs avaient mitraille sans aucune raison deux villages albanais,
tuant deux habitants et en blessant huit1 •
Parmi les 36 incidents provoques en 1946 par
des militaires grecs a la frontiere greco-yougoslave, il y en a eu 30 ou le territoire yougoslave
a essuye le feu des Grecs et ou ia fron.tiere
yougoslave a ete franchie par des soldats grecs.
Il y a eu de nombreux cas de survol du territoire
yougoslave par des avions grecs; au cours de ces
survols, les postes frontieres yougoslaves ant ete
mitrailles. Mais, on ne sait trap pourquoi, la
Commission n'a enqu€te sur aucun des incidents
1

Voir le document S/359/Corr. 1.

1238
only investigated the Greek charges against·
Yugoslavia. Some members of the Commission
call this procedure a manifestation of· the Commission's impartiality.
Incidents on the Yugoslav frontier are continuing up to the present day. Thus, on 13 June
a Greek aeroplane fired without any reason, on
the Yugoslav frontier post Number 130, near
Lake Doiran, with the result that a Yugoslav
officer was killed and two frontier guards
wounded.
Provocation by Greek militarists on the Bulgarian frontier has taken the form of flights
across *e Bulgarian frontier by Greek aeroplanes, firing on Bulgarian territory and, finally,
the despatch of diversion units, according to the
testimony of the witnesses Mustafoff and Uruchef!. The Bulgarian Government informed the
Allied Control Commission of all these incidents
and the relevant documents are in the control
Commission's possession.
. I think I should point out that of the 284 incidents with ~hich Greece is charged, only three
were investigated, and in all these cases the guilt
of the Greek military authorities was confirmed.
Of the 197 frontier incidents with which Greece
charged the neighbouring countries, eight were
investigated. The investigation of these incidents
showed that in every case they were nothing but
operations by Greek Government troops against
partisans on Greek territory. Not a single Greek
witness was able to prove that the partisans had
retreated to the neighbouring countries. The
witnesses expressed merely their conjectures. For
instance, the investigation of the Sourmena incident, which took place on 20, September 1946,
showed that there was no such incident but that
Greek troops were conducting operat:'ons against
the partisans on that day. True, the Greek witness, Captain Berovalis, stated that he himself
ordered his men to open fire on a Yugoslav frontier post. It was ascertained that the whole incident amounted to this, that the Greeks asked
the Yugoslav frontier guards to let them enter
Yugoslav territory in order to take the Greek
partisans, who were on Greek territory, from the
rear, which the Yugoslav authorities refused
to do.
Only 47 of the 197 incidents are connected
with alleged crossings by partisans from Greece
into neighbouring countries. With regard to
crossings by partisans from the neighbouring
countries into Greece, which is the charge made
by the latter against its neighbours, the Greek
representative himself quoted only twelve cases,
and not one of them was confirmed by any evidence which could be considered more or less
convincing.
Is it not ridiculous, for instance, for the Greeks
to accuse Bulgaria of sending armed partisan
bands into Greek territory? The Greek representative himself could only point to one case of

qui lui avaient ete signales par les Yougoslaves
et eUe n'a procede qu'a. des enquetes relatives
aux accusations portees par le Gouvernement
grec contre la Yougoslavie. Certains representants a la Commission veulent qualifier cette
methode d'impartiale.
Les incidents a la frontiere yougoslave continuent a se produire. C'est ainsi que le 13 juin
un avion grec a mitraille, sans raison, le poste
frontiere yougoslave numero 130 dans la region
du lac Doiran. Un officier yougoslave a ete tue
et deux gardes frontiere ont ete blesses.
Les actes de provocation commis par les militaires grecs a la frontiere bulgare ont consiste
en survols de la frontiere bulgare par des avions
grecs, en coups de feu essuyes par le territoire
bulgarc, et enfin en expeditions de diversion,
ainsi que l'ont declare les temoins Moustafoff et
Ouroutchetf. Le Gouvernement bulgare a parte
taus ces incidents a la connaissance de la Commission de contrOle interalliee, qui dispose de
toute la documentation.
J'estime necessaire de vous faire observer que
sur les 284 incidents imputes a la Grece, trois
seulement ont fait l'objet d'une enquete et que
dans tous ces cas la culpabilite des autorites
militaires grecques a ete etablie. Sur les 197 incidents de frontiere que la Grece avait reproches
aux pays voisins, huit ant fait l'objet d'une enquete. Ces enquetes ant montre que dans tous
ces cas, il ne s'agissait pas d'autre chose que
d'operations menees en territoire grec par les
troupes du Gouvernement grec contre les partisans. Aucun temoin grec n'a pu montrer que
les partisans se repliaient sur le t~rritoire des
pays voisins. Les temoins n'ont fait qu'exprimer
des suppositions. L'enquete menee au sujet de
l'incident de Sourmena qui s'etait produit le ?O
septembre 1946, a montre, par exemple, qu'il
n'y avait pas la d'incident, mais que, ce jour-la,
les troupes grecques operaient contre les partisans. Il est vrai qu'un temoin grec, le capitaine
Berovalis, a declare qu'il avait lui-meme donne
l'ordre d'ouvrir le feu sur un poste frontiere
yougoslave. Il est apparu plus tard que l'incident
se recluisait a ceci: les Grecs avaient demande
aux gardes frontiere yougoslaves de les laisser
entrer en territoire YOllgoslave pour prendre a
revers les partisans grecs qui se trouvaient en
territoire grec; les autorites yougoslaves avaient
refuse;
C'est seulement dans 47 cas, sur un total de
197 incidents, qu'il y aurait eu franchissement
des frontieres par des partisans venus de Grece.
Quant aUA cas de passage en Grece de partisans.
venant des pays limitrophes, que la Grece reproche a ses voisins, le representant grec luimeme n'a pu en citer que douze et pour aucun
d'entre eux il n'a ete presente de preuves tant.
soit peu convaincantes.
Les accusations grecques selon lesqueUes la:
Bulgarie, par exemple, aurait envoye en territoire grec des detachements de partisans armeS'
ne sont-eUes pas ridicules? Pour toute l'annee

1239

i
1946, le representant grec lui-meme n'a pu citer
qu'un seul cas ou un groupe de partisans serait
entre en Grece venant de Bulgarie.
Tout cela demontre l'absurdite des accusations
All this shows that the charges that Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania are provoking inc~­ selon lesquelles la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et
dents and, still more, that they bear responsI- l'Albanie provoqueraient des incidents et, a plus
bility for the civil war in Greece are - non- forte raison, qu'elles seraient responsables de la
guerre civile en Grece.
sensical.
L'etude objective des faits montre que la culObjective study of the facts shows that the
guilt of the Greek authorities and the Greek pabilite des autorites grecques et du GouverneGovernment in provoking frontier incidents is ment grec dans les incidents de frontiere ne fait
really incontestable. Indeed, have we ever heard aucun doute. En effet, est-il jamais arrive que
of the Greek Government punishing persons le Gouvernement grec punisse les personnes
guilty of provocative acts on the Yugoslav, Bul- coupables d'actes de provocation aux frontieres
garian and Albanian frontiers? We have no greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et greco-albaknowledge of such action by the Greek Govern- naise? Nous n'avons pas connaissance de mesures
ment. More than that, we know something dif- de ce~ ordre prises par le Gouvernement grec.
ferent. The Greek Government either gratui- Nous savons au contraire que le Gouvernement
tously denies the existence of such incidents, or grec nie sans aucune preuve l'existence de ces
passes them over in silence: Thus, it is in fact incidents, ou les passe sous silence. De cette faencouraging the provocation of incidents. The ~on, il contribue en fait a provoquer ces inciGreek Government is thereby, and cannot avoid dents. Par consequent, le Gouvernement grec
porte necessairement la responsabilite de ces inbeing, responsible for these mcidents.
cidents.
Si les militaires grecs s'emploient a provoqucr
Apparently, the Greek military clique's aim in
provoking frontier incidents is to reinforce the des incidents de frontiere, c'est evidemment
present Greek Government's official policy of parce qu'ils veulent appuyer la politique offihostility towards neighbouring countries. It is delle d'hostilite que le Gouvernement grec actuel
common knowledge that this Government con- a adoptee a l'egard des pays voisins, On sait
ducts unceasing propaganda against the terri- que ce Gouvernement mene sans cesse une protorial integrity of Albania and Bulgaria and does pagande dirigee contre l'integrite territoriale de
not conceal its aggressive designs against these l'Albanie et de la Bulgarie, a l'egard desquelles
countries. In this connexion it is particularly il ne cache pas ses intentions agressives. A ce
noteworthy that the Greek Government still con- propos, il est particulierement important de nosiders itself to be in a state of war with Albania, ter que le Gouvernement grec se considere toualthough the Albanian Government has repeat- jours en etat de guerre avec l'Albanie, bien que
erly· expressed its wish to establish normal and le Gouvernement albanais ait exprime a plufriendly relations with Greece in the interests of sieurs reprises le desir de retablir des relations
normales et amicales avec la Grece, dans l'inteboth countries.
ret des deux pays.
On peut dire que ces reves d'agrandissement
It may be said that the territorial claims cherished by Greek governing circles against neigh- territorial aux depens des pays voisins, que nourbouring countries are but empty dreams and that rissent les dirigeants grecs, sont vains et que les
it is not worth while taking any notice of the auteurs de ces projets ne mcritent pas de retenir
authors of such plans. It is true that such dreams notre attention. I1 est exact que ces reves sont
are empty. That does not mean, however, that vains, mais cela ne signifie pas que la politique
the hostile policy pursued by the Greek Govern~ d'hostilite adoptee par le Gouvernement grec a
ment towards the neighbouring countries cannot l'egard des pays voisins ne puisse faire beaucoup
do serious harm, as it poisons relations between de mal, etant donne qu'elle envenime les relathese countries and Greece and thereby harms tions entre ces pays et la Grece et nuit ainsi au
the maintenance of peace in the Balkans. This maintien de la paix dans les Balkans. Ceci est
is shown by the very fact that the question of d'ailleurs evident du seul fait que le Conseil de
these relations is being considered by the Security securite est saisi de la question des relations entre
Council.
ces pays..
It follows, therefore, that if the Security CounPar consequent, si le Conseil veut redresser la
cil wishes to mend matters and improve the re- situation et obtenir une amelioration des relalations between Greece and its neighbours, it tions entre la Grece et ses voisins, il doit prendre
should take steps to stop the Greek Government des mesures en vue de mettre fin a la politique
behaving in a hostile manner towards the neigh- d'hostilite que le Gouvernement grec mene a
bouring countries and should recommend that it l'egard de ses voisins et il doit recommander a ce
establish friendly relations with those States, Gouvernement d'etablir des relations amicales
which wish to establish such relations with avec ces Etats, qui desirent entretenir de telles
Greece.
relations avec la Grece.
Of course, regardless of how soon the Greek
I1 est evident que, quel que soit le temps que
Government comes to understand that the policy mettra le Gouvernement grec a comprendre que
it is now pursuing towards its neighbours is in- la politique qu'il poursuit en ce moment a l'e-

an alleged crossing of a partisan unit from Bulgaria into Greece during the whole of 1946.

1240
gard des pays voisins est inadmissible de la part
d'un Etat Membre de l'Organisation des Nations
Unies, quel que soit le temps qu'il lui faudra
pour entrer dans la voie des relations normales
avec ses voisins, ce Gouvernement doit en tout
cas prendre sans delai les mesures necessaires
pour mettre fin aux actes de provocation qui se
produisent a la frontiere.
Les incidents provoques par les militaires
The provocation of incidents by the Greek
military clique is evidently a method of distract- grecs sont, semble-t-il, un moyen de dc5tourner
ing the attention of world public opinion from l'attention de l'opinion mondiale de la situation
the internal conditions in Greece which have interieure qui s'est creee en Grece apres sa libearisen since that country's liberation from fascist ration du joug fasciste, et de rendre les voisins
occupation, and to lay the blame for Greece's de la Grece responsables de la situation qui
internal situation on the neighbouring States, or existe dans ce pays, ou de donner au moins l'imat least create the impression that Greece's neigh- pression que ce sont les voisins de la Grece qui
bours are responsible for all the misdemeanours sont coupables de tous les peches commis par les
of the Greek ruling circles and of their foreign milieux dirigeants grecs ou par leurs protecteurs
etrangers.
protectors.
There can be no doubt, however, that world
Mais il est clair qu'on ne pourra pas toujours
public opinion cannot be deceived indefinitely egarer l'opinion mondiale quant aux causes
about the real reasons for the present situation reelles de la situation qui s'est creee en Grece et
in Greece and the reasons for the strained rela- de la tension qui existe entre ce pays et ses voitions between Greece and its neighbours. Sooner sins. Tot ou tard, l'opinion publique connaitra
or later public opinion will get to know the facts les faits; elle les appreciera a leur juste valeur
and appraise them at their proper value and et en tirera les conclusions qui s'imposent.
draw the correct conclusions.
admissible for a State Member of the United
Nations, regardless of how soon it starts establishing normal relations with the neighbouring countries, it must in any case immediately take steps
to put an end to frontier provocations.

H.

MACEDONIA AND ALBANIAN MINORITIES

The Commission's report deals at considerable
length with the problem of Aegean Macedonia
and the position of the Macedonian and Albanian minorities in Greece. The Greek Government has accused Yugoslavia and Bulgaria of
being responsible for the existence of the partisan
movement in that area. In addition, Yugoslavia
and Bulgaria are said to be planning virtually
to wrest this area from Greece. A study of the
facts collected by the Commission and of a large
nUIllber of depositions of witnesses from among
the local population '-'uestioned on the spot in
Macedonia shows, however, that these charges
too are unfounded.
Indeed, what arguments do the representatives of the Greek Government bring forward to
prove the accuracy of the charges they have
levelled? In substance, the principal argument
adduced for this purpose consists of reference to
statements in certain Yugoslav papers expressing
sympathy with the position of the Macedonian
population residing in Aegean Macedonia. The
Greek representatives adduced no other facts
that merit attention.
As this question was discussed by the Commission and mentioned in the report, we should
study it here too and separate the truth from unfounded assertions and fabrications. In this connexion the question arises as to what is really
going on. A knowledge of the facts shows that
one of the reasons why the partisan movement in
northern Greece has acquired a more intensive
character compared with other regions is the
present Greek regime's persecution of the national minorities dwelling in northern Greece the Macedonians and Chams. The terror perpe-

H.

LES MINORITES MACEDONIENNE
ET ALBANAISE

Une grande partie du rapport de la Commission est consacree a la question de la Macedoine
egeenne et a la situation des minorites macedonienne et albanaise en Grece. Le Gouvernement
grec a accuse la Yougoslavie et la Bulgarie d'etre
responsables de l'existence d'un mouvement de
partisans dans cette region. En meme temps, on
attribue a la Yougoslavie et a la Bulgarie des:
plans qui iraient jusqu'a arracher cette region a
la Grece. Cependant, l'etude des faits rassembIes:
par la Commission et celle des nombreuses depositions de temoins pris dans la population locale'
et interroges en Macedoine meme, montre que
ces accusations sont denuees de tout fondement.
En effet, quels sont les arguments dont use leGouvernement grec pour demontrer le bienfonde de ses accusations? En fait, l'argument
principal invoque par les autoritc5s grecques, ce'
sont les declarations de certains journaux yougoslaves qui expriment de la sympathie pour la:
population macedonienne en raison de la situation Oll elle se trouve en Macedoine egeenne. En
dehors de cela les representants grecs n'ont pas'
cite de fait qui merite de retenir notre attention.
Puisque cette question a ete discutee par la
Commission et qu'il en est fait mention dans le'
rapport, nous devrons, nous aussi, Hkher d'y voirclair et de separer la verite de ce qui n'est qu'affirmation non fondee ou invention. A ce propos,
il y a lieu de se demander: Que se passe-t-il en'
realite? L'etude des faits montre que si le mouvement partisan a pris dans le nord de la Grece uneintensite plus grande que dans les autres regions
du pays, l'une des raisons en est que le regime
grec actuel persecute les minorites nationales
qui habitent la Grece du Nord: les Macedoniens;

.....

•

.$

1241
trated by the gendarmerie, troops and various
bands against these national minorities, aimed
at oppressinl£ and exterminating these minorities,
evoked the natural reaction in the latter - resistance. This has taken both a passive form flight to the neighbouring countries -. and also
an active form - the organization of partisan
units. We learn this from the data in the Commission's report. The fact is that in Aegean
Macedonia the Greek rulers are now reaping
what they have sown.

If you read the testimony of Macedonian witnesses, you will see that the Greek authorities
have not only proclaimed a campaign against
Macedonian national culture, have not only
closed down all Macedonian schools and forbidden Macedonians to speak in their mother
tongue, but they are also carrying out a policy
of extermination against the Macedonian population of Greece, which numbers more than
250,000.
The Macedonian minority is a population
with deep-rooted national traditions, with its
own language and with its own ancient culture.
It demands the acknowledgment of certain national rights as regards the use of its own language and culture. But what is actually happening? It is known that Greek soldiers and gendarmes, in coEabortion with right-wing or socalled "nationalist" bands, completely devastated
and burned down number of Macedonian villages last year (Katerini, Xirovrisi and Stefanina) .
It is also known that, with the same aim of
extirpating the Macedonian minority, the Greek
Government, through its own official agencies
and also with the help of right-wing bands, unleashed such a terror on the Macedonian minority that, in order to escape murder, torture and
violence, the Macedonians were forced to flee by
the thousands to the neighbouring countries.
More than 20,000 Macedonians fled to Yugoslavia and about 10,000 to Bulgaria. The Greek
Government calls all these people partisans and,
furthermore, blames the neighbouring countrL...
for the fact that these people have found refuge
on their territories.·

a

The witnesses Maria Slav! and Prose Zega informed the Commission that Greek gendarmes
burned· down the Macedonian village of Skra.
The inhabitants of this village, fearing further
persecution by the authorities, were forced to flee
to Yugoslavia. Three hundred inhabitants of
this village who had fled to Yugoslavia gave the
Commission a memorandum describing the persecutions they had suffered and the tragic lot of
the Macedonian population in Greece generally.
This memorandum states that, after more than
ninety per cent of the population of that village
had voted for a republic in the March 1946
elections, on 13 November gendarmes and bandits attacked the village on the pretext that
partisans were hiding there, killed 33 people and
:t::(i';;_

""

et les Tchamouriotes. La terreur exercee contre
ces minorites nationales par la gendarmerie, les
troupes et par toutes sortes de bandes, terreur
qui vise a I'oppression et a I'extermination de
ces minorites, a. provoque une reaction toute naturelle : la resistance. Cette resistance a pris
d'une part une forme passive, c'est-a-dire la fuite
des habitants dans les pays voisins, et d'autre
part une forme active, a savoir la creatiOl.. de
detachements de partisans. Ceci ressort des faits
contenus dans le rapport de la Commission. On
voit qu'en Macedoine egeenQe les dirigeants actuels de la Grece recoltent ce qu'ils ont seme.
Lisez les depositions des temoins macedoniens,
et vous verrez que les autorites grecques ont non
seulement el1trepris une croisade contre la culture nationale macedonienne, ferme toutes les
ecoles macedoniennes et h'1terdit aux Macedoniens l'usage de leur langue materneUe, mais
qu'elles menent aussi une politique d'extermination a I'egard de la population macedonienne de
Grece, qui comprend plus de 250.000 personnes.
La minorite macedonienne constitue une population qui a des traditions nationales auxquelles elle est profondement attachee, une
langue qui lui est propre et une vieille culture.
Cette minorite demande qu'on lui reconnaisse
certains droits nationaWl; en ce qui concerne sa
langue et sa culture. Mais dans la realite, que se
passe-t-il? On sait que I'an dernier des soldats
et des gendarmes grecs, aides par des bandes de
droite, qu'on appelle aussi "nationalistes", ont
entierement detruit et brl1le une serie de villages
macedoniens (Katerini, Xirovrisi et Stefanina).
Toujours avec I'intention d'aneantir la minorite macedonienne, le Gouvernement grec, on le
sait egalement, par ses agents et avec I'aide aussi
des bandes de droite, a soumis cette mhlOrite a
une terreur telle que, pour echapper aux assassinats, aux tortures et aux violences, les Macedoniens ont ete contraints de se refugier par milliers dans les pays vaisins de la Grece. Plus de
20.000 Macedoniens se sont refugies en Yougo~
slavie, et environ 10.000 en Bulgarie. Tous ces
gens, le Gouvernement grec les appelle des partisans et il va jusqu'a mettre en accusation ses
voisins parce que ces refugies ont trouve asile
sur leur territoire.
Les temoins Maria Slavi et Prose Zega ont
declare a la Commission que des gendarmes
grecs avaient brl1le le village macedonien de
Skra. Craignant de nouvelles persecutions par les
autorites, les habitants de ce village ont dll se
refugier en Yougoslavie. Trois cents des habitants de ce village, refugies en Yougoslavie, ont
presente a la Commission un memorandum qui
decrit les persecutions dont ils ont ete victimes
et le sort tragique de la poput'tion macedonienne de Grece en general. Il est dit dans ce
memorandum que lors des elections du mois de:
mars en 1946, plus de 90 pour 100 de la population de ce village avaient vote en faveur de 'la
republique; a la suite de quoi, le 13 novembre,
dit le memorandum, des gendarmes et des ban-·

It

..

Q.

1242
dits ont attaque le village sous pretexte qu'il
abritait des partisans, ont tue 33 personnes et
en ont blesse 5, et ont incendie 120 maisons,
c'est-a-dire pratiquement tout le village.
Le temoin Djordje Atanasov a declare que les
The witness Djordje Atanasov testified that
right-wing bands and the gendarmerie were ter- bandes de droite et la gendarmerie terrorisent la
rorizing the Macedonian population and were population macedonienne et qu'elles brutalisent,
assaulting, killing and torturing Macedonians. assassinent et torturent les Macedoniem:. Le teThe Macedonian witness Ioannis Nikolaidis, in- moin Ioannis Nikolaidis, un Macedonien qui a
terrogated in the Poligheros prison, testified that ete interroge a la prison de Poligheros, a declare
the terror of the Greek authorities agaiTlSt the que la terreur exercee par les autorites grecques
Macedonians "is obliging some, of them to go contre les Macedoniens "fait qu'une partie
into the lllIls and others to take refuge in neigh- d'entre eux se refugie dans les montagnes, et que
les autres s'enfuient da.ns les pays voisins".
bouring countries".
The position of the Albanian national minorLa situation de b~ minorite nationale albaity, the Chams, is no less difficult. Between June naise, les Tchamouriotes, n'est pas moins grave.
1944 and March 1945 the Greek Government De juin 1944 a mars 1945, le Gouvernement
carried out a regular campaign to exterminate grec a mene une veritable campagne d'extermithis minority. Military units were, sent to the nation contre cette minorite. Des detachements
areas bordering on Albania inhabited by Chams militaires ont ete envoyes dans les regions voiand began to plunder and burn down Cham vil- siaes de la frontiere albanaise, ou vivent ces
lages wholesale and to murder the population. Tchamouriotes; ~ ont pille, massacre et brCile
As a result of this campaign, 2,877 people were des villages tchamouriotes. Au cours de cette
killed, 5,800 houses were burned down and a campagne, 2.877 personnes ont ete tuees, 5.800
total of 69 villages suffered. It was pointed out maisons ont ete incendiees et 69 villages au total
in the memorandum of the Anti-Fascist Com- ·ont ete endommages. Un memorandum, publie
mittee of Cham Refugees now living in Albania par le Comite antifasciste des refugies tchamouthat this campaign was the tragic culmination riotes qui se trouvent actuellement en Albanie,
of the thirty-two year old story of the sufferings affirme que cette campagne a marque pour la
of the Cham papulation. The Greek authorities population tchamouriote l'aboutissement tragihave now managed to "clear" Chamuria of que de trente-deux ans de souffrances. Les autoChams. According to the witness Nusrat Ali, rites grecques sont arrivees a "nettoyer" la Tchathere are now no more than 16 Cham families mourie de ses habitants tchamouriotes. Le tein Greece; the remainder have either been ex- moin Nusrat Ali a declare qu'il ne restait. auterminated or have fled to Albania. There are jourd'hui en Grece que seize familles tchamou23,000 Cham refugees in Albania.
riotes, toutes les autres ayant ete massacrees
'ou s'etant refugiees en Albanie. Le nombre
des Tchamouriotes re£ugies en Albanie atteint
23.000.
Ace propos, il n'est pas inutile de citer la deIn this connexion, it may not be superfluous
to recall also the statement of a British Member claration faite par M. Hutchinson au Parlement
of Parliament, Mr. Hutchinson, who reported as britannique:
follows:
"Pendant mon sejouf en Albanie, j'ai eu l'oc"During my stay in Albania I had the opportunity to talk to a good number of refugees who casion de m'entretenir avec un grand nombre de
came from Chamuria. I mean the 25,000 Chams refugies venant de Tchamourie. Il s'agit de
who were driven from their homes by Greek 25.000 personnes qui ont ete chassees de leurs
terrorist bands under the command of General foyers par les bandes terroristes grecques commandees par le general Zervas."
Zervas."
Cette declaration de M. Hutchinson a paru
This statement by Mr. Hutchinson was published on 9 November 1945 in the newspaper le 9 novembre 1945 dans le Hertford Times.
Hertford Times. Such is the picture with regard Telle est done la situation des minorites natioto the situation of the national minorities in nales en Grece. Tous ceux qui le desireraient
Greece. Anyone wishing to do so may consult peuvent prendre connaissance de la documentathe relevant documents supplied us by the Com- tion qui nous a ete fournie a ce sujet par la
Commission.
mission.
Ce ne sont done pas les autres pays, mais
Thus, it is the Greek Government, and not
bien
le Gouvernement grec qui est responsable
other countries, that is responsible for the situation which has arisen with regard to the Mace- de la situation des minorites macedonienne et
donian and Albanian national minorities in albanaise en Grece. Cette conclusion merite
Greece. This conclusion merits special attention d'autant plus de retenir notre attention que la
if '.ve bear in mind that Aegean Macedonia and Macedoine egeenne et la Tchamourie OU habite
Chamuria, which is where the Albanian minority la minorite albanaise sont des regions frontieres .
lives, are frontier regions, a fact which makes et que, par consequent, la situation dans ces rethe situation in those regions one of special sig- gions a une importance particuliere.
nificance.
wounded 5, and burned down 120 houses virtually the whole village.

I

"""

...

1243
Here the question arises as to why the Greek
Government, despite the fact that Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania have no connexion with
what is going on ill Aegean Macedonia and
Chamuria, has made gratuitous accusations
against these countries. This can only be explained by a desire to conceal its own treatment
of the Macedonians and Albanians. And here
we see the same methods which are used by the
Greek Government in connexion with the socalled frontier incidents.
That is how the matter stands as regards
Aegea.ll Macedonia and the situation of the national minorities in Greece.

Ill.

EVIDENCE AND WITNESSES

A' good deal of space is given in the Commission's report to the evidence of witnesses. This
is understandable. In ascertaining the actual
situation on the spot, the Commission could not
fail to use the evidence of living persons. The
witnesses may be divided basically into two categories:

lci aussi, on peut se demander pourquoi le
Gouvernement grec porte des accusations gratuites contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et I'Albanie, bien que ces pays n'aient rien a. voir avec
les evenements de la Macedoineegeenne et de
la Tchamourie. L'attitude du Gouvernement
grec ne peut s'expliquer que par son desir de
cacher son action vis-a.-vis des Macedoniens et
des Albanais. rci aussi, nous retrouvons donc les
methodes que le Gouvernement grec applique
dans le cas des pretendus 'incidents de frontiere.
Voila. donc comment se presente la question
de la Macedoine egeenne et de la situation des
minorites nationales en Grece.

Ill.

LES DEPOSITIONS ET LES TEMOINS

Les depositions des temoins occupent dans le
rapport de la Commission une place considerable. Ce!a est tout a. fait nature!. Pour eclaircir
sur place la situation reelle, la Commission ne
pouvait faire autrement que d'entendre tous les
temoignages de premiere main. Tous les temoins
peuvent se classer, en substance, en deux categories:
1. Those who testified against the Greek
1. Ceux qui ont temoigne contre le Gouvernement grec;
Government;
2. Those who testified in defence of the
2. Ceux qui ont temoigne en faveur du Gouvernement grec.
Greek Government.
De nombreux temoins, representant le peuple
The first category comprises the many witnesses representing the Greek people. It includes de Grece, appartiennent a. la premiere categorie.
representatives of democratic parties and organ- Celle-ci comprend des representants des partis
iza"tions, among them representatives of the et des organisations democratiques, y compris la
EAM coalition and representatives of the Greek coalition de I'EAM, et de la Confederation
Labour Confederation, and also a large numbe,r grecque du travail, ainsi qu'un grand nombre
of private citizens.
de personnes privees.
All these witnesses gave the Commission facts
Tous ces temoins ont ec1aire la Commission
and conveyed the thoughts and aspirations of sur la situation, les opinions et les aspirations du
the Greek people. They all told of the acts of peuple grec. Tous ont decrit la terreur dirigee
terror perpetrated against all the, democratic contre tous les partis et organisations democraparties and organizations in the country, against tiques du pays, contre tous ceux qui sont soupall persons suspectd of acting for or thinking of ~onnes d'agir, ou de vouloir agir, pour la dethe defence of democracy. They spoke of the fense de la democratie. Ils ont decrit les exces
wanton behaviour of fascist· bands such as the des bandes fascistes des "Hitos", des bandes de
"Hitos" and Surlas bands and others.
Sourlas et autres.
Among these witnesses are a leading EAM
Parmi ces temoins, on remarque une personpolitician, Mr. Kyrkes, a representative of the nalite politique marquante de I'EAM, M. KirGreek Socialist Party, Mr. Tsirimokos, a repre- kes; le representant du parti socialiste grec, M.
sentative of the 'Left Liberal Party, Mr. Gri- Tsirimokos; le representant du parti liberal de
goriadis, a representative of the Greek Labour gauche, M. Grigoriadis; le representant de la
Confederation, Mr. Paparigas, and others.
Confederation grecque du travail, M. Paparigas,
etc.
The overwhelming majority of these witnesses
La tres grande majorite de ces temoins ne sont
are not Communists, but they all with one voice pas des communistes. Pourtant, ils sont unanim~s
declare that they are fighting shoulder to shoul- a declarer qu'ils luttent cote a. cote avec les comder with the Communists for the democ':"atic munistes pour la defense des droits democrarights of the Greek people. Communists and tiques du peuple grec. Les communistes, et les
genuine democrats who are not Communists act vrais democrates parmi les non-communistes,
in unison, because they are fighting for the agissent de concert parce qu'ils luttent pour dedemocratic liberties of the Greek people, who fendre les libertes democratiques du peuple grec,
have earned the right to be reckoned with.
qui a merite que 1'0n tienne compte de sa volonte.
'The charge constantly made by the Greek
Les accusations constamment formuIees par
Government and its foreign protectors that all le Gouvernement grec et ses protecteurs etranwho are opposed to the Greek Government are gers, et seIon lesquelles tous ceux qui s'opposent
~mIllunists does not correspond with reality. In I au Gouvernement seraient des communistes,' ne

1244
actual fact democr.atic Greece is fighting antidemocratic Greece. The damour raised about
the red peril is iL,tended to conceal from world
public opinion the real significance of what is
happening in Greece. This should be told not
only to the Greeks, but to those gentlemen
ab. d who suffer from a kind of daltonism
and can no longer distinguish between political
1

COlOurs.

;

..• ' ";~\Of'

1I .' .J::.,,1ii~'"

:Many of the witnesses are private individuals,
relatives of persons deported to the islands and
imprisoned by the Greek autilOrities. Amongst
them there are not a few democratic leaders who
distinguished themselves in the struggle against
the occupationists. There are hundreds of such
witnesses. The oral and written evidence given
by these people, as well as the evidence of outstanding representatives of democratic parties
and organizations, disdoses to us a grim picture
of the conditions which at present prevail in
Greece and reveals the abyss into which the present Greek rulers have hurled the country. The
voice of these persons is the voice of the Greek
people. The Security Council should listen to it.
There is also another ca~egory of oral and
written evidenl:e. This is the evidence of persons recommended by the Greek Government.
These witnesses may be divided into three basic
groups:
1. Witnesses from the ranks of the Greek
military (frontier) authorities;
2. Criminals, sentenced at various times by
the Greek authorities, and quislings who have
fled from other countries into Greece and whose
services have proved useful to the Greek Gov-

correspondent pas a la realite. En fait, c'est la
Grece democratique qui lutte .contre la Grece
antidemocratique. Tous les cris que 1'0n pousse
a propos de "menace rouge" n'ont pour objet
que de cacher a 1'0pinion mondiale le sens veritable des evenements qui se produisent en Grece.
Il faut que cela soit dit, non seulement aux
Grecs, mais a tous ceux qui, a l'etranger, sont
atteints d'un daltonisme particulier qui les empeche de distinguer les couleurs politiques.
Parmi les temoins, il y a un grand nombre de
simples citoyens, parents de ceux que les autorites grecques ont emprisonnes ou deportes dans
les lies. Il y a parmi eux un grand nombre de
personnalites democratiques qui se sont signalees
dans la lutte contre 1'0ccupant. Les temoins de
ce genre se comptent par centaines. Les temoignages oraux et ecrits de ces gens, joints aux
depositions des representants marquants des partis et organisations democratiques, nous decouvrent le tableau affligeant de la situation qui
existe en Grece en ce moment, et nous montrent
l'abime dans lequel les dirigeants. actuels de la
Grece ont precipite leur pays. La voix de ces
hommes est la voix du peuple grec: le Conseil
de securite a le devoir de l'ecouter.
Il existe une autre categorie de depositions
orales et €crites: ce sont les temoignages de personnes recommandees par le Gouvernement
grec. D'une fa~on generale, on peut dasser ces
temoins en trois categories:
1. T€moins produits par les autorites mili~
taires grecques (de la frontiere) ;
2. Criminels de droit commun condamnes a
differentes epoques par les autorites grecques, ou
quislings d'autres pays refugies en Grece, dont
le Gouvernement grec a cru devoir se servir;

,~mment;

3. Persons sentenced to death or various
terms of imprisonment by the Greek authorities.

3. Personnes condamnees a la peine de mort
ou a differentes peines de prison par les autorites
grecques.
Que pouvait-on attendl"e du temoignage des
autorites militaires grecques? Elles ont cherch€
par tous les moyens a calomnier les pays voisins.

What could be expected from the evidence of
the Greek military authorities? They have tried
in every possible way to calumniate the neighbouring countries.
Persons belonging to the second group are
in large part amoral elements with no political
convictions, who have sold themselves to the
police authorities, or elements which collaborated with the enemy during the occupation of
Greece's neighbours by fascist troops and which
found shelter in Greece.
Here are some such witnesses: In the Greek
White Bookl mention is made of 2.n ex-colonel of
the Bulgarian Army, Ivan Gc:oganoff, sentenced
to death by a Bulgarian court for serious crimes
against the Bulgarian people. Kotsinako, a witness against Albania, is a criminal who stole
3,500 United States dollars from the State Treasury in Tirana and fled from Albania to escape

Les personnes appartenant au deuxieme
groupe sont en grande partie des individus sans
moralite, denues de convictions politiques, vendus a la police, ou encore des individus qui ont
collabore avec l'ennemi dans les pays voisins de
la Grece, occupes par les fascistes et qui depuis
ont trouv€ refuge en Grece.
Voici quelques-uns de ces temoins: le Livre
blanc grecl cite Ivan Gologanoff, ex-colonel de
l'arm€e bulgare, condamne a mort par un tribunal bulgare pour ses crimes contre le peuple
bulgare. Le temoin Kotsinako, qui a depose
contre l'Albanie, est un criminel de droit commun et a vole a Tirana 3.~00 dollars des EtatsUnis appartenant au Tresor, puis s'est enfui

1 The document referred to in the report of the Commission of Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Incidents as "Greek White Book I" (listed by the Commission
as document S/ACA/15) is a publication of the Greek
Ministry for Foreign Affairs, entitled Evidence in Support of the Creek Appeal to the Security Council (Athens,
1947) •

1 Le document dont il est question dans le rapport de
la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survenus le
long de la frontiere grecque, sous le nom de "Livre blanc
grec I" (document S/AC.4/15 de la Commission) a ete
publie par le Ministere grec des Affaires etrangeres, sous
le titre Temoignages a l'appui de l'appel dll la Crece au
Conseil de securite (Athenes, 1947).

1245
justice. The witness Zhivko Mladenovic, who is
mentioned in the report in support of the Greek
charges against Yugoslavia, is a man who fought
against Yugoslavia along with the German occupationists.
The Greek representative in a letter of
25 February insisted on the interrogation of the
witness Hristos Vlahos. It was this same Hristos
Vlahos who, at the instigation of the Greek
gendarmerie, murdered Zevgos, a former minister and a member of the Central Committee
of EAM, on 20 March 1947, in a street in
Saloniki. Zevgos was sent by the Central Committee of EAM to establish relations with the
Security Council's Commission, which was working in Saloniki at that time.
The chief Greek witness, Fotios Kontopanos,
whose name figures in the Commission's report
in dozens of places, is an agent provocateur.
Kontopanos' own "brothers exposed him as a
person of no morals and an agent provocateur.
Another Greek witness, Zahos, admitted before
the Commission that his own evidence was a
forgery.
It is not accidental that the evidence of a
number of such persons was ignored by the
Commission, since the devices to which the persons who supplied these witnesses had resorted
were too obvious. Apparently, it was difficult
to find more suitable persons.
With regard to the third group of witnesses,
it is ~qually impossible to regard their evidence
as trustworthy. How can one trust the evidence
of persons who, a few days before their interrogation, sent written statements to the Commission expressing the wish to testify against the
Greek Government, yet, on meeting the representatives of the Commission, testified to the
contrary and defended the activities of the Greek
authorities, having obviously been bribed as a
result of threats and the application of force on
the part of the police and gendarmerie? It is
obvious that these people were saving their skins
and were the victims of coercion and bribery.

In this category, for instance, we may place
the witness Bobtsis, who was dismissed by the
Commission as a perjurer, but whose evidence
is nevertheless mentioned in the report, and also
the witnees Valtadoros, who had been sentenced
to death by a Greek court. Four people sentenced to death together with Valtadoros were
executed in October 1946, whereas Valtadoros
was not executed in order to keep him to give
evidence against the neighbouring countries, as
he himself said later. The prisoners Zervas and
Petsas stated during their interrogation that Valtadoros was tortured for three days until he gave
false evidence about the alleged support which
Yugoslavia was giving to Greek partisans.

d'Albanie pour echapper a la justice. Le temoin
Jivko Mladenovic, dont la deposition figure dans
le rapport pour etayer les accusations grecques
contre la Yougoslavie, est un homme qui a lutte
contre son propre pays aux cotes des occupants
allemands.
Dans sa lettre du 25 fevrier, le representant
de la Grece a insiste pour qu'on interroge le
temoin Hristos VIahos. n s'agit du meme Hristos
Vlahos qui, le 20 mars 1947, agissant sur les
jnstructions de la gendarmerie grecque, a tue,
dans une rue de Salonique, l'ancien ministre
Zevgos, membre du Comite executif de l'EAM.
Zevgos avait ete envoye a Salonique par le Comite executif de l'EAM pour faire la liaison avec
la Commission du Conseil de securite qui a ce
moment-la siegeait a Salonique.
Le principal temoin grec, Fotios Kontopanos,
dont le nom figure des dizaines de fois dans le
rapport de la Commission, est un agent provocateur. Ses propres freres ront demasque et l'ont
fait apparaitre comme un homme immoral et
un agent provocateur. Un autre temoin grec,
Zahos, a reconnu devant la Commission que ses
propres depositions etaient des faux.
Ce n'est pas par hasard que la Commission
n'a pas voulu tenir compte des depositions d'un
certain nombre de ces temoins; en efiet, les pro'cedes employes pour produire ces temoins etaient
trop evidents. !l a ete visiblement difficile de
trouver de meilleurs temoins.
Quant a la troisieme categorie de temoins,
leurs depositions ne meritent pas non plus confiance. Comment pourrait-on ajouter foi aux
depositions de personnes qui, que1ques jours
avant leur interrogatoire, avaient adresse a la
Commission des declarations ecrites dans lesquelles elles exprimaient le desir de temoigner
contre le Gouvernement grec, mais qui, une fois
en presence des representants de la Commission,
ont temoigne tout au contraire en f~veur de
l'action des autorites grecques. n est clair que
ces personnes ont ete achetees ou qu'elles ont
cede aux menaces ou aux voies de fait de la police et de la gendarmerie. 11 est certain que ces
temoins cherchaient a sauver leur peau et qu'ils
avaient succombe a la violence et a la corruption.
Dans cette categorie, on pent ranger le temoin Bobtsis, que la Commission avait rejete
comme etant un faux temoin, mais dont les depositions sont neanmoins citees dans le rapport,
et de meme le temoin Valtadoros qu'un tribunal
grec avait condamne a la peine de mort. Quatre
personnes condamnees a mort en meme temps
que Valtadoros ont ete executees en octobre
1946 alors que Valtadoros a ete epargne, pour
pouvoir, ainsi qu'il l'a declare lui-meme, temoigner contre les pays voisins de la Grece. Les detenus Zervas et Petsas ont declare, lors de leur
interrogatoire, que Valtadoros avait ete torture
pendant trois jours, jusqu'au moment ou il avait
fait une deposition mensongere, tendant a iDoIi;.
trer que la Yougoslavie soutient les partisans
~~ecs.

1246
The witness Tomas Zahos stated at his interrogation by a team of the Commission that he was
forced, as the result of beatings, to sign false
depositions regarding alleged assistance given to
Greek partisans by the neighbouring countries.
He pointed out that the evidence of the witness
Kontopanos had also been obtained under
duress.
At this point during the English interpretation of his speech at the Council meeting, Mr.
Gromyko made the following statement (translated from Russian) :
I agree that the English interpretation should
continue from part V, on "foreign interference
in Greek internal affairs". With regard to the
remainder, I shall ask the Secretariat to prepare
an official text. We shall now pass on to part V.

Interroge par un groupe de la Commission, le
temoin Tomas Zahos a declare qu'on l'avait
battu pour lui faire signer une deposition mensongere tendant a prouver que les' voisins de la
Grece aident les partisans grecs. 11 a indique que
les depositions du temoin Kontopanos avaient
egalement ete obtenues par la force.

A ce point de l'i'1terpretation anglaise de son
discours a la seance du Conseil de securite, M.
Gromyko a fait la declaration suivante (traduit
du russe):
J'accepte qu'on continue l'interpretation anglaise a partir de la section V: "L'intervention
etrangere dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece." Quant au reste, je prierais le Secretariat
de preparer une traduction officielle. Nous pourrions done passer maintenant a la section V.
Ce qui suit de la troisieme partie, ainsi que
The following section of part III and the
whole of part IV of Mr. Gromyko's speech were toute la quatrieme partie du discours de M.
not given an· English interpretation during the Gromyko, n'a pas etC interprete en anglais au
meeting.
.
cours de la seance.
Les temoins Kentros et Tsipis, qui ont comThe witnesses Kentros and Tsipis, when interrogated by a CoIIlIlli$sion team at Yannina paru a lanina devant un groupe de la Commisstated that they were on Albanian territory to- sion, ont declare qu'ils avaient ete en territoire
gether with the leader of a partisan unit, Raptis. albanais avec un certain Raptis, chef d'un
On the other hand, Raptis stated at a court tx:ial groupe de partisans. Or, ce meme Raptis a dein Yannina on 6 September 1946 that he had clare, au cours de son proces a lanina, le 6 sepnever been in Albania. Hence, the evidence of tembre 1946, qu'il n'avaitjamais ete en Albanie.
Kentros and Tsipis is false. Raptis was executed Par consequent,' les temoignages de Kentros et
and Kentros and Tsipis saved their lives by their Tsipis sont faux. Raptis a ete execute, alors que
false evidence. Gheorgios Krinakis, a twenty- Kentros et Tsipis ont sauve leur vie au prix d'un
year-old member of the Greek youth organiza- faux temoignage. Le denomme Georgios Krikation EPON, under sentence of death, stated nis; age de 20 ans, membre de I'organisation de
when he was interrogated by the team that he la jeunesse grecque EPON, et condamne a mort,
had been severely beaten and instructed to give a declare devant le groupe de la Commission
false evidence against Yugoslavi~, Bulgaria and qu'on I'avait roue de coups pour lui faire faire
Albania. Krinakis had refused to give such evi- une deposition mensongere contre la Yougosladence and was sentenced to death.
vie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie. Krinakis a refuse de
faire cette deposition, et il a ete condamne a
mort.
Another witness, loannis Patis, who had been
Un autre temoin condamne a mort, loannis
sentenced to death, also stated that he was in- Patis, a declare egalement qu'on lui avait destructed to give false evidence regarding the mande un faux temoignage attestant que les
help given by the northern neighbours to the voisins septentrionaux de la Grece aidaient les
partisans. He refused to .~ve such evidence and partisans. 11 avait refuse de temoigner dans ce
was subjected to beatL.'lg and torture.
sens et c'est pourquoi il avait ete torture et roue
de coups.
.
With regard to the depositions in the notori,.
Quant aux depositions contenues dans le faousWhite Book, which is so often mentioned by meux Livre blanc auquel les representants grecs
the Greek representatives, according to the state·· se referent si souvent, elIes ont ete falsifiees de
ments of the Greek witnesses themselves, this I'aveu des temoins grecs eux-memes. L'un des
evidence i" falsified: One of the chief Greek principaux temoins grecs, Gatsios, a declare: "Je
witnesses, Gatsios, stated: "I deny my evidence retracte ma deposition parce qu'elle etait fausse."
because it was false." Zahos declared that he Zahos a declare qu'il "n'avait pas fait la depo"did not give the evidence which is written sition consignee dans le Livre blanc". Le temoin
down in the White Book." The witness Ikonom- Ikonomoff a declare devant la Commission que
off told the Commission that his deposition in son temoignage, tel qu'il figure dans le Livre
the White Book was not true and that he gave blanc, ne cox:respond pas a la realite et qu'il n'aevidence of alleged help by Bulgaria to Greek vait fait sa deposition concernant l'aide que la
partisans as a result of beatings which lasted for Bulgarie aurait accordee at.1x partisans grecs que
parce qu'il avait. ete hattu pendant plusieurs
several days.
jours.
Telle est la realite. Ces quelques exemples
Such is the real situation. From these few
examples it may be seen quite clearly, unless we nous suffisent pour voir de fac,;on parfaitement
consciously close our eyes to these facts, that the claire, si nous ne voulons pas sciemment fermer ......

1247
Greek proofs are constructed from the depositions of false witnesses, including depositions·.
which were extracted by force, often under
threat of execution. Naturally, such depositions
cannot be accepted as evidence and they prove
nothing, and, even if they do prove anything,
it is the exact opposite of what the Greek Government wishes to prove. It is on these depositions, however, that the Greek Government bases
its position.
Is it not clear that the Security Council cannot
fail to take into account the nature of the witnesses and their statements?

IV.

THE INTERNAL .SITUATION IN GREECE

It would be incorrect for us to consider the
question of the so-called frontier incidents separately from the general situation which has arisen
in Greece since her liberation from fascist occupation. It is not accidental that the Security
Council's Commission gave considerable attention to facts relating to the internal situation in
the country. By doing so the Commission recognized that the question of incidents cannot be
considered apart from the whole situation which
has arisen in Greece and that this situation has
directly influenced the relations between the
present political regime in Greece and the neighbouring States. It is true that the interest taken
by certain representatives on the Commission in
the situation prevailing in Greece diminished
somewhat during the last stage of the Commission's work. But this fact affords still stronger
confirmation of the correctness of the above
conclusion.
In this case too, as in that of the position of
the Macedonian and Albanian minorities in
Greece, I shall touch upon the internal situation
in Greece only from one specific point of view,
namely, that of the extent to which the relations
which have grown up between Greece, on the
one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and ,Albania, on the other, are determined by this internal situation.
What, then, is going on in Greece? What has
led to such strained relations between Greece
and the neighbouring countries? For more than
two years now, Greece is almost the only country
liberated from the enemy where there is no order, where the interests of the overwhelming
majority of the people are ignored and where
aggressive designs against neighbouring States
are openly discussed. It is the scene of an acute
conflict between democratic forces, on the one
hand and on the other hand, the anti-democratic forces grouped around the present Greek
Government. It cannct, after all, be denied that
prominent among the latter are elements which
co~promised themselves in the past by collaboratIon with the enemy, fascist "Hitos" bands and
the like, who are terrorizing the population.

les yeux devant ces faits, que les preuves foumies
par lapamegrecque':sott"t.iondees "Sur les depositions de:faux temoins, et meme'sur des depositions qui ont ete arrachees par la force et sov:vent sous menace de la peine de mort. On ne
saurait evidemment attribuer une valeur probante a ces depositions. Elles ne prouvent rien,
ou bien, si dIes prouvent quelque chose, c'~-t
precisement le contraire de ce que veut demontrer le Gouvernement grec. Et pourtant, c'est sur
ces temoignages que le Gouvernement grec batit
sa these.
Il est clair que le Conseil de securite ne peut
se dispenser de tenir compte de ce que sont reellement les temoins et de ce que valent leurs
depositions.
IV. LA SITUATION INTERIEURE DE LA GdCE
En examinant la question de ce qu'on appelle
les incidents de frontiere, nous aurions tort de
laisser de cote l'ensemble de la situation qui s'est
creee en Grece, apres sa liberation des occupants
fascistes. Ce n'est pas par hasard que la Commission du Conseil de securite a etudie avec une
attention particuliere les faits qui se rapportent
a la situation interieure de ce·pays. La Commission a reconnu par la qu'on ne saurait isoler la
question des incidents de frontiere de l'ensemble
de la situation qui existe en Grece, et que cette
situation affecte directement les relations entre
le regime actuel grec et les pays voisins de la
Grece. Il est vrai que, vers la fin des travaux
de la Commission, ceItains de ses membres ont
montre moins d'interet pour la situation qui
existe err Grece, mais cela ne fait que confirmer
davantage l'exactitude de la remarque que je
viens de faire.
De meme que je l'avais fait a propos de la
situation des minorites macedonienne et albanaise de Grece, je ne traiterai de la situation
interieure de la Grece que sous un angle determine: je me bornerai a examiner jusqu'a quel
point la situation interieure de la Grece affecte
les relations entre ce pays, d'une part, et la
Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, d'autre
part.
Donc, que se passe-t-il en Grece? Qu'est-ce
qui a provoque des relations si tendues entre la
Grece et ses voisins? Depuis plus de deux ans,
la Grece presente parmi les Etats liberes de l'ennemi, ce cas presque unique d'un pays ou il n'y
a pas d'ordre, ou les interets de la grande majorite de la population sont meconnus et ou 1'0n
manifeste ouvertement des intentions agressives
a l'egard des nations voisines. La Grece est le
theatre d'une lutte violente entre les forces democratiques d'une part et, d'autre part, les forces
antidemocratiques, groupees autour du Gouvernement grec actuel. En efIet, on ne saurait nier
qu'au premier rang des elements antidemocratiques on trouve des personnes compromises par
leur collaboration avec l'ennemi, les bandf."-s fascistes des "Hitos" et leurs emules qui terrorisent
la population.

1248
The Commission prodtlced numerous proofs
La Commission a presente de nombreux faits
of t,heJerror th<.tki&"J·~g!pg<.jl1! ov~~.(~r~e.ct;:.ii.¥Qt".·etablissant que la terreur sevit dans toutes les
only on the northern frontiers with Yugoslavia, regions de la Grece, non seulement dans le nord,
Albania and Bulgaria, but also in the centre of aux frontihes yougoslave, bulgare et albanaise,
the country and in the south. Large numbers of mais aussi dans le centre et le sud du pays. Vne
documents wel'e placed at t.~e Commission's dis- documentation abondante a ete mise a- la dispoposal, testifying to the v: •IDce and rowdyism sition de la Commission en ce qui concerne les
perpetrated against the population by persons violences et les exces diriges contre le peuple par
who either directly worked for the enemy in the des hommes qui autrefois avaient directement
past or who sat tight like rats in their holes dur- servi i'ennemi ou bien s'etaient teITes comme des
ing the fascist occupation of the country. These rats pendant l'occupation fasciste de la Grece.
people, taking advantage of Government pro- Maintenant ces hommes, forts de la protection
tection, are now with impunity wrecking ven- du Gouvernement, opprL'llent impunement la
geance on the population, trying to throttle ali population, ten1.ent d'arreter tous les effc::ts que
its attempts to secure recognition of its legal deploie le peuple pour faire reconnaltre ses droits
rights and organizing provocations in the fron- legitimes, et commettent des actes de provocatier regions.
tion dans les regions frontieres.
Voici quelques exemples qui temoignent de la
I shall give you a few examples in evidence
of the tragedy which has befallen the Greek tragedie qu'a vecue le' peuple ~ec depuis sa
people since its liberation from fascist occupa- liberation du joug' fasciste. Dans la seule periode
tion. Solely in the period between 12 February du 12 fevrier 1945 - jour de la signature de
1945, i.e., after the conclusion of the so-called l'accord dit de Varkiza - au 31 mars 1946, la
Varkiza agreement, and 31 March 1946, the gendarmerie et les bandes de droite ont tue
gendarmeri(! and right-wing bands killed 1,289 1.289 personnes et en ont battu et torture
people and subjected 31,632 people to beatings 31.632. Actuellement plus de 10.000 deportt~s
and torture. More than 10,000 puliti.cal de- politiques languissent dans les prisons ou sur des
portees, who fought to liberate Greece from the iles desertes. Tous ces hommes ont combattu
German occupationists and to set up a really pour liberer la Grece de l'occupation allemande
democratic regime, are at present languishing in et pour y instaurer un regime vraiment demoprisons and on desert islands. Between July 1946 cratique. Depuis juillet 1946, les 4-'-ibunaux miand the present time military tribunals have sen- litaires ont condamne a- mort 358 personnes.
tenced 358 persons to death. Need one won- Faut-il s'etonner que le temoin Kostoudis ai.t deder at the words of the witness Kostoudis, who clare a la Commission que la terreur qui s'exerce
told the Commi~ion that the prevailing terror en Grece contre la population "ne differe en rien
against the people in Greece "was no different de celle qu'y faisaient regner les' Allemands et
from the terror practised by the Germans and leurs collaborateurs pendant l'occupation"?
collaborators during the occupation"?
Vn representant du parti socialiste (ELD) a
The representative of the Socialist Party
(ELD) told the Commission that the Greek declare devant la Commission que les autorites
authorities were carrying out mass punitiv~ ex- grecques menent des expeditions punitives de
peditions against democratic elements, that these grande envergure contre les elements democracampaigns often involved the annihilation of. tiques de la population; ce qui aboutit souvent awhole villages and that in their operations the la destruction de villages entiers, et que ces
authorities had the support of r~ght-wing bands, memes autorites s'appuient sur les bandes de
consisting of persons who had formerly collabo- droite. composees d'individus ayant collabore
rated with the occupation forces. This was avec les occupants. Les temoins Vitaniotis, Tsenborne out by the witnesses Vitaniotis, Tsengos, gos, Batis, Atanasov, Lambros, Zogas, Skembis
Batis, Atanasov, Lambros, Zogas, Skembis and et b~aucoup d'autres encore ont declare la meme
chose au moment d'etre interroges par la Commany others interrogated by the Commission.
mission.
Actuellement, loin de s'ameliorer, la situation
At the present time the situation has not only
not improved but, on the comrary, has notice- empire sensiblement. Les cours martiales grecably deteriorated. Greek courts martial hav ~ ques ont commence a prononcer des condamnabegun to pass se!1tences of death at a particu- tions a mort a un rythme accelere. De mars alarly fast rate. Between March and June this . juin dernier, il y a eu 214 condarnnations ayear, 214 death sentences were pa&ed, ard 150 mort; 150 personnes, dont 6 femmes, ont ete
people have already been executed, among them executees. On a meme execute le Dr Efthymios
6 women. One of the witnesses, Dr. Efthymios Ioannidis, un des temoins qui ont depose devant
Ioannidis, who testified before the Commission la Commission au sujet des persecutions auxon the Greek Government's persecution of the quelles le Gouvernement grec soumet la minoMacedonian minority in Greece, has been exe- rite macedonienne de Grece.
cuted.
D'apres les dernieres informations rec;ues de
According to the recent information from
Greece, only a few days ago another 17 people, Grece, 17 personnes, anciens membres du mouformerly members of the national liberation vement grec de liberation nationale, ont ete exemovement in Greece, were executed. Character- cutees tout recemment. C'est un fait caracterisistically, ~.e execution of these persons coincided tique que ces executions ont coincide avec la

'1

1249
in time with the signing, on 20 June, of the
Greek-American agreement regarding so-called
aid to Greece. Now that the agreement has been
signed, in Greece one has evidently become
bolder in chopping off the heads of democrats.
At the same time, scores began to be settled
with the leaders of opposition political parties.
I have already mentioned the cowardly assassination of the former minister and member of
the Central Committee of EAM, Zevgos, on
20 March in Saloniki. On 30 March, in the same
place, three members of the staff of the newspaper, Agonistis, the local organ of EAM, were
killed with revolvers and hand grenades.
It has been announced recently that Pergalidis, the chairman of the trade unions of the
town of Iraklion, was killed in Crete. Many
other Cretan trade union workers were arrested.
In Yithion (Lakonia), right-wing bands took
the law into their own hands in dealing with
democratic political prisoners. They dragged 32
people from the jail and executed them in the
town square. In America this would be called
lynching. In Greece it is called "democracy". '
The Press has fared no better. Eleven Greek
journalists, correspondents of the democratic
Press, have been deported, and 20 have been
sentenced to various terms of imprisonment.
Is it surprising that in such circumstances
thousands and tens of thousands of the Greek
people have left for the mountains, preferring to
fight actively for recognition of their rights than
to put themselves at the disposal of Surlas'
butchers and the like? If you read the testimony
of the partisans and their leaders you will see
what forced these people to go to the mountains.
You will see that they did so because it is the
.only way left to them, the only way in which
they can defend the honour, liberty and independence of the Greek people. The only alternative would be to bow their heads before the
right-wing "Ritos" bands, the Sulars's, Manganostes and the like.
Is it surprising, either, that in such circumstances thousands and tens of thousands of the
in~abitants of Greece prefer to find refuge in
.neIghbouring countries to avoid falling into the
hands of the gendarmes, police and fascist
bands? The witnesses Nikolaos Terzopoulos
(Agrarian Party), Panaistis Konstantinoupoulos
(Democratic Party), General Bakirdzis, Loulis
and others who were interrogated by a team of
the Commission on the island of lkaria, one of
the largest concentration camps in Greece, said
that the persecutions forced Greeks to flee to the
mountains or to neighbouring countries. The
~artisan Zogas declared that the gendarmes and
?ght-wing bands "are together killing, plundermg and ruining Greece".
General Grigoriadis, a representative of the
L~ft Liberal Party, told the Commission that the
LIberal Party "as early as August 1945 foresaw
that the persecution of democracy would plunge
cne Greek people into despair and would lead to
~':;:~~:..~: .. The assertions of the rightists

i ;;ignatme de :- ·'cr.o'" ~ ,P';;co-americain du 20 juin
~ a.ppe1le l'assistance a la
portant ~ur r·
Grece. Depu, .~ signature de cet accord, nous
le voyom, Oh s'est ~ en Grece a trancher la
tete aux democrates d'tW creur plus legeI'.
En meme temps, on s'est mis a regler le
compte des chefs des partis d'opposition. J'ro
deja parle de Zevgos, ancien ministre et membre
du comite central de l'EAM, qui avait ete assassine dans un guet-apens a Salonique le 20 mars
dernier. Le 30 mars, on a assassine dans la meme
ville, a coups de grenades et de mitraillettes,
trois collaborateurs du journal Agonistis, organe
local de l'EAM.
On a annonce recemment que Pergalidis, president des syndicats d'Heraclion, avait ete assassine en Crete. Plusieurs autres chefs syndicaux
de Crete ont ete arretes. A Ghition (Laconie),
les droites ont pris la justice entre leurs mains a
l'egard des detenus politiques democrates. Ils ont
enleve 32 prisonniers et les ont execl1tes sur la
place de la ville. En Amerique, on eiit appele
cela un lynchage. En Grece, cela s'appelle democratie.
La presse n'y a pas echappe. Onze journalistes
grecs, correspondants de la presse democratique,
ont ete deportes et 20 autres condamnes a differentes peines de prison.
" que clans ces conditions des
Quoi d'etonnant
milliers, des dizaines de milliers de. Grecs se soient
refugies dans la montagne, aimant mieux lutter
activement pour la defense de leurs droits que
de tomber aux mains des bourreaux de Sourlas
~t de ses emules? Lisez les depositions des partisans et de leurs chefs, et vous comprendrez ce
qui les a fait fuir dans la montagne. Vous verrez
que, s'ils ont choisi cette voie, c'est parce que
c'etait la seule qui leur restat pour defendre
l'hcnneur, la liberte et l'independance du peuple
grec. Sinon, il ne restait qu'a s'incliner devant
les bandes de droite des "Hitos", des Sourlas,
des Manganos et de leurs emules.

Quoi d'etonnant aussi que dans ces conditions
des milliers, des dizaines de milliers d~ Grecs
preferent se refu~ier dans les pays voisins pour
echapper aux gendarmes, a la police et aux
bandes fascistes? Les temoins Nicolaos Terzo~
poulos (du parti agraire), Panaistis Konstantinopoulos (du parti democrate), le general Bakirdzis, Loulis et autres, qui ont ete interroges
par un groupe de la Commission dans l'ile d'Icarie - qui constitue l'un des plus grands camps
de concentration de la Grece - ont declare que
c'etaient les persecutions qui poussaient le peuple
grec a se refugier dans la montagne et dans les
pays voisins. Le partisan Zogas a dit que Jes
gendarmes et les bandes de droite"operaient de
concert pour tuer,·piller, ruiner la Grece".
Un representant du parti liberal de gauche,
le general Grigoriadis, a declare devant la Commission que "des le mois d'aoiit 1945, son parti
avait prevu que les persecutions dirigees contre
la democratie en Grece rCduiraient le peuple grec
au desespoir et aboutiraient a des consequences

.uq

1250
that the rebels are coming into Greece from the
neighbouring countries are false from beginning
to end."-I repeat this phrase: "are false from
beginning to end"-"because the partisans are
operating not only in Macedonia but also in
Thessaly, throughout the whole of continental
Greece, in the Peloponnese and on the Islands.•.".
Terzoglou, the commander of a partisan unit,
stated that "all the partisans under his command
came from Thessaly," and that "all who were
persecuted ill Thessaly fled into the hills".
The connexion between the internal situation
in Greece and the so-called frontier incidents for
which the Greek Goverment is attempting to
blame the neighbouring countries is an obvious
fact. Whatever the efforts of the Greek Government to present the position so as to show that
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania are organizing
these incidents, it cannot be done. The provocative behaviour of the Greek authorities towards
the neighbouring countries is too obvious.

V.

FOREICN INTERFERENCE IN GREEK
INTERNAL AFFAIRS

tragiques..• Les affirmations de la droite selon
lesquelles les insurges penetreraient en Grece en
venant des pays voisins, sont fausses d'un bout
a l'autre, je repete, sont fausses d'un bout a
l'autre, etant donne que les partisans n'operent
pas seulement en Macedoine, mais aussi en Thes.
salie, dans toute la Grece continentale, dans le
Peloponnese et dans les Iles".
Terzoglou, chef d'un gI'Oupe de partisans, a
declare que "tous les partisans qui se trouvaient
sous ses ordres etaient originaires de Thessalie"
et que "toutes les victimes des persecutions dans
cettc province fuyaient dans la montagne".
Il y a evidemment un rapport entre la situa·
tion interieure de la Grece et les pretendus incidents de frontiere, incidents que le Gouvernement grec cherche a imputer aux pays voisins.
Quels que soient les dforts que fait ce Gouvler.
nement pour presenter les choses comme si ccs
incidents etaient provoques par la Yougoslavie,
la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, il ne saurait y parvenir.
Les actes de provocation commis par les autorites grecques a l'egard des pays voisins sont trop
evidents.

V.

L'INTERVENTION ETRANG~RE DANS LES
AFFAIRES INTERIEURES DE LA GR~CE

We should not be behaving objectively if we
overlooked one of the essential aspects of the
question under discussion and failed to point out
that the difficult internal situation in Greece,
which has spoiled the relations between Greece,
on the one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania on the other, is largely the result of foreign interference in the internal affairs of Greece.
The tragedy of Greece would doubtless have
been averted at the outset, immediately after the
liberation of Greece from the invaders, had it not
been for foreign interference. This has made it
more difficult to establish a political regime consonant with the interests of the vast majority of
the people. It has also made it more difficult to
establish friendly relations between Greece and
its neighbours.

Nous manquerions d'objectivite si nous passions sous silence I'un des aspects principaux de
la question que nous etudiohs et si nous ne di~
sions pas que la situation interieure difficile qui
s'est creee en Grece et la tension des relations
entre ce pays, d'une part, et la Yougoslavie, la
Bulgarie et l'Albanie, cl' autre part, sont dans une
grande me'lure la consequence de l'intervention
etrangere dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece. Certainement, s'il n'y avait pas eu d'intervention etrangere, on aurait pu prevenir des
le debut, des apres la liberation, la tragedie que
la Grece a vecue depuis. Cette intervention a
rendu plus difficile l'instauration dans ce pays
d'un ordre politique conforme aux interets de
la grande majorite de la population. Elle a ren·
du plus difficile l'etablissement de relations ami·
cales entre la Grece et ses voisins.
In earlier discussions of the Greek question,
Au cours des seances du Conseil consacrees a
the USSR delegation to the Security Council has l'examen de la question grecque, la delegation
repeatedly pointed out the inadmissibility of the sovietique a deja indique a plusieurs reprises
continuation of foreign interference in Greek in- qu'il etait inadmissible que des pays etrangers
ternal affairs and the inadmissibility of external continuent a intervenir dans les affaires inte·
pressure on the internal situation in Greece, and rieure~, de la Grece, qu'il etait inadmissible
indicated the necessity of providing the Greek qu'une pression exterieure s'exerce sur la situa
peopl~ with the opportunity to decide for itself
tion interieure de la Grece. Notre delegation a
the question of the political form of its Govern- dit qu'il etait necessaire de permettre au peuple
ment. This people, which has suffered severely grec de decider lui-rneme du regime politique
from the fascist occupation, deserves to have its de son pays. Cc peuple, qui a tellement souffert
voice heard, not only at home, but also abroad. de l'occupation fasciste, merite qu'on ecoute sa
In any case it has earned the right to be given voix non seulement a l'interieur, mais aussi a
the opportunity to settle its internal affairs for l'etranger. En tout cas, il merite qu'on lui per·
itself. Yet it is being deprived of this opportunity mette de decider luiomeme de ses affaires inte·
and the arsenal of methods used for this purpose rieures. Or, on le lui refuse, et pour cela on se
is, as is known, becoming more and more varied. sert, comme chacun sait, de moyens de plus en
plus varies.
A l'intervention directe que constit'.le la preDirect interference through the presence of ·1
foreign troops has recently been supplemented by sence de troupes etrangeres, sont venues s'ajouter
o

........

•

1251
new forms of interference, such as the despatch
to Greece of so-called military instructors, the
shipment of military supplies, etc. All this tends
to aggravate further the situation in the country
and is in no way contributing to the improvement of Greece's relations with the neighbouring
States. This cannot be cloaked by any proposals
to set up a commission. The proposal introduced
by the United States representative, which is a
repetition of the majority proposal of the still
operative Commission of Investigation, cannot
be justified. It does not follow from what is
demanded of Greece and its neighbours in regard to the !"dations which have arisen between
them. This proposal cannot be considered as a
means of settling Greece's relat~ons with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania and, apparently,
that is not what such a commission is intended
to do.

recemment de nouvelles formes d'intervention,'
qui se traduisent par l'envoi en Grece de pretendus instructeurs militaires, de materiel de
guerre, etc. Tout cela cond!Jit a une tension
croissante dans le pays et ne contribue nullement
a ameliorer les relations entre la Grece et les
Etats voisins. C'est la une verite que ne saurait
cacher aucune proposition tendant a creer une
commission. La proposition du representant des
Etats-Unis, qui ne fait que repeter la proposition
presentee par la majorite de l'actuelle Commission d'enquete, ne saurait se justifier. Cette proposition n'est pas conforme a ce que l'on demande a la Grece et aux pays limitrophes en ce
qui concerne leurs relations mutuelles. Elle ne
saurait etre consideree comme un moyen de regler les relations de la Grece avec la Yougoslavie,
la Bulgarie et l'Albanie, et d'ailleurs ce n'est pas
pour cela, semble-t-il, que 1'0n veut ereer une
commission de ce genre.

The establishment of a commission cannot but
be appraised by fair-minded people as a move to
set up a screen to conceal the activities of certain Powers in meddling in the internal affairs
of Greece. Such a conclusion suggests itself particularly if we bear in mind that the sponsors of
the proposal to set up a commission disagreed
with the proposal that a Security Council commission should be set up to ensure that foreign
assistance to Greece would be used only in the
interests of the Greek people.

Ceux qui reflechissent d'une fa~on objecti"e
ne sauraient voir dans la creation de cette commission qu'une manreuvre tendant a cacher l'action de certaines Puissances qui se traduit par
l'intervention dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece. C'est la une conclusion qui s'impose tout
particulierement, si nous r:.cus souvenons que
ceux qui defendent la proposition de creer une
commission se sont opposes precedemment a la
creation d'une commission du Conseil de securite chargee de veiller a ce que l'aide exterieure
accordee a la Grece soit utilisee exclusivement
dans l'interet du peuple grec.
Certes, les relations de la Grece avec la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie soulevent un certain nombre de questions qui doivent etre reglCes; et, bien entendu, il faut absolument que
les autorites grecques cessent de provoquer des
'incidents de frontiere. Mais ces questions pourraient etre rep:lees sans qu'il y ait de commission,
au moyen de negociations directes entre les
quatre pays interesses, ce qui n'exclut pas la
possibilite pour le Conseil de securite d'adresser
a ces pays un appel les invitant a regler ces
questions dans un esprit de comprehension mutuelle et a etablir entre eux des relations amicales.
Une de ces questions est celle des conventions
frontalieres. Les representants des Gouvernements yougoslave, bulgare et albanais, on le sait,
se sont montres favorables au renouvellement de
ces conventions ou a la conclusion de conventions nouvelles, alors que nous n'avons entendu
rien de semblable de la bouche du representant
grec. Bien plus, le Gouvernement grec n'a pas
repondu a l'invitation de la Bulgarie, par
exemple, qui lui a propose la remise en vigueur
de l'accord anterieur sur le reglement des incidents de frontiere.
La commission proposee par le representant
des Etats-Unis peut provoquer de nouveIles frictions, de nouveaux malentendus dans le5 relations entre ces pays; eIle risque de compromettre
son autorite par ses actions, comme le montrent
certains aspects peu brillants des travaux de la
Commission dont nous examinons en ce moment

Of course, there are several problems connected with the relations between Greece, on
the one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, on the other, which call for settlement,
quite apart from the absolute necessity for the
Greek ~Lut~orities to stop provoking frontier incidents. Such problems, however, might have
been settled without a commission, by appropriate negotiations between the four countries concerned; this does not exclude the possibility of
an appeal by the Security Council to these countries to settle such questions in a spirit of mutual
understanding and to establish friendly relations
between them.
One of these questions is that of frontier conventions. As is known, the representatives of the
Governments of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania took a positive stand on the question of the
need for renewing old conventions or concluding
new ones-but no such affirmation has been
heard from the representative of Greece. Moreover, tlle Greek Government did not, for instance, respond to Bulgaria's request to revive an
earlier agreement for settlement of frontier incidents.
The commission proposed by the United
States representative can become a source of
f?rther friction and misunderstanding in the relati~ns between these countries and can compro~llse .itself by its activities, especi3Jly if we bear
In mmd the far from brilliant experience of the
work of the Commission whose report we are

~1;1?~\(V('l>i'Y'

HC'

.

...
now considering and, in particular, the clumsy
and tactless behaviour of the so-called Subsidiary
Group of this Commission, which has been left
in Greece.
Taking all this into account, the USSR delegation deems it necessary to state that it cannot
agree with the proposal to set up the commission
proposed by the United States representative.
In his speech at the hundred and forty-seventh
Security Council meeting on 27 June1 the
United States representative attempted to prove
the responsibility of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania for frontier incidents. Rather, he did
not so much try to prove this, as to suggest to us
the idea that the guilt of these countries was obvious and required no proof-that it could not
be otherwise.

le rapport, et en particulier les initiatives maladroites et depo~rvues de tact du Groupe dit subsidiaire qui a ete laisse en Grece.

. The United States representative went even
further than the proposal to establish a commission. In proposing the adoption of the artificial,
far-fetched and ill-founded wording of the proposals approved by certain members of the Commission, namely, that the future action of Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania (what kind of
action no one knows) should be described as a
threat to the peace, he is thereby imitating those
who, as experience has shown, lose all sense of
p;:oportion in their attempts to accuse these
countries. With regard to the statement on the
possibility of applying to these countries Chapter
VII of. the Charter, which provides for compulsory measures, that can be answered by the wellknoW!' ltussian proverb: "Don't say 'hup' before
you ju.~.;.p.·'
Does it need to be proved that the Security
Council must consider all questions to which its
attention is drawn by any State? The Council
cannot and has no right, without considering a
concrete question, a concrete dispute or a concrete situation, to give a general authority to
any commission whatsoever to decide whether a
threat to the peace or a breach of the peace exists

Pour toutes ces raisons, la delegation de
I'URSS estime necessaire de declarer qu'elle ne
peut accepter la proposition du representant des
Etats-Unis de creer une commission.
Dans la declaration qu'il a faite a la centquarante-septieme seance du Conseil de securite,
le 27 juin\ le representant des Etats-Unis a tente
de prouver la culpabilite de la Yougoslavie, de
la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie dans les incidents de
frontiere. A vrai dire, il a moins cherche a la
prouver qu'a nous faire croire que la culpabilite
de ces pays etait evidente, qu'elle n'avait besoin
d'aucune preuve et qu'il ne pouvait meme en
etre autrement.
Je ne vous cacherai pas que je reste un peu
etonne de la legerete avec laquelle le representant des Etats-Unis a condamne ces pays.
Les conclusions que le representant des EtatsUnis a presentees au cours de son intervention
ne prouvent rien, quelles que soient les phrases
sonores qui les emaillent. Ce n'est pas la premiere
fois que nous voyons les representants des EtatsUnis se presenter avec des resolutions toutes
pretes dans leur serviette, comme ils 1'0nt fait ala premiere seance du Conseil consacree a la
question grecque, et introduire des resolutions
avant meme que la question n'ait ete examinee
par le Conseil de securite. C'est parce qU'il ne
tient pas compte du Conseil de securite -. on ne
saurait l'expliquer autrement - que le representant des Etats-Unis a presente sa resolution
avant meme que le rapport de la Commission
ait ete discute par le Conseil de securite. Le ton
severe de sa declaration ne change rien a la situation.
Le representant des Etats-Unis est alle encore
plus loin; il ne s'est pas borne a proposer la
creation d'une commission. En voulant faire
adopter pour des propositions approuvees par
certains membres de la Commission un texte non
justifie et qu'il y rattache artificiellement, texte
qui qualifie de menace a la paix les actions futures de la You~oslavie, de la Bulgarie et de
l'Albanie (on ne sait lesquelles), le representant
des Etats-Unis ne fait que suivre ceux qui, I'experience l'a montre, perdent le sens de la mesure
lorsqu'il s'agit d'accuser ces pays. Quant a sa
declaration selon laquelle il serait possible d'appliquer a l'egard de ces pays le Chapitre VII de
la Charte, qui prevoit des mesures de coercition,
on ne peut y repondre que par le proverbe russe:
"Ne criez pas "Hop la!" avant d'avoir saute."
Est-il besoin de demontrer que le Conseil de
securite a le devoir d'examiner toutes les questions portees a sa connaissance par I'un que!conque des Etats? Le Conseil ne saurait avoir le
droit, sans examen prealable des cas d'especequ'il s'agisse de questions, de differends ou de
situations - d'accorder a une commission, queUe
qu'elle sait, le pouvair general de decider s'iI

'See Official Records of the Security Council, Second
Year, No. 51.

---;Voir les Proces-verbaux officiels du Conseil de securitl,
.
Deuxieme Annee, No 51.

I do not conceal a certain surprise at the lighthearted way in which the United States representative has passed sentence on these countries.
The conclusions proffered by the United
States representative, however shrilly they may
have been voiced, still prove nothing. This is not
the first time that we witness United States
representatives arriving with ready-made resolutions in their despatch cases at the very first
meeting devoted to the Greek question and submitting such resolutions even before the question
has been discussed in the Security Council. The
tabling by the United States representative of a
resolution, even before the Commission's report
was discussed in the Security Council, can only
be interpreted as showing disregard for the Security Council. The angry tone in which he
spoke does not change the situation.

"'" or not. Precisely that, however, is the mode of existe ou non une menace contre la paix ou une
operation proposed to us by the United States
reprc.sentative.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND PROPOSALS

The following conclusions are implicit in what
I have said:
1. The Commission's report and the f, ctual
data which it has collected confirm that the
Greek authorities are responsible for the incidents which have taken place on the frontiers of
Greece with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania.

rupture de la paix. Or, c'est bien ainsi que le
representant des Etats-Unis noilS propose d'agir.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS ET PROPOSITIONS

A la lumiere de ce que je viens de dire, les
conclusions suivantes s'imposent:
1. Le rapport de la Commission et les donnees de fait reunies par celle-ci confirmentque
ce sont les autorites grecques qui portent la responsabilite des incidents qui se sont produits
aux frontieres greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et
greco-albanaise.
2. Yugos!<:.via, Bulgaria and Albania, in re2. En accueillant les refugies grecs qui cherceiving Greek refugees seeking shelter on their chent asUe sur leur territoire, la Yougoslavie, la
territories, are acting in accordance with estab- Bulgarie et l'Albanie agissent en conformite des
lished and generally accepted norIns of inter- normes etablies et universellement acceptees du
national law.
droit international.
3. The Greek Government's charge that
3. L'accusation portee par le Gouvemement
Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania are provoking grec contre la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Alfrontier incidents is unfounded and contradicts banie et selon laquelle ces pays provoqueraient
the facts. Such a charge can onlybe considered as des incidents de frontiere est sans fondement et
an attempt on the part of the Greek Government contraire aux faits. On ne saurait envisager une
to distract the attention of world public opinion pareille accusation autrement que comme une
from the difficult and steadily worsening intemal tentative faite par le Gouvemement grec pour
situation which has arisen in Greece since that detourner l'attention de l'opinion mondiale de
country's liberation from the fascist occupation la situation interieure qui s'est creee en Grece
and to create the impression that the situation apres sa liberation de l'occupant fasciste, et dont
prevailing in Greece is the result of interference la gravite ne fait que croitre, et pour donner
by the neighbouring countries in the internal af- l'impression que cette situation est la consefairs of Greece.
quence de l'intervention des pays limitrophes
dans les affaires interieures de la Grece.
4. La cause principale de toutes les difficul4. The fundamental reason for all the complications in the relations between Greece, on. the tes dans les relations entre la Grece, d'une part,
one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Al- et la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie et l'Albanie,
bania, on the other, may be found in the internal d'autre part, doit etre recherchee dans la situaconditions in Greece, which are characterized by tion interieure de la Grece qui est caracterisee
a d.::bauch of terror against the democratic par- par la terreur dechainee contre les partis et orties and organizations and, above all, against ganisations democratiques, et surtout contre les
the forces which in the past led the struggle of groupes qui avaient dirige la lutte du peuple
the Greek people against the occupation forces. grec contre les occupants. Cette terreur s'accomThis terror is accompanied by the lawlessness pagne d'actes de banditisme et de violence perand violence of various fascist bands and groups, petres par divers groupes et bandes fascistes, qui
which collaborated with the enemy during the ont collabore avec l'enneIni pendant l'occupation
occupation of Greece.
de la Grece.
5. L'une des causes principales qui ont pro5. One of the fundamental reasons which
have produced the tense situation in Greece, and voque la tension en Grece, qui ont cree, en fait,
have in fact brought the country to a state of un etat de guerre civile dans ce pays et qui concivil war, and which are aggravating relations tribuent aux mauvaises relations entre la Grece
between Greece and its neighbours, is the per- et ses voisins, c'est l'intervention etrangere dans
sisting foreign interference in Greek internal les affaires interieures de la Grece, intervention
affairs which, however, is not ascribable to qui se poursuit, mais qui n'est pas le fait des pays
neighbouring countries.
.
limitrophes de la Grece.
6. A number of quesions conne~ted with the
6. Des questions ayant trait aux relations
relations of Greece with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria entre la Grece, d'une part, et la Yougoslavie, la
~nd Albania, including the question of prolong- Bulgarie et l'Albanie, d'autre part, et notam~g existing or concluding new frontier conven~ ment la question de la prolongation des convent~ox:s, must and can be settled by direct nego- tions frontalieres ou de la conclusion de noutiations .and agreements between the countries velles conventions, r~uvent et doivent etre reconcerned.
glees au moyen de negociations directes et d'accords entre les pays interesses.
. 7. The proposal to establish a Security Coun7. La proposition tendant a creer une comcil commission with rights and powers, as sug- mission du Conseil de securite investie des droits
gested in the T]nited States representative's draft et pouvoirs mentionnes dans le projet de resolu-

~ Liz' .....

c

_

1254
resolution, is not called for by the circumstances
and is not in conformity with the interests of the
speediest settlement of the disa~reements and
misunderstandings between Greece and her
neighbours and cannot be justified. The establishment of such a commission may prove to be
a source of additional complications in the relations between these countries. Moreover, the
establishment of such a commission can only be
interpreted as a wish to set up a screen to conceal outside interference by certain Powers in the
internal affairs of Greece.
8. The proposal that future incidents on
Greece's frontiers with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and
Albania should be defined as constituting a
threat to the peace is unfounded and inadmissible.
In the light of the foregoing, I think it essential to submit, for the consideration of the Security Council, the following proposals in the
form of a resolution:
"Having considered the report of the Security
Council Commission of Investigation concerning
Greek Frontier Incidents,
"The Security Council considers it to be est,abblished:
"1. That the Greek authorities are to blame
for the incidents which have occurred on the
frontiers of Greece with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria
and Albania. The investigation of the situation
on the spot conducted by the Commission has
confirmed the connexion between the incidents
and the general hostile policy pursued by the
present Greek Government towards Greece's
neighbours;
"2. That the internal situation in Greece, as
can be seen from the report, characterized as it
is by an exacerbation of the conflict between the
Greek people a.nd the anti-democratic forces
grouped around the present Greek Government,
is the fundamental factor responsible for the
strained situation in the northern frontier areas
of Greece also, of which Greek militarists have
taken advantage to engage in provocative acts
against Yugoslavia, Albania and Bulgaria. The
present Greek Government has not only failed
to check these acts but, on the contrary, ha"
encouraged and justified them.
"3. That the state of affairs prevailing in
Greece, including its northern areas, is to a considerable extent the result of foreign intervention in the internal affairs of Greece. This foreign intervention is exploited by anti-democratic
circles in Greece, among which a prominent influence is exercised by elements previously compromised by collaboration with the fascist occupation forces, and it is one of the causes of the
further aggravation of the Greek situation. That
intervention complicates the possibility of establishing normal relations between Greece and the
neighbouring countries.
"With a view to settling the relations between
Greece, on the one hand, and Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania, on the other,

a....

tion du representant des Etats-Unis, ne decoule
pas de la situation, ne conduit pas a un reglement rapide des questions que posent les frictions et les malentendus qui surgissent entre la
Grece et ses voisins, et ne saurait done se justifier. La creation de cette commission pourrait
devenir une source de nouvelles complications
dans les relations entre ces pays. En outre, la
creation de cette commission ne saurait etre interpretee que comme une tentative de dresser
un paravent qui masquerait 1'intervention de
certaines Puissances etrangeres dans les affaires
interieures de la Grece.
8. La proposition de qualifier de menace
contre la paix les incidents qui se produiraient a
l'avenir aux frontieres greco-yougoslave, grecobulgare et greco-albanaise, est denuee de fondement et inadmissible.
Pour les raisons que je viens d'enoncer, j'estime devoir soumettre a 1'examen du Conseil de
securite la proposition suivante, sous forme de
resolution:
"Ayant etudie le rapport de la Commission
d'enquete du Conseil de securite sur les incidents
survcnus le long des frontieres nord de la Grece,
"Le Conseil de securite considere comme etabli:
"1. Que ce sont les autorites grecques qui
sont responsables des incidents survenus aux
frontieres greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et
greco-albanaise. L'enquete que la Commission
a menee sur place a confirme le rapport qui
existe entre ces incidents et la politique generale
d'hostilit{ envers les pays limitrophes de la Grece,
qui est celle du Gouvernement grec actuel;
"2. Que la situation interieure de la Grece,
telle qu'elle ressort du rapport, et qui est caracterisee par l'intensite croissante de la lutte entre
le peuple grec et les forces antidemocratiques
groupees autour du Gouvernement grec actuel,
constitue, dans les regions frontieres du nord de
la Grece egalement, la cause essentielle de la
tension que la clique militaire grecque utilise
pour susciter des actes de provocation a 1'egard
de la Yougoslavie, de l'Albanie et de la Bulga.rie.
Non seulement le Gouvernement grec actuel ne
fait rien pour arreter ces actes de provocation:
il les encourage au contraire, et cherche ales
justifier.
"3. Que la situation qui regne en Grece, et
notamment dans le nord de ce pays, est dans
une grande mesure la consequence de 1'intervention etrangere dans les affaires interieures de la
Grece. Cette intervention est exploitee par les
milieux antidemocratiques grecs, dans lesquels
des elements compromis par leur collaboration
passee avec les occupants fascistes sont particulierement influents, et elle constitue 1'une des
causes de l'aggravation croissante de la situation
du pays. Cette intervention entrave l'etablissement de relations normales entre la Grece et les
Etats limitrophes.
"En vue d'un reglement des relations entre la
Grece, d'une part, et la Yougoslavie, la Bulgarie
et I'Albanie, d'autre part,
..~

•
"The Security Council recommends:
"1. That the Greek Government take steps
to put an end to the frontier incidents on the
borders with Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania;
"2. That normal diplomatic relations be established between Greece, on the one hand, and
Bulgaria and Albania, on the other, and that
diplomatic relations between Greece and Yugoslavia be restored to normal;
"3. That the Governments of Greece, Yugoslavia, Bulgaria and Albania renew previously
operative, or conclude new, bilateral frontier
conventions, providing for the settlement of frontier incidents;
"4. That the Greek Government, on the one
hand, and the Governments of Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Albania, on the other, settle the
question of refugees in a spirit of mutual understanding with the desire to establish friendly
relations between their countries;
"5. That the Greek Government put through
the necessary measures guaranteeing the elimination of all discrimination against citizens belonging to the Macedonian and Albanian ethnic
groups on Greek territory, the aim being to
afford t!lem facilities to use their native language
and develop their national culture;
"6. That the Governments of Albania, Bulgaria, Yugoslavia and Greece report to the Security Council at the end of three months on the
execution of the recommendations contained in
the Council's present resolution.
"With a view to improving the internal political situation in Greece, creating conditions for
the formation of an independent democratic
Greek State and bettering relations between
Greece and the neighbouring countries,

"The Security Council Recommends:
"That foreign troops and foreign military personnel be recalled from Greece.
"To ensure the proper use of the foreign economic assistance extended to Greece,
"The Security Council resolves:
"To set up a special commission which by appropriate supervision would ensure that such
assistance is used only in the interests of the
Greek people."
The PRESIDENT: I should like to inform the
Council about the programme for the remainder
of the week. I intend to caU two meetings on
Thursday and one meeting on Friday morning.
The Thursday meetings will be devoted in the
morning to the report of the Military Staff Committee, and in the afternoon I propose to hold a
closed meeting on the governorship of Trieste.
The meeting on Friday will be devoted again to
the Greek question.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (United Kingdom) :

As I suggested at the last meeting, if you receive

"Le Conseil de securite recommande:
"1. Que le Gouvernem("nt grec prenne des
mesures pour faire cesser les incidents le long
des frontieres greco-yougoslave, greco-bulgare et
greco-albanaise;
"2. L'etablissement de relations diplomatiques normales entre la Grece, d'une part, et la
Bulgarie et I'Albanie, d'autre part, et la normalisation des relations diplomatiques entre la
Grece et la Yougoslavie;
"3. Que les Gouvernements de la Grece, de
la Yougoslavie, de la Bulgarie et de l'Albanie
renouvellent les conventions frontalihes bilaterales qui etaient autrefois en vigueur et qui prevoyaient le reglement des incid("nts de frontiere,
ou en concluent de nouvelles;
"4. Que.le Gouvernement grec, d'une part,
et les Gouvemements yougoslave, bulgare et albanais, d'autre part, reglent la question des refugies dans un esprit de comprehension mutuelle,
afin d'etablir des relations amicales entre ces
pays;
"5. Que le Gouvernement grec prenne les
mesures necessaires pour supprimer toute discrimination a l'egard des citoyens appartenant aux
groupes ethniques macedoniens et albanais, et
qui resident en territoire grec, en vue de leur
donner la possibilite de se servir de leur langue
maternelle et de developper leur culture nationale;
"6. Que les Gouvernements albanais, bulgare, yougoslave et grec rendent compte au Conseil de securite, a l'expiration d'un delai de trois
mois, de l'execution des recommandations contenues dans la presente resolution du Consei!.
"Afin d'assainir la .situation politique interieure de la Grece et de creer des conditions
favorables a l'etablissement d'un Etat grec democratique et independant et a l'amelioration
des relations entre la Grece et les pays limitrophes,
"Le Conseil de securite recommande:
"Le rappel des troupes etrangeres et du personnel militaire etrangerqui se trouvent enGrece.
"Afin d'assurer l'utilisation convenable de
l'aide economique etranghe accordee a la Grece,
"Le Conseil de securiee decide:
"De creer une Commission speciale qui garantira, par un controle adequat, que cette aide
sera utilisee uniquement dans l'interet du peuple
grec."
Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je voudrais mettre le Conseil au courallt du programme prevu pour le reste de la semaine. J'ai
l'intention de convoquer le Conseil pour deux
seances jeudi et pour une vendredi matin. La
seance de jeudi matin sera consacree au rapport
du Comite d'etat-major, et je propose de tenir
l'apres-midi une seance privee, consacree a la
designation du gouverneur de Trieste. La seance
du vendredi sera, de nouveau, consacree a la
question grecque.
Sir Alexander CADOGAN (Royaume-Uni)
(traduit de l'anglais): Comme je I'ai suggere a

1256
any names of speakers who wish to take part in
this debate, would you consider the possibility of
fixing the meeting on the Greek question' for
Thursday afternoon, perhaps starting later tha.n
three o'clock, if you like, at three-thirty?
I do not believe that the Council wishes to
devote the whole afternoon to the Trieste question. I hope we may be able to take it a stage
would be ready, to consider discussing this question. I hope we may be able to take it a stage
further, but I do not believe we shall reach any
final deciskm on Thursday, and I should not
anticipate that that meeting would last more
than a half-hour or so.
At the pace we are going, discussion of the
Greek question may continue for a very long
time, which I think is dangerous. Therefore I
ask you, if you have any names of speakers who
would be ready, to consider discussing this question on Thursday afternoon as well as on Friday
morning. That would mean two meetings or one
and a half meetings devoted to the Greek question.

notre derniere reunion, je vous demande d'examiner la possibilite de fixer a jeudi apres-midi la
seance relative a l~ question grecque. S'il y a des
orateurs qui se font inscrire pour prendre part
au debat, cette seance pourrait commencer apres
15 heures, a 15 h. 30 par exemple, si vous etes
de cet avis.
'
J e ne crois lJas que le Conseil veuille consacrer
tout l'apres-- :idi a la question de Trieste. J'espere que nous pourrons faire faire un pas en
avant a cette question, mais je ne crois pas que
nous aboutissions a aucune decision definitive
jeudi, et je ne prevois paS que la seance dure
plus d'une demi-heure ou a peu pres.
Au train dont nous alIons, la discussion de la
question grecque peut continuer tres longtemps,
ce qui, a mon sens, est un danger. Je vous demande done d'envisager de discuter cette question des jeudi apres-midi aussi bien .que vendredi matin s'il y a des orateurs inscrits qui soient
prets a prendre la parole. Cela ferait ainsi deux
seances ou une seance et demie qui seraient consacrees a la question grecque.

The PRESIDENT: I am quite ready to accept
the proposal of the United Kingdom representative, provided there will be speakers. At this mo~
ment there are two speakers on my list, one of
whom asked to speak on Friday. I shall make
some inquiries among the representatives, and if
there are several speakers, I shall then place the
Greek question as the next point of the agenda
after the issue of Trieste.

Le- PREsIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je suis
tout dispose a accepter la proposition du representant du Royaume-Uni, a condition qu'il y ait
des orateurs. En ce moment, j'ai deux orateurs
inscrits dont l'un a demande a parler vendredi...
Je m'informerai aupres des representants, ets'il
y a plusieurs orateurs je mettrai la question
grecque a l'ordre du jour comme second point,
.
apres la question de Trieste.

The next meeting will take place on Thursday
at 10.30 a.m.

La prochaine seance aura lieu jeudi a 10 h. 30.. 1

j

The meeting rose at 7.42 p.m.

La seance est levee a 19 h. 42.

j
I

r
~

SALES AGENTS-OF UNITED NATIONS PUBLICATIONS*'"

I! DEPOSITAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS.UNIES

i
i

I

i ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana
S. A.
Calle Alsina 500
Buen~s Aires

AUSTRALIA-AUSTRALIE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
Sydney
BELGI~-BELGIQUE

Agence et Messageries de la
Presse
14-22 rue du Persil
Bruxelles

BOLIVIA-BOLIVIE
Libreria Cientffica y
Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
·Casilla 972
LaPaz

CANADA-CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
Toronto

CHILE-CHILl
Edmundo Pizarro
Merced 846
Santiago

CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
Shanghai
COSTARICA

COSTA·RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
San Jose

CUBA-CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
La Hahana
CZECHOSLOVAKIA

TCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic
Narodni Trida 9
Prahal

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munskgaard
Norregade 6
Kjohenhavn

"DOMINICAN REPUBLIC

REPUBLIQUE
DOMINICAlNE
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
Apartado 656
Ciudad Trujillo

ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Muiioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octuhre 703
Casilla 10-24
Guayaquil

Jj'INLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskauskatu
Helsinki

FRANCE-FRANCE
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue SoufHot
Paris Ve

GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie internationale
Place de la Constitution
Athenes
GUATEMALA

GUATEMALA
Jose Gouhaud
Gouhaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
5a Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
Guatemala

HAITI-HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale I11-B
Port·au-Prince

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery
Co.
Scindia House
New Delhi

IRAN-IRAN
Baugahe Piaderow
731 Shah Avenue
Teheran

IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
Baghdad

LEBANON-LIBAN
Lihrairie universelle
Beirut

NETHERLk~DS'I
PAYS-BAS

N. V. Martinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
s'Gravenhage

.

1

1
I

1

NEW ZEALAND

NOUVELLE·ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch
Waring Taylar Street
Wellington

NORWAY-NORVEGE
Norsk Bokimport A/S
Edv. Storms Gate 1
Osk

SWEDEN-SUEDE
C. E. Fritze's Kungl.
Hofhokhandel A.·B.
Fredsgata,n 2
Stockholm

SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Librairie Payot S. A.
Lausanne

.....................

Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
Zurichl

SYRIA-SYRIE
Lihrairie universelle
Damascus
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA

UNION SUD~AFRICAINE
Central News Agency Ltd.
COlmnissioner & Rissik Stll.
Johanneshurg
UNITED KINGDOM

ROYAUME-UNI
H:M. Stationery Office
P.O. Box 569
London, S.E. 1

UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA

ETATS-UNIS D:A.MERIQUE
International Documents .
Service
Columhia University Press:
2960 Broadway
NewYork27,N. Y.
YUGOSLAVIA

YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavno Preduzece

Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska ID. 36
Belgrade

1
