V.

143

Resolutiflns adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

sary, be the subject of complementary agreements concluded for this purpose.

General Assembly and by the Industrial Development Board of the Organization upon authorization of the General Conference of the Organization.

Article 17

40/181. Food and agricultural problems

BUDGETARY AND FINANCIAL MATTERS
(a) The Organization recognizes the desirability of establishing close
budgetary and financial relationships with the United Nations in order that
the administrative operations of the United Nations and the agencies
within the United Nations system shall be carried out in the most efficient
and economical manner possible, and that the maximum measure of coordination and uniformity with respect to these operations shall be
secured.
(b) The Organization agrees to accept the Statute of the Joint Inspection Unit.
(c) The Organization agrees to conform, as far as may be practicable
and appropriate, to standard practices and forms recommended by the
United Nations.
(d) Financial and budgetary arrangements entered into between the
United Nations and the Organization shall be approved in accordance with
their respective constitutive instruments.
(e) In the preparation of the budget of the Organization, the DirectorGeneral of the Organization shall consult with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations with a view to achieving, in so far as is practicable, uniformity in presentation of the budgets of the United Nations and of the
agencies within the United Nations system for the purposes of providing a
basis for comparison of the several budgets.
(I) The Organization agrees to transmit its proposed budgets to the
United Nations not later than when the said budgets are transmitted to its
members so as to enable the General A~sembly of the United Nations to
examine them and make recommendations, in accordance with paragraph
3 of Article 17 of the Charter of the United Nations.
(g) Representatives of the Organization shall be entitled to participate,
without vote, in the deliberations of the General Assembly or any committee thereof established by it, at all times when the budget of the Organization or general administrative or fmancial questions concerning the Organization are under consideration.

The General Assembly'.
Recalling the Declaration and the Programme of Action
on the Establishment of a New International Economic
Order, contained in its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of l May 197 4, the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, contained in its resolution 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 1974, resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic
co-operation, and the International Development Strategy
for the Third United Nations Development Decade, contained in the annex tn its resolution 35/56 of 5 December
1980,
Reaffirming the Universal Declaration on the Eradication of Hunger and Malnutrition adopted by the World
Food Conference 23 and the Programme of Action adopted
by the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural
Development, 24
Stressing the imperative need to keep food and
agricultural issues at the centre of global attention,
Stressing also the urgent need for the international community in its development efforts to take determined
action towards the elimination of, inter alia, poverty, hunger and malnutrition, and infant mortality,
Reaffirming the Declaration on the Critical Economic
Situation in Africa, adopted by the General Assembly on 3
December 1984, 25
Reaffirming that food and agricultural problems in
developing countries should be considered in a comprehensive manner in their different dimensions and in their
immediate, short-term and long-term perspectives,
Affirming the urgent need for sustained international
support for the efforts of the African countries towards
rehabilitation and long-term development of their food
and agriculture,
Reaffirming that the right to food is a universal human
right which should be guaranteed to all people and, in that
context, believing in the general principle that food should
not be used as an instrument of political pressure,
Reaffirming also that the maintenance of peace and
security and the strengthening of international co-operation in food and agriculture are important for improved
economic conditions and enhanced food security,
I. Reaffirms its resolutions 38/ l 58 of 19 December
1983 and 39/ 166 of 17 December 1984, and Economic
and Social Council resolution 1984/54 of 25 July 1984, as
well as all other relevant resolutions concerning food and
agriculture, and calls for their immediate and effective
implementation;
2. Welcomes the conclusions and recommendations,
as adopted, contained in the report of the World Food
Council on the work of its eleventh ministerial session,
held in Paris from 10 to 13 June 1985; 26
3. Welcomes also the conclusions and recommendations contained in the tenth annual report of the Committee on Food Aid Policies and Programmes of the World
Food Programme 27 and m the report of the Committee on
its nineteenth session; 28

Article 18

UNITED NATIONS LAISSEZ-PASSER
Officials of the Organization shall be entitled, in accordance with such
special arrangements as may be concluded between the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the Organization, to use
the laissez-passer of the United Nations.
Article HI

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT
The Secretary-General of the United Nations and the Director-General
of the Organization may enter into such supplementary arrangements for
the implementation of this Agreement as may be found desirable.
Article 20

AMENDMENT AND REVISION
This Agreement may be amended or revised by agreement between the
United Nations and the Organization and any such amendment or revision
agreed upon between the Economic and Social Council of the United
Nations and the Industrial Development Board of the Organization shall
come into force on approval by tht i ieneral Assembly of the United
Nations and the Gt>neral Conference of the Organization.
Article l 1

ENTRY INTO FORCE
This Agreement shall enter into force on its approval by the General
Assembly of the United Nations and the General Conference of the Organization.
(b) Without prejudice to the provision of paragraph (a) of this article,
the present Agreement shall be applied provisionally when it has been
approved by the Economic and Social Council upon authori7.ation of the
(a)

23 Report of the World Food Conferenc,•. Rome. 5-16 November 1974
(United Nations publication, Sales No. E. 75 11.A.3), chap. I.
24 See Food and Agricullure Organization ,1fthe I 1nited Nat1um. Report of
the W(lr/d Conference on Agra,·,an Refiirm and Ri,,a! [)e,·rlf'pme'II Rome.
17-20 July 1919 (WCARRD,REP). part one
J5 Resolution 39/29, annex.
26 O/licial Records of the Ueneral Assemblv. F.:m,eth Spssi•m, Supplement
No. /9(A/40/19), part one.
•

27 See El 1985/110. The annual report was issued as document WFP/CFA:
19/21.
28 See World Food Programmr, Report of the Nineteenth Session of the

Comm11t,•1· on Food Aid Pn/ic1e-. and Programmes. Rome. 20-3/ Mar JV/15

(WFP ("FA 19122)

•

144

General Assembly-Fo_m_·_et_h_Sess
__i_o_n_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ __

4. Affirms that food represents an essential element of
the world's economic, social and political development
process and should therefore be treated with the highest
priority by all Governments in their rededication to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations in this fortieth anniversary year of the United
Nations and to the commitment of the World Food Conference to eliminate hunger and malnutrition;
5. Reaffirms that urgent action should be taken to
increase food production, which is one of the most important elements in meeting the food needs of the developing
countries; that, in this regard, sustained efforts at the
national, regional and international levels should be pursued; and that the national food strategies, plans and programmes of developing countries should play a central role
in the process of establishing priorities, in co-ordinating
national and international funding and in the application
of technology and human resources development, in order
to promote food production and increase the national selfreliance of the developing countries;
6. Welcomes the positive efforts of developing
countries for the development of their food and
agricultural production, and calls upon the international
community to provide effective support to those efforts;
7. Emphasizes the need for priority attention at the
national, subregional, regional and international levels to
the timely delivery of food to those requiring assistance,
especially in African countries, and the need to assist
recipient countries in developing and strengthening their
logistic, transportation and administrative capacities, as
well as internal distribution systems, and, that emergency
food aid programmes should, whenever possible, procure
supplies within the region;
8. Appeals to the international community to provide,
as a matter of extreme urgency, the logistic agricultural
inputs, and fulfil the unmet aid needs of the drought and
famine-affected African countries;
9. Notes with deep concern the substantial decline in
international market prices for agricultural commodities
over the last five years, which, coupled with deteriorating
terms of trade for commodity exporting countries, have
had particularly serious effects on developing countries.
and in this context calls for appropriate measures to overcome foreign exchange constraints, including measures to
diversify and increase export earnings, and for continuous
efforts for the conclusion of commodity agreements and
arrangements, as appropriate, particularly within the
framework of the Integrated Programme for Commodities,
and agrees that efforts should continue in order to improve
the effectiveness of appropriate export earning stabilization schemes and to seek agreement on more effective cooperation in international commodity policy, notably
through the early entry into force of the Agreement Establishing the Common Fund for Commodities; 29
10. Emphasizes that the success of efforts of developing countries to solve their food and agricultural problems
requires, as a major element, economic growth, which is
severely constrained by, inter alia, the burden of external
debt; and that, in accordance with recommendations of the
World Food Council at its eleventh ministerial session,
adjustment programmes for resolution of debt problems
should take into account the food and social needs of the
developing countries on a sustained and long-term basis;
11. Stresses the need to continue and to intensify the
support for programmes and policies for increasing food
and agricultural production and raising nutritional stand-

ards in developing countries, particularly in Africa and the
least developed countries, and in this context urges the
international community, particularly the developed
countries, to take determined action, in support of the
efforts of developing countries, to increase the flow of
resources, particularly the concessional flow by, inter alia.
increasing their contributions to multilateral agencies;
12. Calls upon the parties concerned urgently to
achieve the conclusion of the negotiations on the second
replenishment of the International Fund for Agricultural
Development in the light of the broad agreement achieved
at the seventh meeting of the consultation on the replenishment;
13. Urges developed countries to provide the International Development Association with the necessary financial resources, including, inter alia, supplementary financing, to enable it to cover any shortfall and to increase its
assistance to developing countries, particularly in the
development of food and agriculture;
14. Recommends that the International Wheat Council
should continue to explore the possibilities of raising the
minimum overall commitment under the Food Aid Convention to 10 million tons;
15. Recommends that the Committee on Trade in
Agriculture of the General Agreement on Tariffs and
Trade should continue, within its mandate, to accelerate to
the greatest extent possible progress towards more operationally effective rules and disciplines for trade in agriculture, bearing in mind the concerns of all developing
countries, including wider and more predictable access to
markets;
16. Urges all countries to demonstrate the requisite
political will by refraining from creating obstacles to
agricultural imports, especially those from developing
countries, and all exporting countries, particularly
developed countries, to endeavour to limit export subsidies and analogous practices which might hinder trade,
especially that of developing countries;
17. Notes with satisfaction paragraph 2 (e) of Trade and
Development Board resolution 286 (XXVIII) of 6 April
1984, 30 in which the Board decided that, in the annual
review of the problems of protectionism and structural
adjustment, attention should be given to strengthening the
participation of developing countries in agro-industrial
production and trade and, in this regard, paragraph (g) of
Board decision 310 (XXX) of 29 March 1985, 31 in which
the Board recommended that, in preparing the documentation for the annual review to be carried out at the thirtysecond session of the Board, the secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development should
give particular attention to this question and special attention to the difficulties of the African and the least
developed countries;
18. Recognizes the important contribution and potential of women in the development of the food and
agricultural sectors and the need adequately to reward
their contribution to those sectors, and urges Governments to ensure and enhance women's participation in the
formulation and implementation of national food and
agricultural policies, plans and projects;
19. Recognizes the importance of implementing famine prevention measures and, in this regard, welcomes the
increased activity and proposed strengthening of the Global Information and Early Warning System in Food and
Agriculture of the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, and emphasizes the importance of

29 United Nations publication, Sales No. E.81.11.D.8
JU See Ojfina/ Records o(the Cieneral 4ssemb/y. J'hirll•-mnth Sernon. S111•
p/emenl No. 15 (N19/I 5). vol. L part one, sect. II.A

l I Ibid .. Fortlf?lh S,•rnon. Supp/emrnt No. 15 (N40115), vol. I, part one,
sect. 11.B.

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee_____________l_4_5

establishing and improving national and regional early
warning systems;
20. Appreciates the measures taken by the World Food
Programme to ensure speedy and timely delivery of food
aid as well as the development of an information system
for the dissemination on a regular basis of all relevant
information on food aid to facilitate planning and operational co-ordination;
21. Urges the donor community to provide the necessary financial support for the effective implementation of
the programmes of action adopted by the FAO World
Conference on Fisheries Management and Development; 32
22. Urges the World Food Council, within the context
of its mandate, to mobilize and sustain greater efforts in
the struggle to overcome hunger, to continue to review and
report on major problems and policy issues, and to continue to serve as a co-ordinating mechanism in the field of
food and other related policy matters within the United
Nations system and, in this connection, notes that the
Council, in its report to the General Assembly, 33 addressed
the question of strengthening its effectiveness and other
related issues, and expresses the hope that necessary
action, as appropriate, will be taken in that regard;
23. Stresses the need to strengthen subregional,
regional and interregional co-operation for the promotion
of food security and the development of agriculture in
developing countries and, in this context, calls upon the
relevant entities of the United Nations system to accord
priority support to economic and technical co-operation
among developing countries in food and agriculture.

States, thereby contributing to the establishment of the
new international economic order;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the
Economic and Social Council at its second regular session
of 1989, a comprehensive and analytical report, in order to
ensure systematic and comprehensive consideration of the
implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, in accordance with the provisions of article 34 thereof;
4. Invites the organs, organizations and bodies of the
United Nations system to facilitate the implementation of
the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States in
their respective spheres of action.
119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/183. Specific action related to the particular
needs and problems of land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 320 I (S-VI) and 3202 (S-VI) of
May 1974, containing the Declaration and the Programme of Action on the Establishment ofa New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of 12 December
1974, containing the Charter of Economic Rights and
Duties of States, and 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975
on development and international economic co-operation,
which laid the foundations of the new international economic order,
Recalling also its resolution 37/204 of 20 December
1982 on the review of the implementation of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
Recalling further its resolution 39/ 163 of I 7 December
1984, in which it decided to establish an Ad Hoe Committee of the Whole to Review the Implementation of the
Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States,
1. Takes note of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee
of the Whole to Review the Implementation of the Charter
of Economic Rights and Duties of States; 34
2. Urges all States to examine further the implementation of the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of

The General Assembly,
Reiterating the specific actions related to the particular
needs of the land-locked developing countries stated in
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
resolutions 63 (III) of 19 May 1972, 35 98 (IV) of 31 May
1976, 36 123 (V) of 3 June 1979 37 and 137 (VI) of 2 July
1983 38 and Trade and Development Board resolution 319
(XXXI) of 27 September 1985, 39
Recalling the provisions of its resolutions 31/ 157 of 21
December 1976, 32/191 of 19 December 1977, 33/150 of
20 December 1978, 34/ 198 of 19 December 1979, 35/58
of 5 December 1980, 36/ 175 of 17 December 1981 and
39/209 of I 8 December I 984 and other resolutions of the
United Nations relating to the particular needs and problems of land-locked developing countries,
Bearing in mind various other resolutions adopted by
the General Assembly, its related organs and the specialized agencies emphasizing special and urgent measures in
favour of land-locked developing countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Third United Nations
Development Decade, 22
Recalling the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea, 40 adopted on 10 December 1982,
Bearing in mind the report of the Ad Hoe Group of
Experts to Study Ways and Means of Improving Transittransport Infrastructures and Services for Land-locked
Developing Countries, 41
Recognizing that the lack of territorial access to the sea,
aggravated by remoteness and isolation from world markets, and the prohibitive transit, transport and trans-shipment costs impose serious constraints on the socio-economic development of land-locked developing countries,
Noting with concern that the measures taken thus far
have not adequately addressed the problems of landlocked developing countries,
1. Reaffirms the right of access of land-locked
countries to and from the sea and freedom of transit

32 See Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Reporr u/
the FAO World Conference on Fisheries Mana!(ement and De ..e/opmem.
Rome, 27 June-6 July 1984 (Rome, 1984).
33 Official Records of the General Assembly. Forlleth Sesswn. Supplemrnt
No. /9(A/40/ I 9).
34 !hid, Supplement No. 52 (A/40/52)
3 5 See Proceedings of the United Nations Conference on Trad,· und Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and Annnes (United Nations publication. Sales No. E.73.ILD.4). annex IA
36 Ibid., Fourth Session, voL I, Report und Annnes (United Nation, publication. Sales No. E.76.ILD.10 and corrigendum). part one, S<'<·t I\

-17 Jina. Fl/ih Sessum, voL I. Report and Annexes (United Nations puMication, Sab No. E.79.ILD.14). part one. sect. A.
1 8 /hid. Snth Semon, voL L Report and Annexes (United Naltons puhl1ca1ton, Sales No. E.83.ILD.6), part one, sect. A.
39 See Olfina/ Records o( the Ucneral Assemhlr. fi>rti,•th Session. Supplement N,, 15 (A.'40-'15). vol. II. se<·t. L
40 Offinal Records of the Third ( 'mted Natwns ( ·onji-ro1et' on th,· 1,aK o(
the s,,a, vol. XVII (Umted Nations publication, Sales No. E.84.V.1). document Nt 'ONF.62/ 122.
41 Offinul Records ,fth,, Trad,, und Development Board. '! wentr-nuuh ,\e\·\/O'I. I nnnn. agenda ,tern 6, dr,rnment TD/B/1002

119th plenary meeting
17 December 1985

40/182. Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of
States
