28

General Auembly -

respect of Greenland as terminated and had, therefore,
decided to bring to an end the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Considering that resolution 742 (VIII) adopted by
the General Assembly on 27 November 1953 instructs
the Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing Territories to study any documentation transmitted
under resolution 222 (III) in the light of the list of
factors approved by resolution 742 (VIII) and other
relevant considerations that may arise from each concrete case,
Having studied the report8 prepared by the Committee 9n Information from Non-Self-Governing Territori~s during its session of 1954 on the question of
the cessation of the transmission of information on
Greenland and presented to the General Assembly in
conformity with paragraph 2 of resolution 448 (V)
of 12 December 1950,
Having examined the communication of the Government of Denmark in the light of the basic principles
and objectives embodied in Chapter XI of the Charter,
the criteria established by the list of factors, and of all
the other elements of judgment pertinent to the issue,
Bearing in mind the competence of the General Assembly to decide whether a Non-Self-Governing Territory has or has not attained a full measure of selfgovernment as referred to in Chapter XI of the
Charter,
1. Takes note of the conclusions set forth by the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories in its resolution ;9
2. Takes note of the opi'lion of the Government of
Denmark that due to the new constitutional status of
Greenland the Government of Denmark regards its
"responsibilities according to Chapter XI of the Charter
as terminated" and that consequently the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the Charter in
respect of Greenland should be brought to an end;
3. Commends the action of the Member State concerned in including in its delegation to the General
Assembly representatives elected by the National Council of Greenland for the purpose of furnishing information on constitutional changes in Greenland;
4. Takes note that when deciding on their new
constitutional status, through their duly elected representatives, the people of Greenland have freely exercised their right to self-determination;
5. Expresses the opinion that, from the documentation and the explanations provided, Green1and freely
decided on its integration within the Kingdom of Denmark on an equal constitutional and administrative
basis with the other parts of Denmark;
6. Notes with satisfaction the achievement of selfgovernment by the people of Greenland;
7. Considers that due to these circumstances the
Declaration regarding Non-Self-Governing Territories
with the provisions established under it in Chapter XI
of the Charter can no longer be applied to Greenland;
8. Considers it appropriate that the transmission of
information in respect of Greenland under Article 73 e
of the Charter should now cease.
499th plenary meeting,
22 November 1954.
8 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Supplement No. 18, part onP <Prt;n,, lX.
• Ibid., para. 61.

Ninth Session

850 (IX), Consideration of communications re•
lating to the cessation of the transmission
of information under Article 73 e of the
Charter

The General Assembly,
Considering that, by resolutions 222 (III), 448 (V)
and 742 (VIII), it has approved principles which
should be followed in evaluating situations indicative
of the attainment of a full measure of self-government
by the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories and
the consequent cessation of the transmission of information under Article 73 e of the Charter,
Having approved in 1953 and 1954 resolutions10
relating to the cessation of the transmission of information concerning Puerto Rico and Greenland respectively.
Considering that the experience gained should be
used by the General Assembly to perfect the methods
and procedures to be followed in such cases,
Considering further the necessity of laying down
procedures enabling the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories to discharge its
functions under General Assembly resolution 742
(VIII),
1. Expresses the opinion that communications received from the Members concerned relating to the
cessation of the transmission of information under
Article 73 e of the Charter in respect of any Non-SelfGoverning Territory should be examined, as indicated
in resolution 742 (VIII), with particular emphasis on
the manner in which the right of self-determination has
been attained and freely exercised;
2. Considers that, in order to evaluate as fully as
possible the opinion of the population as to the status
or change in status which they desire, a mission, if
the General Assembly deems it desirable, should, in
agreement with the Administering Member, visit the
Non-Self-Governing Territory before or during the
time when the population is called upon to decide on its
future status or change in status ;
3. Considers that the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories might study
means by which it could, at the appropriate time,
draw the attention of the General Assembly to the
forthcoming changes in the status of the Territory
concerned;
4. fovites the Committee on Information from NonSelf-Governing Territories to include in its report to
the General Assembly at its tenth session any proposals
that it considers desirable concerning the implementation of the present resolution.
499th plenary muting,
22 November 1954.
851 (IX). Report of the Committee on South
West Africa

The General Assembly,
Having established by resolution 749 A (VIII) of
28 November 1953, "until such time as an agreement
is reached betwten the United Nations and the Union
of South Africa, a Committee on South West Africa",
10

See resolutions 748 (VIII) and 849 (IX).
