S/2014/603

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
18 August 2014
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the restoration of and
respect for constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau
I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolutions 2048
(2012) and 2103 (2013), and covers major political, security, human rights,
humanitarian and socioeconomic developments in Guinea-Bissau since my reports
of 12 May 2014 (S/2014/332 and S/2014/333).

II. Restoration of and respect for constitutional order
A.

Political situation

1.

Overview of the political situation in the country
2.
During the reporting period, the key political developments in Guinea -Bissau
included the successful completion of the second round of presidential elections, the
opening of the first session of the elected Parliament, the swearing -in of the new
President of the Republic and the appointment of the new Prime Minister and his
Cabinet.
3.
On 18 May, the second round of the presidential election was conducted in a
peaceful manner. There were no reports of major technical or logistical
shortcomings. The alleged beating of 14 members of the African Party for the
Independence of Guinea and Cape Verde (PAIGC) by unidentified individuals, on
the night before the election in the central city of Bafatá, and the alleged threats
against the party’s Third Vice-President, Mr. Baciro Djá, on the eve of the polling,
did not discourage the people of Guinea-Bissau from casting their votes. With the
participation of 78.2 per cent of eligible voters, the people demonstrated their
commitment to democratic values and to the restoration of cons titutional order in
their country.
4.
On 20 May, the President of the National Electoral Commission, Judge
Augusto Mendes, announced that José Mário Vaz of PAIGC had obtained 61.9 per
cent of the vote in the run-off election, while Nuno Gomes Nabiam, the independent
candidate, had received 38.1 per cent. Although Nuno Gomes Nabiam initially
rejected the provisional results, he eventually declared during a press conference on

14-58833 (E)

190814

*1458833*

S/2014/603

22 May that he would accept them for the “sake of peace, stability and higher
interests of the country”. He also asked his supporters to respect his decision.
5.
In their preliminary statements issued on 19 and 20 May, the international
election observer missions of the African Union, the Community of Portuguese speaking Countries (CPLP), the Economic Community of West African States
(ECOWAS), the European Union, the International Organization of la Francophonie
and the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA) assessed that the
election had been free, fair, transparent and credib le. In its recommendations,
ECOWAS urged development partners to expedite the lifting of sanctions imposed
on the country and to join it in extending financial and technical support to the
country for post-election reconstruction and development.
6.
On 21 May, PAIGC and the Social Renewal Party (PRS) issued a joint
communiqué confirming their intention to (i) reinforce their relations; (ii) work
towards reaching consensus on a national reconciliation programme; (iii) abide by
the principle of “forgiveness in favour of reconciliation” and advocate for the
competent State institutions to grant amnesty to those behind the coup of 2012;
(iv) promote respect for, and the “dignified” treatment of, the defence and security
forces, especially within the framework of security sector reform; and (v) provide
guarantees that the people of Guinea-Bissau will not be persecuted or threatened.
7.
On 23 May, the final results of the presidential election were published in the
Official Gazette, confirming the provisional fig ures announced by the National
Electoral Commission on 20 May. This officially concluded the 2014 electoral
process.
8.
Some 102 newly elected parliamentarians were sworn in on 17 June in the
presence of the Transitional Prime Minister, the President of t he Supreme Court, the
President of the National Electoral Commission, representatives of political parties
and civil society organizations, religious leaders, members of the diplomatic corps,
my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of the United Nations
Integrated Peacebuilding Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNIOGBIS), José Ramos-Horta,
and the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Portugal, Luís Campos Ferreira.
The ceremony marked the opening of the ninth legislature for the period from 2014
to 2018. The new parliamentarians elected Cipriano Cassamá of PAIGC as President
of the National Assembly. They also elected Inácio Gomes Correia of PAIGC as
First Vice-President; Alberto Nambeia, the President of PRS, as Second
Vice-President; Serifo Djala of PRS as First Secretary; and Dam Yala Nanka
Baranção of PAIGC as Second Secretary.
9.
In his inaugural speech as President of the National Assembly, Mr. Cassamá
appealed to the international community to deliver on its pledges to support Guinea Bissau. He praised the role played by ECOWAS in supporting his country, including
through the deployment of a stabilization force, the ECOWAS Mission in Guinea Bissau (ECOMIB), and expressed appreciation for the financial support provided by
Timor-Leste. He called for the creation of an ethics committee within the National
Assembly, to make Parliament more accountable to the citizens, adding that the
National Assembly needed to take on its responsibilities for the equitable
exploitation of natural resources and the protection of the environment. Finally, he
called for national unity and proposed the reactivation of the Reconciliation
Commission of the National Assembly.

2/10

14-58833

S/2014/603

10. From 27 May to 19 June, prior to his swearing-in ceremony, President-elect
José Mário Vaz visited Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea, Nigeria,
Portugal, Senegal and Togo, where he met with the respective Heads of State. He
also met with the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Xanana Gusmão, in Bissau on
7 June. On 23 June, he was sworn in at the National Stadium in Bissau, in the
presence of 11 Heads of State from the West Africa subregion.
11. In his inaugural address, President Vaz thanked the countries of the subregion
and international organizations for their support to Guinea -Bissau during the
transition. He underlined his commitment to respect the country’s Constitution and
laws, eradicate poverty, put an end to instability and fight corruption. In addition, he
pledged to ensure the sustainable use of natural resources and promote re forms in
the public administration, justice, defence and security sectors through a strategic
partnership with the new Government.
12. Following talks with all political parties represented in Parliament, President
Vaz appointed Domingos Simões Pereira, the President of PAIGC, as the new Prime
Minister on 25 June. Upon his appointment, Mr. Simões Pereira told the media that
the political environment in the country had significantly improved although there
were challenges that could be tackled only with the support of the international
community and increased accountability within the new administration. He
reaffirmed that, irrespective of the PAIGC majority in the National Assembly, he
would continue to reach out to PRS and other parties. He also expressed his
commitment to “walk the path of dialogue towards national reconciliation” and to
consider mechanisms that would enable the nation to move forward in unity. On
28 June, he led a march of thousands of people, mostly youth, calling for “genuine
national reconciliation”.
13. On 3 July, Mr. Simões Pereira was sworn in as Prime Minister at the
Presidential Palace. In his speech, the new Prime Minister recalled that the country
needed “order, discipline and work”, and announced that he would promote
inclusiveness and work to achieve consensus on major national issues. He
highlighted a number of priority areas, including good governance, transparency,
protection of the environment and the rational use of natural resources, as well as
the promotion of socioeconomic development and of good relations with
neighbouring countries, subregional organizations, financial institutions, and the
international community as a whole.
14. On 4 July, on the basis of recommendations received from the Prime Minister,
President Vaz issued a decree appointing a 31-member Cabinet, including
16 Ministers, 5 of whom are women, and 15 Secretaries of State including one
woman. The new Cabinet has 19 members from PAIGC, six from PRS, and one each
from the United Social Democratic Party, the Democratic Convergence Party and
the Union for Change Party. Two Ministers and one Secretary of State have no
declared party affiliation.
15. On 10 July, the Prime Minister chaired the first meeting of the new Council of
Ministers. During the meeting, he emphasized his commitment to respect the rule of
law, uphold the public interest, and promote inclusive dialogue to ensure broad based consensus on key national issues. The meeting concluded with decisions to
pay two months of salary to civil servants, to temporarily suspend timber exports in
order to prioritize the shipment of cashew nuts, and to extend the public school year
until August.

14-58833

3/10

S/2014/603

2.

Overview of the human rights situation in the country
16. During the reporting period, no significant progress was made towards human
rights protection and greater accountability for previous human rights violations in
the country.
17. On 17 May, on the eve of the second round of presidential elections,
14 members of PAIGC, including the President of the Bafatá Regional Political
Bureau, the party’s campaign director and three of its newly -elected
parliamentarians, were allegedly attacked by unidentified individuals at different
locations close to the city of Bafatá. The victims, four of whom were women, were
travelling in three separate groups to deploy election monitors and materials to
different regional polling stations. The majority of the victims received medical
treatment in Bafatá and Bissau. PAIGC issued a communiqué on 18 May
condemning the violence and asking the people of Guinea-Bissau not to be
intimidated. The case was reported to the regional authorities, the joint command in
charge of election security and to ECOMIB. No suspects have been identified or
charged.
18. On 9 June, the Prosecutor General, Abdu Mané, tendered his resignation to the
Transitional President, Manuel Serifo Nhamadjo, citing an “inability” to work with
the President-elect. Mr. Mané had petitioned the Supreme Court, on 6 March 2014,
to disqualify Mr. Vaz as the PAIGC presidential candidate, on the grounds that a
criminal investigation had been conducted into corrupt activities allegedly
committed by Mr. Vaz in February 2013. The Supreme Court had subsequently
concluded that Mr. Vaz was entitled to full political rights, stating the re were no
legal impediments to his running in the elections.

3.

Regional and international efforts towards the restoration of and respect for
constitutional order
19. At a meeting of the Guinea-Bissau configuration of the Peacebuilding
Commission on 12 May, my Special Representative for Guinea-Bissau and Head of
UNIOGBIS briefed members of the configuration on the situation in Guinea -Bissau.
He underlined the need for the newly elected Government to adopt a new approach
to address the root causes of instability. He also emphasized the important role of
the international community in the mobilization of financial and technical resources
for the country.
20. On 14 May, the configuration issued a statement to the press welcoming the
successful conduct of the legislative elections and the first round of the presidential
election, which were held on 13 April, and commending the people of Guinea Bissau for a high turnout and for the peaceful manner in which they had exercised
their democratic rights. In another press statement issued on 12 June, the
configuration reiterated its view that the holding of the elections was a fundamental
step towards the restoration of constitutional order and for the resumption of full
cooperation with the international community. The configuration also reiterated its
willingness to work with the elected authorities in the review of the peacebuilding
strategic priorities for Guinea-Bissau and to help in addressing the urgent needs of
the country. It also reiterated its call to all political and military stakeholders to
continue to heed the voice of the people of Guinea-Bissau and to work in a spirit of
dialogue to uphold civilian rule.

4/10

14-58833

S/2014/603

21. In a communiqué issued following the extraordinary session of the ECOWAS
Authority of Heads of State and Government held on 30 May in Accra, the
ECOWAS leaders encouraged the new Government to adopt an “all-inclusive
governance system” to forge national consensus and enable the mobilization of
national stakeholders to implement “urgent” post-election programmes. The
ECOWAS leaders also urged the new authorities of Guinea-Bissau to adopt and
implement a comprehensive reform agenda, with the assistance of ECOWAS and the
international community, encompassing national dialogue and reconciliation,
economic recovery, reform of State institutions, and processes to sustain the
stabilization and recovery efforts.
22. From 6 to 10 June, the Prime Minister of Timor-Leste, Xanana Gusmão,
visited Guinea-Bissau, where he met with the President-elect and the Prime
Minister-elect. He also held consultations with the Transitional President, the
President of the National Assembly, the Transitional Prime Minister, and the Chief
of General Staff of the Armed Forces, as well as representatives of police and
security forces, political parties, civil society organizations and ECOWAS. Prime
Minister Gusmão extended an invitation to the President-elect and the Prime
Minister-elect to participate in the tenth Conference of Heads of State and
Government of CPLP, which was held in Dili on 23 July.
23. On 17 June, the African Union lifted the suspension of Guinea -Bissau from the
activities of the Organization, paving the way for the country to participate in the
23rd ordinary session of the Assembly of Heads of State and Governme nt of the
African Union, which was held in Malabo from 20 to 27 June. In its decision
following the summit in Malabo, the African Union appealed to the international
community to enhance its support to Guinea-Bissau, while urging bilateral and
multilateral partners to seize the opportunity of a donors round table late in 2014 to
provide the country with the necessary financial and economic support. Similarly, in
a press communiqué issued on 27 June, the International Organization of
la Francophonie announced its decision to reintegrate Guinea-Bissau into its
activities and statutory bodies.
24. On 14 July, the Council of the European Union issued a statement announcing
the suspension of measures limiting the European Union’s cooperation with Guinea Bissau following the holding of “free and credible” elections. The announcement
was made after the visit of a European Union technical mission to Guinea -Bissau
from 7 to 11 July. On the same day, the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton, expressed satisfaction with
the decision on the grounds that it enabled the European Union “to support the
newly elected authorities towards the reconstruction and stabilization of the State”.
On 23 July, at its tenth Conference of Heads of State and Government held in Dili,
CPLP readmitted Guinea-Bissau into the organization.
25. On 10 July, President Vaz, along with the new Ministers for Foreign Affairs
and Defence, attended the 45th ordinary session of the ECOWAS Authority of
Heads of State and Government in Accra. ECOWAS leaders encouraged the new
Government to adopt and implement a comprehensive reform agenda, which should
encompass national dialogue and reconciliation, economic recovery, and the reform
of the governance and political institutions to sustain the country’s stabilization and
recovery efforts. They pledged assistance for resource mobilization efforts,
including through the holding of a donors conference. They also decided to create a

14-58833

5/10

S/2014/603

special emergency support fund for Guinea-Bissau, and appealed to ECOWAS
member States and development partners to contribute to the fund. Moreover, the
leaders agreed to ensure the effectiveness and sustainability of the defence and
security sector reform programme by enhancing the human, financial and logistical
capacities of the Office of the ECOWAS Special Representative in Guinea -Bissau.
Finally, they instructed the ECOWAS Commission to review the mandate of
ECOMIB by 31 December 2014, in close consultation with the Government of
Guinea-Bissau and other international partners.
4.

Efforts towards a democratic electoral process
26. During the period under review, the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) led the international community’s technical support for the elections. It
assisted the National Electoral Commission and its regional structures in carrying
out information, sensitization and civic education programmes, as well as in
conducting the operational and logistical preparations for the polling process,
including the procurement of election materials. Both logistical and technical
conditions were in place by the polling day.
27. Multilateral and bilateral partners, including the African Union, CPLP,
ECOWAS, the European Union, the International Organization of la Fra ncophonie,
UMEOA, Timor-Leste, the United States of America and the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, deployed over 270 election observers to monitor
the second round of the presidential election.
28. Notwithstanding the lack of provision for domestic election observers, three
main groups of civil society organizations monitored different aspects of the
electoral process. The groups were Acção Cidadã (“Citizens Action”), which
focused on monitoring the election campaigns and the polling process; the Peace
and Security Network for Women in the ECOWAS region, which focused on
monitoring women’s participation in the electoral process; and the Civil Society
Committee Monitoring the Electoral Code of Conduct, which focused on the
compliance of candidates with the code that was signed by presidential candidates
and political parties on 20 March. The groups also informally deployed their
members to polling stations during the run-off election to observe the conduct of the
elections.

B.

Security situation
29. During the reporting period, the security situation remained relatively stable.
ECOMIB troops reached a total strength of 850 personnel, following the
deployment of an armoured formed police unit from Burkina Faso to Guinea -Bissau
on 10 May.
30. UNIOGBIS co-located one police officer and one military adviser with the
joint command of the Ministers of the Interior and Defence of the Transitional
Government, which was established to monitor the implementation of the national
electoral security plan for 2014. The security protection of the former National
Electoral Commission building, which was used as a warehouse for electoral
material, was withdrawn only on 28 May following a decision of the joint
command. The joint command provided close protection to the President of the
Electoral Commission, the elected President and Prime Minister, as well as the

6/10

14-58833

S/2014/603

transitional authorities and government institutions until its official dissolution on
5 July.
31. On 2 June, the Secretary-General of INTERPOL, Ronald Noble, visited Bissau
along with my Special Representative for West Africa and Head of the United
Nations Office for West Africa, Said Djinnit, within the framework of the West
Africa Coast Initiative. They held meetings with the Minister of Justice of the
Transitional Government, the National Central Bureau of INTERPOL, the
Transnational Crime Unit, the joint command, and the High Council for Policing
and Internal Security Coordination. At a press conference in Bissau following the
visit, Mr. Noble praised Guinea-Bissau’s law enforcement agencies for their
dedication and highlighted the important role they had played in creating an
environment conducive to a peaceful electoral process in the country. He also
underlined the importance for Guinea-Bissau and other countries in the subregion to
work with the international community to fight drug trafficking and transnational
organized crime.
32. In a letter dated 6 July, the European Union delegation in Guinea -Bissau
informed the new Minister for Foreign Affairs and Cooperation that General
Melcíades Fernandes, a former Chief of Staff of the Guinea -Bissau Air Force, had
voluntarily left the European Union premises in Bissau that day. General Fernandes
had sought refuge at the European Union premises for 21 months following the
coup d’état of 2012. Speaking to the Portuguese news agency LUSA and the
Portuguese News Network (PNN) shortly after leaving the premises on 6 July, the
General expressed his gratitude to the European Union representatives for the ir
support and assistance. In an interview with PNN on the same day, the new
Secretary of State for Public Order expressed the view that the departure of General
Fernandes from the European Union premises was “the result of the return to
constitutional order in the country”.

III. Socioeconomic and humanitarian situation
33. The socioeconomic and humanitarian situation in the country remained fragile
during the period under review. The weak capacities of the Government for fiscal
revenue collection, in conjunction with the extended suspension of budgetary
support by Guinea-Bissau’s development partners, significantly affected the State's
ability to meet its basic obligations, including the delivery of social services.
34. The second quarter of 2014 was marked by trade union protests and strikes
due, inter alia, to the non-payment of salaries. The strikes virtually paralysed public
administration and had an extremely detrimental impact on the education and health
sectors. The cumulative effect of strikes in the education sector caused the overall
loss of 28 per cent of school days in the 2013/14 academic year.
35. As at 11 June, Guinea-Bissau had exported only 10,000 tons of cashew nuts of
the 70,000 tons stored in warehouses. While the pace of export was markedly slow
compared to the same period in 2013, available data showed that the harvest and
sale of cashew nuts in 2014 has been relatively good. The average price per kg paid
to producers varied from CFAF 330 to CFAF 335 compared to the base price of
CFAF 250 set by the Transitional Government.

14-58833

7/10

S/2014/603

36. No cases of the Ebola virus were reported in Guinea-Bissau since the outbreak
in neighbouring Guinea. UNICEF, the World Health Organization and other partners
continued to provide support for strengthening epidemiological surveillance. With
the support of those parties, an emergency “hotline” was activated at the Ministry of
Health. Moreover, weekly joint field missions were conducted to the most
vulnerable regions of the country to maintain the alert while th e surveillance,
capacity-building and community awareness programmes continued to be
implemented.
37. During the reporting period, three cholera deaths were recorded by health
centres in the town of Calaque, in the southern region of Tombali. UNICEF and its
partners provided the centres with basic medical supplies, technical support and
capacity-building training for treating and preventing cholera. Cholera prevention
and awareness-raising interventions were conducted in the most vulnerable
communities and households in the region.
38. On 30 May, the World Bank approved $22.5 million ($17.2 million in credit
loans and $5.3 million in grants) to support the emergency water and electricity
services upgrading project for Guinea-Bissau. The aim of the project was to restore
and increase the population’s access to safe drinking water and to improve the
reliability of electricity in Bissau.
39. On 12 June, UNDP commenced the delivery of one million life -saving
bednets, as part of a national awareness campaign to help communities to combat
malaria. The $5.8 million campaign was financed by the Global Fund to Fight
AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, and is expected to further reduce the number of
malaria-induced deaths.

IV. Observations
40. The high voter turnout in the second round of the presidential election, as well
as the peaceful and orderly conduct of the poll, demonstrated the determination of
the people of Guinea-Bissau to restore constitutional order to their country.
I commend all the people of Guinea-Bissau for their remarkable sense of civic duty
throughout the electoral process and for their commitment to ending the transition
through peaceful and democratic means.
41. I would like to reiterate my appreciation to the international partners of
Guinea-Bissau, including the African Union, CPLP, ECOWAS and the European
Union, as well as to Member States, for their financial, technical and security
assistance, and continued engagement and dedication to ensuring a coordinated and
appropriate international response to the crisis in the country.
42. The swearing-in of the President and new parliamentarians of the Republic, as
well as the appointment of the new Prime Minister and his Cabinet, all of whom are
now in office, have marked the return to constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau.
Continued support to and respect for the preservation of constitutional order will be
critical to enable the country to enjoy sustainable political stability and lasting
peace.
43. I call on the newly elected authorities to foster r espect for constitutional order
and for the rule of law by promoting and practising accountable governance,
fighting corruption and illegal trafficking, establishing harmonious civil -military

8/10

14-58833

S/2014/603

relations, and ensuring the respect of human rights for all. This is an opportunity for
the country to write a new page of its history, in which coups d’état have no place.
44. I am encouraged by the new administration’s commitment to fostering
inclusive dialogue and promoting national reconciliation. I encourage all political
stakeholders to take this path as the country focuses on setting and implementing its
key national priorities. I note the pledges made by President Vaz and Prime Minister
Simões Pereira to strive for national reconciliation through dialogue and ex plore all
mechanisms for that purpose. As the authorities of Guinea-Bissau earnestly engage
in a national reconciliation dialogue in the coming months, the United Nations
remains ready to provide advice, including on international human rights protection
standards and the fight against impunity.
45. The new Government has inherited a difficult socioeconomic situation with
limited State resources. Nevertheless, it should aim at providing tangible
improvements in the lives of the population, including by ensu ring uninterrupted
salary payments to civil servants, completion of the school year, recovery of
agricultural production including in the cashew sector and a regular supply of water
and electricity. I appeal to international partners to provide substantial support, in
the short term, to assist the new administration in delivering on its obligations and
providing social services. Any delays in such immediate support may hamper
Guinea-Bissau’s effort to consolidate peace.
46. In the medium to long term, it would be essential for Guinea-Bissau’s
authorities to pursue fiscal sustainability and to attract international investment.
A programme with clear goals for the country’s stability and development should be
the centrepiece of the forthcoming donor pledging conference, which is expected to
be organized by the end of 2014, in close collaboration with the United Nations and
Guinea-Bissau partners.
47. The presence of natural resources in Guinea-Bissau is not by itself enough to
ensure the development of the country. It is equally important that the income
generated from the exploitation of those resources be utilized for the benefit of the
population rather than for a few individuals. This requires strong political will to put
the public common good above personal interest. I welcome the commitment
already expressed by the elected authorities to address these matters firmly. I call
upon them to work closely with relevant private companies and investors, civil
society organizations, Member States and international organizations to make
transparency and sustainability in natural resource management a key national
priority. I urge international partners and the United Nations to assist the country in
implementing best transparency practices in this area, which would help to ensure
the rational exploitation of natural resources, their sustainability and the protection
of the environment.
48. While the security situation has improved over the past few months, the
overall outlook remains fragile. The country will continue to count on the security
assistance currently provided by ECOMIB. I take note of the recommendations
made by the ECOWAS Heads of State and Government to review the mandate of
ECOMIB by 31 December 2014. I also welcome their encouragement to the new
Government to adopt and implement a comprehensive reform agenda with the
assistance of ECOWAS and other international partners.

14-58833

9/10

S/2014/603

49. I will continue to be actively engaged in this process, consistent with
paragraph 3 of Security Council resolution 2048 (2012), in order to harmonize the
positions of international partners, particularly the African Union, CPLP, ECOWAS
and the European Union. I would also aim to ensure maximum coordination and
complementarity of international efforts to develop a comprehensive and integrated
strategy to implement security sector, political and economic reforms, as well as
combating drug-trafficking and fighting impunity.
50. In the light of the successful return to constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau,
which was the main target set by the Security Council in resolution 2048 (2012),
I recommend, for the Council’s consideration (as indicated in my letter dated
13 August 2014) that this report on the restoration of constitutional order in the
country be the last one. Any future updates on the remaining aspects of the
resolution, including paragraph 3, as well as broader issues relevant to the
consolidation of constitutional order, would be provided every six months in my
regular reports on UNIOGBIS, while oral briefings to the Security Council will
continue to be provided, as and when required.
51. In conclusion, I wish to express my appreciation to the staff of UNIOGBIS and
the United Nations country team, under the leadership of my former Special
Representative, José Ramos-Horta, for their commitment and hard work. I am
grateful to my former Special Representative for his leadership and passionate
dedication to Guinea-Bissau, both of which were important enabling factors in the
progress achieved to date. I also express my appreciation to the regional and
international partners of Guinea-Bissau for their contributions to efforts to restore
constitutional order and promote peace in the country.

10/10

14-58833
