UNITED NA TIONS

207

th
MEETING:

8 APRIL 1980

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

..a...**

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..I.

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman of the Committee
’ on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13855) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2207) ..,,,.......I................

SlPV. 2207

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly S~tpplements of the Offi&! Records of the Swuriiy Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and
Drc*isions r>f the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before I January 1965,became fully operative
on that date.

2207th MEETING
Held in New York on Tuesday, 8 April 1980, at 11.00 a.m.
president:Mr. Porfirio MUfiOZ LED0 (Mexico),

PalestineLiberation Organization(PLO) to take places
at the Council table,

present:
The representatives of the following States:
Bangladesh,China, France, German Democratic
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Bedjaoui
Republic,Jamaica, Mexico, Niger, Norway, Philip- (Algeria), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt), Mr. B. C. Mishra
pines, Portugal, Tunisia, Union of Soviet Socialist (India), Mr. Bali (Iraq), Mr. Blum (Israel), Mr. NuseiRepublics,United Kingdom of Great Britain and beh (Jordan), Mr. Tue’ni (Lebanon), Mr, Mansouri
NorthernIreland, United States of America, Zambia. (Syrian Arab Republic) and Mr. Komatina (Yugo-

slavia) took the places reserved for them at the side of
the Council chamber and Mr. Kane (Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
the Paiestiniun People) and Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation Organization) took places at the Council
table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2207)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2, The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
peopleof its inalienable rights:
Letter dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise
of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/13832);
Letter dated 24 March 1980from the Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/ 13855)

2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
I wish to inform the membersof the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Bahrain,
Cuba, Madagascar,Morocco and Viet Nam in which
they requestto be invited to participate in the discussion of the item on the agenda.In accordancewith the
usual practice, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite those representatives to participate
in the discussionwithout the right to vote, in conformity with the relevant provisions of the Charter and
rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure.

The meeting was called to order at 11.35 a.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Al-Saffar
(Bahrain), Mr. Roa-Kouri (Cuba), Mr. Rabetafika
(Madagascar), Mr. Ayachi(Morocco) and Mr. Ha Van
Lau (Viet Nam) took the places reserved for them at
the side of the Council chamber.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

3. Mr. TROYANOVSKY (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): Mr. President, before we turn to the substanceof the item being
considered by the Council, I should like to extend to
you cordial congratulationsandbest wishesfor success
in the performance of your important functions as
President of the Council for April. An earnest of this
successis your outstanding diplomatic talent, which
is so well known in the United Nations. I should like
to take this opportunity to express the hope that the
friendly relations that exist between the Soviet Union
and Mexico, relations of equal co-operation on the
basis of the principles of peaceful COeXiStenCe,
Will
know further constructive development.

Ihe question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
Ofits inalienable rights:
I&+r dated 6 March 1980 from the Acting Chairman
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/13832);
I&r dated 24 March 1980 from the Chairman of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/13855)

1. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Spanish):
ln accordancewith the decisions taken at previous
meetings[220&h and 22&W meetings],
I invite the
npresentativesof Algeria, Egypt, India, Iraq, ISrael,
‘ordan, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and
Yugoslaviato participate in the discussion without
he right to vote, and I invite the Chairman of the
zcmmitteeon the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of
he Palestinian People and the representative of the

4. I should like also to pay a tribute to your predecessor as President of the Council, Ambassador
Mills of Jamaica, who so skilfully and efficiently
conducted the Council’s proceedings last month with
his characteristic tact and diplomatic experience.
1

of its C~U:IIState. ‘I’hra !?aleStiniatl pt”~ple has already
demonstrated that. in or&r to exercise that right, it is
ready to suffer any ticpriVatic>nSant! make uny sac+
f&s. For that ~LJJJIOSC.
under the loadership of its
political vanguard, the Pi~leStilK I3-3cration ()rgaa.
ization, for many years now it bus hecn waging a
valiant and just struggle which is winning ever wider
understanding and suppart throughout the world, as
well as inside the United Nations.

5, The matter of the inalienable rights of the Arab
people of Palestine before the Council is the question
of the present tragic situation and future destiny of that
population of 4 million talented and freedom-loving
people that have been forced to wander in strange
lands or to languish under the yoke of occupation.
At the same time, the problem of the restoration of the
lawful national rights of the Arab people of Palestine
is not just one of restoring its country to a people that
has been deprived of it, It is also a problem of
eliminating a situation of acute crisis, Failure to do this
not only would render the situation in the Middle East
unstable, but also would have a bad effect on the whole
international situation, An immediate, radical and just
solution of the Palestinian problem is demanded by
the interests of the peace and security of the peoples
of the whole world.

10. The General Assembly in particular, at its most
recent sessions, has adopted a number of important
resolutions which stress the need for an early, just
solution of the Palestinian problem on the basis of the
exercise of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people. Those resulutions also provide for
equal participrttiotr hy the I%O, HS the legitimate
representative of the l%lestininn people, in all efforts,
deliberatiotls and conferences concerning the Middle
East,

6. The Palestinian problem is not a new one. It arose
as a result of Israel’s having forcibly expelled the Palestinian Arabs from their ancestral lands and deprived
the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights, in
particular its right to a homeland, What then ensued
is we!! known. The Middle East became a region of
perpetual tension and one of the chief hot-points in
the world. Over a comparatively short span of time
there were repeated outbreaks of bloody war, which
in spite of their regional nature posed serious threats to
international peace and security throughout the world.

11. The Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Kighrs of the Palestinian Pctqllc, which was established
at the thirtieth session c>f the General Assembly,
prepared and presented its recommendations as early
as 1976. Those rccommcndaticms confirmed the right
of the Palestinians tu self-determination, national independence and sovereignty in Palestine, including their
right to create their own independent State, and the
right to recover their property and the homes from
which they were expelled. ‘I’hc t’cctmm~cndationsalso
provided for Israeli troops tu withdraw from al! Arab
territOrics
occupied since Jlmc l%7 and for Israel to
renounce the establishment of new Isrstcli settlements
in those territories, The rrcctmmendations were
approved at the thirty-first session of the General
Assembly in 1976 and havr hccn confirmed annually
since then.

7. The serious tension and the genuine threat of a
fresh outbreak of hostilities exist even today in this
region. Furthermore, there is no doubt at all that a
situation of conflict will not only persist here in the
future but will be exacerbated if the underlying
causes are not eliminated and the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian Arabs restored, Failure to reckon with
this axiomatic truth and any attempt to overlook it
would serve only to complicate further the situation
in the Middle East and deliberately to prepare the
ground for further conflict and upheaval in that region,

12. The Security C’ouncil also has rcpcatedly taken
decisions aimed at protecting the inalienable rights of
the Arab people of Palestine. For cxrtmple, about a
month ago, the I.“uutrcil ;&p&d a resolution L46-5
fl@N)] to the effect that all the mc;\sures taken bY
Israel in order in practice to hrin~ about the annexation of the Arab, inr!ttding Pales&&n, territories it
has occupied have no legal validity and must be
rescinded, and the settlements already established
must be dismantled. That is only a partial, limited
step by the Council, hut it is a step in the right direction.

8. The Soviet Union is firmly convinced that the path
to a truly just and lasting peace in the Middle East can
only lie through a radical and comprehensive settlement, whose necessary elements would be the total
withdrawal of Israeli troops from al! the Arab territories they occupied in 1967 and the implementation
of the lawful rights of the Arab people of Palestine,
including their right to self-determination and to create
their own independent State, as we!! as the guarantee
of the independent existence and security of all States
of that region. This is the unswerving position of principle held by the Soviet Union, It is based upon its
international solidarity with peoples fighting for their
national liberation.

13. Qpica!!y, even th;lt sma~! step was too much for
the United States. Waving attempted to make that
step forwttrd, the United States immediutely took two
steps backwards and not only dissociated itself from
the Council requirement that the Israeli settlemwts 0”
Arab soil he eliminated hut also immediately refused
to consider Jerusalem as occupied Arab territory,
although just six months hefore it had voted in favour
of a resolution adopted by the General Assemblyat
its thirty-fourth session which contained such a Provision, It is clear that thch,czigzags in American POlicY

9. The current situation, in which the Palestinian
people has become an exiled people deprived of its
national homeland, is absolutely intolerable. Like any
other people of the Middle East, that people has the
inalienable right to self-determination and the creation
2

3

y \./

demonstrate not lack of communication
in the Department of State but the absence of any intention on the
part of the United States Government to recognize the
lawful and inalienable rights of the Arab people of
Palestine.
14. Quite a number of important decisions designed
to promote an early and just settlement of the problem
ofpalestine have been adopted in various international
forums, both inside and outside the United Nations,
For example, the Sixth Conference of Heads of State
or Government of Non-Aligned
Countries in Havana
confirmed that no solution to the Middle East conflict
would be possible without the exercise by the people
of Palestine of its inalienable national rights, including
the right of return to their homes, the attainment of
self-determination and the creation of an independent
Palestinian State in Palestine. The Conference took a
decision on the need to convene an emergency special
session of the General Assembly if the Council were to
prove unable to come to a decision because of a lack
of unanimity among its permanent members.
15. It is with the utmost regret and alarm that we
have to note that, in spite of the will of the international community,
the Palestinian
question-and,
indeed, the whole problem of a Middle East settlement-is still very far from being solved in practice.
Israel, which has affixed its signature to the Charter
of our Organization,
continues to disregard those
important United Nations decisions that are designed
to permit the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights and refuses to heed the voice of the
international community.
And it is worth while
recalling here that the decisions of the United Nations
on the question of Palestine have no less legal force
than those decisions which underlay the creation of
the State of Israel.
16. We can look at this matter from another standpoint. For many years we have seen Israel acting in
defiance of the letter and the spirit of the Charter,
systematically and deliberately sabotaging the implementation of Security Council and General Assembly resolutions, and flagrantly flouting universally
acknowledged norms of international
law. In this
regard, the entirely legitimate question arises of how
long the Council is going to tolerate a situation where
one Member State openly refuses to comply with decisions of the Council and thus disregards the obligations which flow from its membership in the United
Nations.
17. Along with Israel, those who have been encouraging Israel’s expansionist policy and placing weapons
in its hands for further acts of aggression against the
Arabs, and primarily
against the Palestinians, also
bear a heavy responsibility
for undermining the just
solution of the question of Palestine, as do those who
have deferred to the aggressor and concluded a separate deal with Israel behind the back of other Arab
peoples, in particular the Palestinian people, and to
the detriment of their legitimate interests.

18. Under the aegis of the United States and with
its active participation, a separate Egyptian-Israeli
treaty was signed, but that cannot be viewed as
anything other than a means of legitimizing the aggressor’s presence on land which does not belong to
it, land seized by force of arms from its true owners,
and of preventing the exercise of the lawful rights of
the Arab people of Palestine, including its right to the
creation of its own national State,
19. It will soon be a year since the parties to the
separate deal have been holding talks about so-called
administrative autonomy for the Palestinians-talks
which in actual fact are really about how to consolidate
Israeli domination over the occupied Palestinian
lands, how to prevent the self-determination of the
Arab people of Palestine and how to exclude the PLO,
the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian
people, from participation in a solution of the Palestinian problem.
20. Under the so-called administrative
autonomy
plan, which the Palestinians themselves have quite
rightly equated with the regime of the South African
bantustans, it has been proposed that the West Bank
of the Jordan and the Gaza Strip should remain under
the sovereignty of Israel and the full control of Israeli
troops. Israel would reserve control over the water
sources and fertile lands, and a considerable portion
of the whole territory of the West Bank would be
earmarked for new Israeli settlements.
21. At the very first meeting of the parties to the
talks on “administrative
autonomy”, the head of the
Israeli delegation, the Minister of the Interior,
Mr. Burg, stated “What must be understood from the
outset is that autonomy does not and cannot imply
sovereignty”. The Prime Minister of Israel, Mr. Begin,
was even more frank in his statements. Speaking at
the Herut Party congress on 6 June 1979, he said
unequivocally that, if an Arab administrative council to be set up on the West Bank and the Gaza
Strip proclaimed a Palestinian State, its members
would be promptly arrested.
22. Thus in these talks Israel is aiming at a clearly
defined goal-that of creating and consolidating in the
Gaza Strip and on the West Bank of the Jordan a
situation where the Arab people of Palestine could
never exercise any genuine self-determination
and
where it could never set up its own independent State.
Typically, even The New York Times, on 22 March,
was obliged to acknowledge that Israel views such
“autonomy” as
“a severely limited local administration,
without
judicial or legislative powers, responsible for nothing
more than street cleaning, schools and other sundry
municipal affairs, all within an envelope of perpetual
Israeli sovereignty over the captured areas”.
23. The facts convincingly demonstrate that, after
the conclusion of the separate Egyptian-Israeli treaty

new military blocs and to concentrate naval units and
rapid-deployment detachments there in order to
consolidate American hegemony over the countries
of that region and to go on pumping out their natural
resources.

and the beginning of talks about so-called administrative autonomy, Israel’s illegal activities in the occupied
Arab territories sharply increased: the Israeli settlements established there grew in number; repression,
oppression and racial discrimination against the Arab
population was intensified; and the practice of
profaning Arab historical religious and cultural sites
and monuments in those territories became more
widespread.

28. For 13 years now the United States has been
taking an anti-Arab and anti-Moslem position in helping
Israel to entrench itself in the lands it has seizedfrom
the Arabs, including Jerusalem. It is surprising that
after all that there should be anyone left in Washington still trying to demonstrate that the present
administration of the United States is a close and
intimate friend of the Arabs and the whole Moslem
world.

24. In spite of the fact that on 1 March this year the
Security Council called upon the Israeli Government
to dismantle existing settlements and to refrain from
establishing new settlements on Arab territory occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, over the last
month the Israeli authorities have adopted new measures aimed at the colonization and annexation of Arab
lands, in flagrant violation of the Charter and open
defiance of the Council. Among these measures was
the confiscation of Arab land near Bethlehem and the
decision to build two Israeli schools on the occupied
Palestinian territory of Al-Khalil.

29. The delegation of the Soviet Union shares the
view expressed in the course of this discussion by the
Chairman of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, the representative of the PLO and a number of delegations
that the present discussion of the question of the
inalienable national rights of the Palestinian people is
particularly timely. This is primarily because it is
precisely now that persistent attempts are being made
to galvanize that part of the Camp David agreements
whose goal is to replace the solution of the Palestinian
problem by a so-called administrative autonomy and,
in essence, the annexation by Israel of lands which
belong to the Arab people of Palestine.

25. As has been pointed out by the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People and also by representatives
of Arab countries in the course of this discussion,
particular alarm has been caused by the situation in
East Jerusalem. In that city the Israeli authorities,
particularly frankly and cynically, have been pursuing
a policy of the planned seizure of Arab lands, squeezing
out the indigenous Arab population and changing its
Arab and Moslem character.

30. In this connection I should like to point out that
the only people who claim that this discussion is
untimely are those who would like the problem to be
solved by means of an agreement behind the back of
the Palestinian people and to the detriment of its vital
interests and who are in practice conniving at the
colonization and annexation by Israel of Arab lands.

26. There can be no doubt that Israel would never
have dared so defiantly to flout the opinion of the
international community and so openly to disregard
the demands of the Council, had not increasingly
broad military, economic, political and other forms of
assistance been offered to it by its foreign patrons. It
is well known that Israel receives each year from the
United States about $2 billion in military and economic
assistance. Furthermore, in connection with the signing
of the separate treaty, the United States assumed
the obligation to provide Israel over a period of three
years with additional assistance in the amount of $3 billion. Over the past four years alone the amount of
economic and military assistance from the United
States to Israel has exceeded $10 billion.

31. The struggle of the Palestinian people for its
inalienable rights occupies a most important place in
the national liberation struggle of the peoples of the
world. Today we can see how, as a result of a Ion&
drawn-out, stubborn and difficult struggle, the people
of Zimbabwe has finally won its right to self-determination and independence. Along with the decisive
contribution to that liberation struggle made by the
people of Zimbabwe itself under the leadership of
the Patriotic Front, the broad international support
which was given through different channels, including
the United Nations, also played an important part in
that victory. This shows once again the importance of
broad international support for the just struggle of
the Arab people of Palestine to exercise its inalienable
national rights. Numerous statements in defence of
those rights by socialist, non-aligned and other States
demonstrate the growth of international solidarity
with the just cause of the Palestinian people.

27. By blocking the exercise of the inalienable rights
of the Arab people of Palestine, the United States has
been impeding a just Middle East settlement and the
establishment of lasting peace in the region. Clearly,
there are people in the United States who believe that,
if a political settlement of the Middle East problem is
delayed and the situation of tension is preserved, it
will be easier to achieve the long-term goals of
American foreign policy in that area. Those goals are
well known: they are to create a network of American
military bases in countries of the Middle East and the
Near East, Africa and the Indian Ocean, to establish

32. But now words are no longer enough. We cannot
simply sit and wait while, behind the backs of the Palestinian people, talks are going on which are designed
4

to impose upon that people a new yoke in the form
of “administrative autonomy”. We cannot stand by
and do nothing while Palestinian lands are being
plundered, water resources are being exhausted and a
whole people remains deprived of its inalienable
national rights, a people in exile and captivity.

unambiguously spelled out those rights and also overwhelmingly endorsed the right of the Palestinian people
to present its own case and participate in any peace
negotiations through its legitimate representative, the
Palestine Liberation Organization. This position is
now recognized by the great majority of the States
within the world community.

33. In these circumstances, the Council must finally
do its duty and support the inalienable rights of the
Arab people of Palestine, Any delay in solving this
problem in the Council will only play into the hands of
those who oppose the exercise of these rights by the
Palestinians, who have an interest in maintaining
tension and an explosive situation in the Middle East
and who are aiming at preventing a genuinely just and
comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict.

39. Five years ago, the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People was
established with the task of recommending a basic
framework for a viable solution of the problem. We
are meeting here today to consider the report of that
Committee. *
40. My delegation takes this opportunity to pay a
well-deserved tribute to the Chairman and the other
members of the Committee for their valuable contribution to this process. In harmony with the position
it has taken in the past, Bangladesh has endorsed the
recommendations and cardinal principles enunciated
by the Committee in the belief that they represent a
viable prescription for peace. It has now become
obvious that any equitable solution cannot remain
confined to the hidebound parameters of Council
resolution 242 (1967). There has been a substantial
forward movement in the intervening period of 13years
or so. There have been qualitative changes universally
recognized by our global society. Four million Palestinians cannot simply be wished away as though
they did not exist. Nor can resolution 242 (1967)
be stretched to justify illegality and expansionism or
to cloud the cardinal principles of the Charter, principles that have underscored the fact that no country
can be permitted to embark on a policy of conquest
and aggrandizement, that no country can be allowed to
enjoy the fruits of its aggression and that no people
can be denied its inalienable right to its own homeland.

34. Mr. AHSAN (Bangladesh): Mr. President, it is
with particular pleasure that my delegation welcomes
your assumption of the presidency for this month, not
least because of the close and friendly ties that exist
between our two countries. Your recognized diplomatic abilities and your commitment and dedication
to peace fully assure us of capable and effective
leadership. We assure you of our fullest co-operation.
35. I also wish to express our appreciation to Ambassador Mills of Jamaica for his able presidency last
month and we fully join in the high tributes paid to him
for steering our work so efficiently during the month
of March.
36. This debate constitutes a resumption of efforts
intensified over the past year to resolve the critical
issue of Palestine and the rights of the Palestinian
people. This is a charge that the Council can no longer
ignore with equanimity without imperilling peace and
compounding injustice.

41. In spite of this, Israel persists in pursuing its
own internationally denounced prescription for peace
through a policy that is the very antithesis of peace.
It has sought to justify, under the blanket cover of
so-called security requirements, measures that violate
every norm and principle of the Charter. Thus, Israel
continues not only illegally to occupy Arab lands,
but to encroach upon and annex those lands permanently through its officially sanctioned policy of settlements. The Chairman of the Committee has referred
specifically to the latest development in this regard in
the letters that figure on the agenda of this debate, a
development which cannot but invite open condemnation.

37. For more than three decades the United Nations
has been seized of the question of Palestine as the key
element in any viable approach to a comprehensive
solution of the Middle East problem. The heart of the
matter is the people of Palestine themselves-the
innocent victims of aggression, dispossession, dispersion and deprivation, and of the denial of their
fundamental rights, Their miserable plight and the
fulfilment of their legitimate aspirations has formed the
subject of exhaustive debate, discussion and innumerable resolutions, but with little practical result.
38. Initially the genera1 problem was obscured
because it was treated purely on a humanitarian plane;
the net result of that was that the rights of the PaC
estinian people were ignored, their existence as a
people with its own historic tradition was denied and
their status as a nation was obliterated. Since 1974,
however, the question of Palestine has finally been
dealt with in its true perspective as an essentially
political problem, the struggle of a people for its right
to self-determination and the acknowledgement of its
inalienable national rights. The General Assembly

42. Israel’s continued and flagrant violation of all
aspects of the human rights of the Palestinian people
has been repeatedly spelled out and amply documented
in this Council. Its wanton and repeated acts of aggression against Lebanon are also a matter of record.
Perhaps the most insensitive aspect of Israel’s policy
is its attempt to alter the status of the Holy City of
Jerusalem and to annex that city as an integral part of
Israel.
5

49. The Arab people of Palestine, like any other
people, is entitled to self-determination and has a right
to its own sovereign State. That is not an empty
phrase but a fully justified norm of our times. It is
founded on international law and is morally justified.
It makes political sense and is in keeping with the
trends and developments of our century, which include
the elimination of colonialism.

43, The continuing Israeli policy of changing the
physical
and demographic character of the occupied
Arab territories through the construction of Israeli
settlements and the unleashing of death, destruction
and terror on the innocent civilian population,
including women and children, involves such a blatant
violation of international law that it has evoked concern
and criticism even from Israel’s friends and sympathizers.

50. On 29 November 1947 [resolution 181 (U)], the
General Assembly decided to terminate the Mandate
of the United Kingdom and to partition Palestine
into two independent States: an Arab State and a
Jewish State. The State of Israel was founded, but the
Arab State provided for by the Assembly still does not
exist. It fell victim to the imperialistic policy of “divide
and conquer”, and particularly to the ambitions of
imperialistic circles in the United States to create in
the Middle East their own imperialist bastion in the
form of Israel, on the basis of their common interests
of domination and their designs on oil, in particular.
That policy led to conflict, war and bloodshed, and a
continuation of that policy cannot bring peace to the
region.

44. The rapidly spreading trend of aggression by a
militarily stronger nation against a militarily weaker
one has now assumed such an alarming magnitude
that global peace and security are clearly in great
jeopardy. But the seeds of that trend were sown in
the violation of the rule of law by Israel through
its act of naked aggression and its defiance, with
impunity, of decisions of the United Nations. The
deepening crisis in the Middle East presents a sad and
tragic contrast to the peaceful resolution of the conflict
in Zimbabwe through the effective application of the
rule of law and the principles of justice, fair play and
democratic government.
45. The position of Bangladesh on what constitutes
a comprehensive, just and durable solution of the
Middle East problem has been repeatedly enunciated
in the Council. We remain convinced that a fair and
lasting solution demands the complete and immediate
withdrawal of Israel from all occupied territories,
including the Holy City of Jerusalem, the restoration
of the inalienable national rights of the Palestinian
people, including its right to its own independent State,
and the acceptance of the PLO as the sole and legitimate representative of the Palestinian people.

51. Still today we hear the ruling circles of Israel and
their imperialist protectors and patrons refusing the
Arab people of Palestine the right to create its own
State, a right they consider natural for their own
people. It is alleged that the security of the people of
Israel will be threatened if the Palestinian people
comes to exercise its right to self-determination, That
is to say, in Tel Aviv it is believed that the security
of Israel can be guaranteed only if another people is
doomed to eke out an existence in conditions of
military occupation. But history shows us that the
reverse is true. The people of Israel will also be
deprived of lasting peace if there is no solution to
the fundamental problem of the Middle East conflict:
the Palestinian question.

46. Mr. FLORIN

(German Democratic Republic)
Permit me to congratulate you, Mr. President, on your assumption of the
important post of President of the Council. You represent a country whose actions for the attainment of
the goals of the United Nations have won widespread recognition. My delegation is convinced that
your well-known diplomatic skill, your energy and
your experience will help the Council successfully to
complete its task.

(interpretation

from Russian):

52. We could not expect a people like the Palestinian
people to resign itself without a word to the fate of
refugees without any rights, They have been fighting
and will continue to fight, like the people of Zimbabwe
and all other peoples which have freed themselves
from the colonial yoke.

47. I also feel the need to express my deep respect,
and that of my delegation, to Ambassador Mills of
Jamaica, President of the Security Council for the
month of March, for his exemplary performance of
those important functions.

53. One can read in the newspapers that in a certain
country no politician can be elected President if he
recognizes the right of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination. In other words, the election of a President has come to depend on the policy of colonial
enslavement of another people. There are cynics who
say that, since three fifths of the world has already
been declared the sphere of interest of a certain great
Power, the small country which is at issue here has no
significance. Such an approach to the rights of another
people might be possible for politologists who think
and act like world policemen, but it is not possible
for an organization of States such as the United
Nations.

48. The German Democratic Republic is a member of
the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People. It assumed the obligations of membership of that Committee in order to
defend peace and security in the Middle East and the
just cause of the oppressed Arab people of Palestine.
The report of the Committee has the support of the
delegation of the German Democratic Republic.
6

54. A new balance of forces in the world, the selfless
gruggleof the Palestinian people under the leadership
ef the Palestine Liberation Organization, and support
of that struggle by many Arab, Islamic and socialist
States,by the non-aligned movement and by the peaceloving citizens of capitalist States have led to widespread recognition of the fact that without a solution
to the Palestine problem it is impossible to settle the
Middle East conflict, that the inalienable rights of the
Arab people of Palestine must be recognized, that the
PLO is the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinianpeople, and that the PLO must participate on
sa equal footing in all talks on the Palestine question,
In spite of terror and naked violence, in spite of the
indescribable sufferings that the Arab people of Palestinehave undergone and are still undergoing, the
PLO has maintained its constructive position on the
questionof a lasting and just solution to the Middle
Eastconflict. As far back as 1974,the PLO expressed
its readinessto play its part in a political settlement if
that settlement were to include the exercise of the
lawful rights of the Palestinian people.
55. Since the imperialistic machinations are encountering difficulties, various circles are attempting to
manceuvreinstead of giving up their untenable positions. Camp David was one such attempt, an attempt
that has failed.
56. A new major threat to the Arab world and hence
to international peace and security has arisen. There is
an intention to hold talks on so-called autonomy for
the Palestinians in the Arab territories occupied by
Israel. But the mere fact of the exclusion of the PLO
from talks that affect the Arab people of Palestine is
illuminating with regard to the approach to this problem.Of course, the problem is not simply the violation
of rules of conduct by parties to the talks, but rather
the fact that the goals pursued run counter to the
interests of the Palestinian people and are aimed at
enabling Israel to broaden its expansion. Nor is it
genuine autonomy that is involved here, such as is
provided for certain territories in international law;
it is rather a matter of extending Israeli domination
of the occupied Arab territories for an indefinite
period, so that at any time it would be possible to use
themfor further actsof aggression againstneighbouring
States.The representative of an Arab State has called
this kind of autonomy a form of bantustanization.
57. We cannot bring about a comprehensive, just and
lastingpeaceful settlement in the Middle East by means
of separate agreements under imperialist sponsorship
and without the equal participation of the PLO, the
sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian Arab
People. The only possible peace programme can be
very briefly formulated as follows. A democratic
Peacebetween the Arab countries and Israel requires
thewithdrawal of Israeli troops from all the Arab territories occupied since 1967; recognition of the inaiienable right of the Arab people of Palestine to selfdetermination, including its right to the creation of an

independent, sovereign Palestinian State; and recognition of the right to existenceof all Statesin the region.
The Security Council would be rendering invaluable
assistanceto all those who are striving for a comprehensive and lasting peace settlement in the Middle
East if it were to confirm right now these ideas for
a peace programme.
58. Action to consolidatepeace and to bring about a
Peaceful solution to the Middle East conflict is
extremely urgent in view of the military preparations
being made by imperialist circles in the Near and
Middle East. Fleet concentrationsand the creation of
new military basesby the United States constitute a
serious threat to the Arab world. Here in the Council
we have already drawn attention to the intention to
deploy new American medium-range missiles in
southern Europe that could be aimed at the North
African region, among others. Those measures help
to fan the flames of the arms race and encourage
adventuristic circles in Israel to undertake such provocative steps as the forcible creation of so-called
Israeli educational centres right in the middle of the
Arab city of Al-Khalil, in the occupied West Bank
of the Jordan,
59. So we are facing a very dangerous development, and the Council must make its weight felt. The
delegation of the German Democratic Republic is
ready to play its part here in any efforts based on
the interests of peace and security and aimed at
bringing about a peaceful solution to the Middle East
conflict.
60. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerarion fro/n Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Bahrain.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
61. Mr. AL-SAFFAR (Bahrain): Mr. President,
allow me first of all to thank you as well as the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to take part in the debate on the item under consideration.
62. On this occasion I should like to extend to YOU
my sincere congratulations on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month. Your
experience and skill as a politician and a prominent
diplomat qualify you to preside over this august body.
Your accessionto that high office is a tribute to your
country, Mexico, which is playing an important role on
the international scene. I wish you every successas
you accomplish your important task.
63. The Council is meeting once again to discussthe
question of the Middle East. This shows not only that
the issue has a direct effect on international peace
and security
but that the decisions of the United
Nations are not being implemented or respected
64. On morethan one occasionthe Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian

The magazine continues:

People, which was set up pursuant to General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), has presented its
recommendations to the Council, but no decision has
been taken, The report of that Commiteee which was
presented last week [2204th meeting] by its efficient
Chairman, Ambassador Falilou Kane of Senegal-to
whom I pay a special tribute for his skilful conduct of
the deliberations of the Committee-contains a
summary of the efforts made by the General Assembly
over more than 30 years to solve the Palestinian
problem. In fact, the report reflects the United Nations
resolutions, and the recommendations contained
therein are in conformity with the basic requirements
of international law and the principles of the Charter.
Although those recommendations were endorsed by
the General Assembly, they have never been implemented because of the intransigent attitude of Israel
and its sustained attempts to block the implementation
of United Nations resolutions with the objective of
perpetuating its occupation of Arab territories.

“In one particularly ugly incident, . . . armed
men stormed the house of two stone-cutters, Abdel
Aziz Idris and his brother Hussein. . . . . The Idris
children and Abdel’s pregnant wife were beaten
before an Israeli , . . patrol arrived to rescue them.”
And, according to The New York Times Magazine,
the gunmen had recently immigrated to Israel from the
Soviet Union and the United States. In other villages
and towns, residents are subjected to the same molestation and other kinds of harassment.
69. According to The New York Times Magazine
of 6 April 1980
“ . . . World Zionist Organization . . . will spend
at least $187 million this year to expand old settlements and create new ones. . . . The Zionist organization suggested70 new West Bank settlements that
would increase the Jewish population there to
100,000 by 1983.”

65. The Council has been dealing with the situation
in the Middle East for the last three decades but,
owing to the negative position of one of its permanent
members, has been unable to adopt measures to end
the occupation of Arab territories.

70. Israel’s policy of settlements in the occupied
Arab territories has been condemned by the world
community, including Israel’s supporters from among
Western countries. Not only does that policy violate
article 49 of the Geneva Convention relative to the
Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,2 which prohibits the Occupying
Power from “deport[ing] or transfer[ringJ parts of its
own civilian population into the territory it occupies”,
but it also constitutes an obstacle to peace in the
region.

66. While the Council remains immobilized in connection with this problem, Israel continues its aggressive and expansionist policy in the occupied
Arab territories. It has become quite clear that Israel’s
continued measures in those territories are aimed at
making that occupation afait accompli and at annexing
the territories once and for all. In Jerusalem; the
Israeli authorities have embarked on the eviction of
Arabs from their houses, the confiscation of Moslem
waqfland and the demolition of historic Arab buildings,
It is evident that these measures are undertaken in
order to force the evacuation of the Arab Palestinians
from that city.

71. On several occasions, the United States, which
is an ally and a staunch supporter of Israel, has
denounced the policy of settlements, characterizing it
as illegal and as obstructing peace. But, while the
United States denounces that policy in public, it continues its financial, military and moral support of
Israel. As a matter of fact, had it not been for the
financial and military aid it gets from the United
States, Israel would not have pursued that policy of
contempt for United Nations resolutions,

67. Since the occupation of the West Bank in 1967,
the Israeli Government has been authorizing the
establishment of settlements in that region, near Arab
towns and villages; and in many cases those settlements are built on confiscated privately-owned Arab
land.

,

72. There is sufficient evidence that the policy of
building settlements in the occupied Arab territories
has been intensified since the signing of the Camp
David agreements, thus complicating more and more
the situation in that region and making it difficult for
the United Nations to implement its resolutions
concerning the exercise by the Palestinian people of
its inalienable rights. This is one of the grave consequences of these agreements which, their initiators
try to make us believe, constitute the basis of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East. For the aforesaid reason the Camp David agreements have been
condemned and denounced by the Arab world.

68. The Palestinians in the occunied territories are
subjected to a policy of terror and humiliation. In
Hebron the Arab residents are regularly intimidated
by the intruders, who are protected by Israeli soldiers.
As is noted in Time magazine of 31 March,
“Scarcely a week passeswithout some incident of
vandalism or vigilantism. Grapevines of Arab
villagers are cut. The tires of Arab-owned vehicles
are slashed and windows smashed. Gun-wielding
Israelis invade the houses of Hebron residents,
threatening and terrorizing them. At the Haram
Al-Khalil Mosque, . . . Jews disrupt the prayers of
devout Moslems.”

73. Since the United Nations has been dealing with
this problem for the last three decades we believe that
8

-i

6

3 y ( ./

it isthe only appropriate forum for solving the Middle
Eastconflict. We also believe that the Palestinian
--homelandcannot be the subject of any bargaining
andthat any international attempt to solve the Middle
Eastproblem that does not include recognition of the
inalienablerights of the Palestinian people will not
bringpeace and stability to that region. Those rights
havebeen recognized and confirmed by the internationalcommunity on several occasions.
74. We are convinced that any settlement of the Palestinianproblems must take into consideration the
following principles: first, the question of Palestine is
at the heart of the Middle East conflict and there can
heno solution of that problem without the realization
of the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people;
secondly,full implementation of the legitimate and
inalienablerights of the Palestinian people-to return
to their homes and properties and to achieve selfdetermination, national independence and sovereignty-will contribute to the final settlement of the
MiddleEast’conflict; thirdly, full participation, on an
equal footing with other parties, of the Palestine
Liberation Organization, the only representative of
the Palestinian people, is indispensable. These are
thereal and solid foundations on which to establish a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.
75. We believe that the report presented to the Council by the Chairman of the Committee on the InalienableRights of the Palestinian People spells out all the
appropriate means for putting these principles into
effect.The programme proposed in the report to enable
the Palestinian people to exercise their inalienable
rights is a realistic one because it takes into considerationthe existing situation in Palestine and in the
Middle East region.
76. The whole climate of the world today is one
that rejects occupation and racism, wherever they
may exist or be practised, It is unthinkable that in
thelast quarter of the twentieth century, when all the
colonial Powers recognize the right to self-determination and independence of the people under their
domination, Israel should emerge as a racist and
colonial Power. It denies the Palestinian people their
right to self-determination and continues to OCCUPY
andcolonize their homeland.
77. Rhodesia, which is a settler-colonialist State,
deniedfor a long time the right of the people of Zimbabwe to self-determination, but in the end it was
forced to accept the reality of that right. It seemsthat
only the Palestinians, according to Israel and the
United States, are not fit for self-determination.
78. The Palestinian people will continue their struggle
to achieve self-determination and to establish a
SovereignState on their territory, like any other people
in the rest of the world, because they are struggling
for a just cause and because of their love for and
attachment to their soil. These feelings are shared by

L’

I

all the Palestinianpeople, whether they be in exile or
living under occupation in their homeland. The Palestinian Poet,Tawfiq Zayyad, expressedthose feelings
in these words:
“Here we have a past, a present and a future.
“Our roots are entrenched deepin the earth.
“Like twenty impossibles,we shall remain”.
79. The PRESIDENT (illterpretarion fiotn Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Morocco.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
80. Mr. AYACHI (Morocco) (interprefation from
Mr. President, first of all I should like to
extend my thanks to you and to the other members
of the Council for having allowed my delegation to
participate in this important debate. It is a source of
great pleasure and satisfactionfor me to extend congratulations to you upon your assumption of the
presidency of the Council for this month, I am confident that your great qualities, which you gave evidence of during your performance of your functions
as the representative of a great country, will ensure
the successof our work.
Spanish):

[The speaker continued in French.]

81. Barely one month ago, the Council considered
the situation in the occupied Arab territories, including
Jerusalem, following the serious and deliberate
action by which Israel flouted the most elementary
rights of the Arab population, stepping up the
plundering of occupied Arab land and desecrating the
Holy Places of Islam located on that land. In its
wisdom, the Council unanimouslycondemnedIsrael’s
actions in its resolution 465(1980).However, notwithstanding that firm position taken by the entire membership of the Council, Israel not only defied that resolution but redoubled its arrogance and continued its
policy of settling and Judaizing the Palestinian Arab
lands.
82. It is against this sombre background that the
Council today is resuming consideration of the question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its
inalienable rights. The international community long
ago agreed that this question is at the centre of the
problem of the Middle East. Hence the importance of
the present debate and the urgent need to conclude it
in a positive manner.
83. Ever since 1976the Council has had before it the
report of the Committeeon the Exerciseof the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People. It should be
pointed out that at its thirty-first session the General
Assembly endorsed the recommendations contained
in the report and called upon the Council to take the
necessary action to implement them. These recom-

ality and justice, we call upon the Council to follow
the course of action laid down by the General Assembly
and approve the recommendations
of the Committee.
In our opinion, the Council can no longer afford to
turn its back on the solidarity and support that all
international
political bodies have shown for those
recommendations.

mendations are the fruit of a consensus that was
skilfully reached in that Committee. They are based on
the following fundamental principles: first, the question of Palestine is at the heart of the problem of the
Middle East and, consequently, no solution will be
realistic if it fails to take into account the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people; secondly, the exercise
by the Palestinian people of their right to return to
their homes and to achieve self-determination,
independence and national sovereigny will contribute to a
settlement of the crisis in the Middle East; thirdly,
participation by the Palestine Liberation Organization,
representative of the Palestinian people, on an equal
footing with the other parties is indispensable in all
efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle
East held under the auspices of the United Nations;
fourthly, the acquisition of territory by force is inadmissible and Israel is under an obligation to evacuate
completely and rapidly all occupied Arab territories,
including Jerusalem.

89, As Acting President of the Organization of the
Islamic Conference, Morocco would like to take this
opportunity to recall the determination
of the Islamic
community, frequently expressed in the course of that
Conference, to work by every possible means for the
unconditional and complete withdrawal of Israel from
all occupied Arab and Palestinian territories, including
Jerusalem, and for the attainment of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people.
90. Representatives will surely agree with me that it
is high time that the aspirations of the Palestinian
people were respected and realized, thereby putting an
end to an injustice that has made Palestinians strangers
in their own land, in those cases where they have not
been forced to live in exile.

84. The sufferings of the Palestinian people and the
injustices of which they are still the victims have
taken on disturbing proportions in the light of the
intransigent, irresponsible and altogether reprehensible
policy of Israel vis-h-vis the Palestinian people.

91. Before I conclude, my delegation would like to
take this opportunity once again to express our unconditional support to the fraternal people of Palestine and
its sole authentic representative, the PLO.

85. Israel’s scorn for the decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council and, indeed, for
world public opinion, is clearly proved-if
there was
any need for that-by
the provocative decisions
recently taken by the Israeli authorities, leading to the
expropriation
of large areas of Arab land in the
northern part of Jerusalem near Bethlehem and the
creation of new settlements there.

92. The PRESIDENT
(interpreratio/z~om
Spanish):
The next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam.
I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
93.

Mr. HA VAN LAU (Viet Nam) (interprerufion
I should like my first words to be words
of thanks to you, Mr. President, and to the other
members of the Council for giving me the opportunity
to speak at this important meeting.

86. While it carries out those almost daily practices,
Israel has constantly stated that it wants peace in the
Middle East. Is that not the very aim of the recommendations of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, which
lay the groundwork for a just and lasting peace in the
area? But Israel must have the courage to set aside
its expansionist, annexationist designs. How can one
reconcile Israel’s alleged desire for peace with its
practices, which violate the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, entail the annexation and Judaization of Palestinian lands, and are made more serious
by the desecration of the Holy Places of Islam in
Palestine, and in particular in Jerusalem.

from French):

87. Israel’s friends must induce it to accept the
inescapable fact that the peace and security that it
wants can become a reality only if there is a radical
change in its attitude and only if it recognizes the
right of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
national independence and sovereigny, including the
creation of an independent State.

95. I should like also to extend my sincere congratulations to Ambassador Mills of Jamaica, a country
which has long been a friend of Viet Nam, for his
enlightened conduct of the Council’s deliberations
during the month of March. I should like to take this
opportunity
to express, on behalf of the Socialist
Republic of Viet Nam, our deep appreciation to Ambassador Mills, President of the Council last month,
and to the other representatives for their messages of
condolence and sympathy to the Government
and
People of Viet Nam in the painful loss they have just

94. I am pleased to see the representative
of
Mexico, a country with which the Socialist Republic
of Viet Nam has close and friendly relations, presiding
over the Council this month. Guided by the traditions
of justice and freedom of the valiant people of Mexico,
Ambassador Muiioz Ledo will, I am sure, make a
positive contribution
to a decision by the Council
on the problem before it, a problem that is as important as it is urgent.

88. The Moroccan delegation is convinced that the
Council has a special responsibility for restoring peace
and security in the Middle East. In the name of mor10

sustajned in the death of their lamented

President

Ton DUC Thang.

96. We are pleased at the great interest shown by
the Council in the problem of Palestine, a problem
of primary importance that lies at the heart of the
Middle East conflict, less than a month after its
meetings on the situation in the occupied Arab territories, by responding positively to the urgent request
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the PdeStinian People.
97, The debate on this question in the United Nations,
which began several decades ago, is particularly
keen today, now that almost all the international community is giving increasingly broad support to the
causeof the liberation of the Palestinian people.
98. The successes scored by that martyred people
these past few months throughout the world are particularly significant. Firm and unequivocal support
for the Palestine Liberation
Organization, the sole
authentic representative
of the Palestinian people,
comes today not only from the non-aligned and
socialist countries but also from the countries of
Western Europe and specifically from their most
authoritative spokesmen. The recent decision of the
Government of India to grant full diplomatic recognition to the representative of the PLO is further
eloquent proof.
99. That development,
which is by no means fortuitous and which was won by the heroic and uncompromising struggle of the Palestinian and Arab peoples,
is striking proof that any effort to ignore or usurp the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people is doomed
to failure. A broad consensus has now been reached
within the international
community to the effect that
a just and lasting peace in the Middle East must
include recognition of the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people: the right to self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty, the right to have
a homeland and the right to return to that homeland.
100. That fact is quite obvious, having been reaffirmed time and time again in the numerous resolutions and decisions adopted at meetings of various
United Nations bodies. It is furthermore a basic fact
that reflects the very purposes and principles of the
Charter.
101. However, it is deplorable that, despite the
general outcry at the United Nations against the
violation of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
People, innocent Palestinian, Lebanese, Syrian and
Jordanian Arabs continue to be murdered during
military operations and criminal air raids conducted
hy the Israeli forces; Arab territories continue to be
seized and turned into settlements; and shameless
manceuvres aimed at disregarding the PLO and wiping
nut Palestinian resistance by the signing of separate
agreements are being pursued systematically
by
Israel and its protector, the United States.

102. Worse still, scorning the decisions and resolutions of the General Assembly on the problem of the
Middle East and Palestine, the United States continues to encourage and support Israel economically,
militarily and diplomatically.
More than 10 billion
dollars have been allocated to the assistance programme for Israel during the few years of the administration of the current President of the United States.
Furthermore, the American military presence has been
intensified in the Gulf region with the shipment of
massive quantities of sophisticated arms and munitions to the Israeli forces, the creation of United States
rapid-deploylment forces, the search for bases and
port facilities and so on with a view to committing
acts of aggression or destabilizing the neighbouring
countries and thus seriously threatening peace and
security in the area.
103. For their part, the people and the Government
of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam wish to reaffirm
their position of firm support for the just cause of the
Palestinian
and Arab peoples. We vigorously
condemn the dark designs of American imperialism,
Zionism and the reactionary forces, which are trying to
divide the Arab people, usurp the national rights of the
Palestinian people, wipe out Palestinian resistance
and perpetuate the occupation of Arab territories. We
join the international community in demanding that
the Israeli aggressors withdraw from the occupied Arab
territories, that the fundamental national rights of the
Palestinian people be recognized, including its right to
establish an independent State on its homeland in
accordance with the Charter and that the PLO, the
sole authentic representative of the Palestinian people, be allowed to participate on an equal footing with
the other parties in all efforts, deliberations and conferences on the Middle East held under the aegis of
the United Nations.
104. At a time when the overwhelming majority of
Member States is impatiently awaiting concrete action,
a solution, or at least a decision from the Council on
the major problem of the Middle East-that is, the
question of Palestine-I wish to express the hope that,
as recommended by the General Assembly in its
resolution 34/65 A, the Council will examine and
implement as soon as possible the recommendations
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, -recommendations
which the General Assembly has endorsed, and that a
decision to that effect will be taken by the Council.
105. Convinced as we are that situations of injustice
in the world cannot be allowed to continue indefinitely, we earnestly hope that any obstacles which
the Council might have to face and which might once
again induce it to postpone a decision will this time be
surmounted.
106. Nowadays, any nation determined to fight for
its own survival, which is confident that its CXUS~ in
just and is assured of the support of the ?rogressivr

mathematical calculations and found that those 50 persons have been held for 160 days, which means
8,000 man-days. This caused the President to take a
decision yesterday that will also eventually call for the
use of the rapid-deployment
force of 110,000 men and
of the strike force of 1,800 Marines and for increasing
the strike force at the base on Diego Garcia. Further,
according to Defense Secretary Harold Brown, seven
freighters loaded with military supplies will be sent to
the area-he
called it the crisis area-and
150 jet
fighters and bombers, 12 other warships and a Marine
amphibious unit are all being moved to the area,
because he is frustrated after 160 days about the fate
of 50 people.

forces in the world will surely triumph in the end.
Contemporary
history has given us many examples of
such victimized
peoples in Africa, Asia and Latin
America, long betrayed by their oppressors, that in the
end won out over those retrograde forces.
107. We earnestly hope that the Council will act in
keeping with its lofty responsibilities
in order to
redress the injustices suffered by a people that has for
so long been martyrized, thereby preserving international peace and security in the Middle East and
throughout the world.
108. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation
from Spanish): The representative
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization has asked to speak. I now call on him.

112. To pursue this mathematical
calculation: does
he not understand that the world, and not only the
Palestinian people and the other Arabs, really feel
frustrated and act when the fate of 4 million Palestinians has been in suspense for 12,000 days, which
equals 48 billion man-days, which is a proportion of
1 to 6 million? Therefore, the United States should at
least understand why the Palestinian people and the
world have had enough of its support of the racists,
violators and occupiers of my country. But, on the
contrary, the United States seems to maintain its
financial, material and military supply to the racists.
For example, we know that on Easter Sunday the
Israelis shelled the regions of Al-Shawakir, Tyre and
the Al-Rashydieyeh refugee camps for two and a half
hours. They used equipment given them by the United
States-175 calibre guns, F-18 and F-16 aircraft and
cluster bombs. It appears that murdering Palestinians
with the most sophisticated weapons is a pardonable
crime or not a crime at all, but an act that calls for
a reward. Those daily crimes apparently have not
attracted the attention of the international community.
However, I have something even more serious to
speak about.

109. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
At the Council’s meeting on Thursday, I referred to
the agonizing situation of a 20-year-old Palestinian,
Ziyad Abu Eain, in a penitentiary in Chicago. I learned
subsequently that on Thursday night Ziyad Abu Eain
was attacked in his cell in the infirmary by guards, who
removed his clothes and took away his blankets. The
reason given was that they were afraid that Ziyad
Abu Eain might commit suicide. In the infirmary he
was kept shivering all through the night, and Chicago
is not Florida. That is a flagrant form of inhuman
physical torture. It is not enough that the man is being
held until deportation
in response to a request by
the Israeli authorities for his extradition
for alleged
acts against the enemy; the Government of the United
States has also involved itself in physical torture. It
has acted unjustly against a young Palestinian while
Nazi criminals are still living comfortably
in this
country.
110. I am sure that yesterday we all watched the
President of the United States making his “historic”
statement. There was something really surprising in
that statement, namely, that at long last the President
of the United States was trying to act “in accordance
with the sanctions approved by 10 members of the
United Nations Security Council on 13 January”,
in a draft resolution that was vetoed. I am glad that at
least he takes cognizance of the deliberations of the
Council. But I am sure that the President of the
United States is aware of a resolution unanimously
adopted by the Council, including the United States,
on 1 March, which called upon Israel to cease immediately its acts and violations in the Palestinian territories occupied since June 1967. Apparently the President of the United States has forgotten about that
resolution, because the United States has rewarded
Israel for defying that resolution by granting it an extra
200 million dollars.

113. On 31 March, I referred to a statement made by
the National Security Adviser to President Carter,
Mr. Zbigniew Brzezinski, in which he said:
“There is a question with Gaza, specifically,
whether it is Palestinian or Arab or what. The issue
is being negotiated.”
[2204th meeting, para. 143.1
Now President Sadat has volunteered an explanation.
The newspaper Yediot Aharortoth reported on 4 April
that President Sadat would impose autonomy on the
Palestinians living in the occupied Gaza Strip even if
they refused to participate in the self-rule plan. The
newspaper reported that Mr. Sadat said that autonomy, even if unwanted by the Palestinians,
was
necessary “to put an end to the suffering under the
Israeli occupation”.

111. While I do not understand the mentality of the
President of the United States, I am sure that he is
really concerned, as he said, about the 50 American
persons in the United States Embassy in Tehran, who
have been held since November.
I have done some

114. That is really touching. Mr, Sadat is concerned
about putting an end to the suffering of the Palestinians in the Gaza Strip under the Israeli occupation. But he does not seem to be concerned about
12

putting an end to the suffering of other Palestinians
who, because of the occupation, are denied the right
to return to their homes and live in peace, other Palestinians who are subjected to Israeli artillery every
day. Of course, we can at least say that President
Sadat is in this country to meet with Begin and Carter
to arrange to impose this plan and I am sure that the
Americans will help him a great deal. They have learned
how to deal with people in reservations, but the Palestinians are not Indians to be kept in reservations.
This plan of theirs is nothing but a plan to enslave
the Palestinian people by denying them their right to
live in dignity. I am sure that what President Sadat,
president Carter and Mr. Begin are doing is in complete defiance of Council resolutions. Many of those
resolutions were adopted unanimously,
and those
three men do not seem to take account of them.
115. We believe it is high time for the Council to
intervene in order to prevent an exacerbation of the
situation. It is high time for it to pronounce itself in
order to prevent an aggravation of the situation. It

should not wait until more damage is done. It is called
upon to take immediate action, and I mean immediate,
We do not need an appeal to Israel to freeze its policy
of establishing settlements for at least three months;
we know that Israel has rejected even that appeal.
116. President Sadat has said: “We pledged ourselves
to work tirelessly to put the Palestinian problem on the
road to a just settlement”. I wish to state that selfrule cannot be imposed on the Palestinians. That is
not the road to a just settlement.
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m.

NOTES
1 Official
Records of the General Assembly,
Thirty-fourth
sion, Supplement
No. 35.
* United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, p. 287.

Ses-

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations, Sales Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications des Nations Units sont en vente dans les librairies et les agences depositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libraire ou adresscz-vous A : Nations Unies, Section
des ventes, New York ou Geneve.
KAIC

IIOJISWiTh

WBflAHHH

OPI-AHHBAI(HW

Oli’IiEAZ1HEHHI~lX

M3nawfn
Opraiuf3aqwf
OPbemfkfemfb~x
HaqwB HOXHO ~yntm
mffax
H arewcmax
BO ncex patioHalt
bf”pa. Haeo~wre
CnpaaKn
8auIeM KtttlmHOW
MatYmKtte
Km
nNlutme
no
anpecy : OpraHH3aLVfR
Hattefi,
Ceuqrfn no npogaxe
u3nauuiI, I-ho-Moprc
Km
XCeHesa.
COMO

CONSEGUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

HAII(HH
B

KtmKKbtK
06
KDAaHHBX
OtheAHHeHHb~~

MaraB

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones de Ins Naciones Unidas esdn en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirfjase a: Naciones Unidas, Seccibn de Ventas,
NUeWt York o Ginebra.

Litho in United Nations, New York
