S/PRST/2000/37*

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 December 2000
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4239th meeting of the Security Council, held on 29 November 2000, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Guinea-Bissau”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement
on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council reiterates its support for the democratically elected
Government of Guinea-Bissau, and underlines that all parties concerned,
especially the members of the former military junta, must continue to uphold
the results of the elections and the principles of democracy, the rule of law, and
respect for human rights and civilian rule in the country.
“The Security Council welcomes the return to peace, democracy and
constitutional order in Guinea-Bissau, and urges all parties to work towards the
consolidation of peace in a spirit of cooperation and reconciliation.
“The Security Council notes with satisfaction the political progress made
so far in Guinea-Bissau, and stresses the importance of continued cooperation
by all parties towards the consolidation of sustainable peace in Guinea-Bissau.
The Council calls upon the members of the former military junta to subordinate
themselves fully to the civilian institutions and to withdraw from the political
process. The Council underlines that the primary responsibility for the
consolidation of peace lies with all the parties and the people of Guinea-Bissau
and is concerned that renewed political unrest may be harmful to the
consolidation of peace and to the commitment of donors to support the
reconstruction of Guinea-Bissau.
“In this connection, the Security Council underlines the importance of an
energetic continuation of the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process and the need for an urgent and accurate census of all military forces. It
recalls the statement of its President of 23 March 2000 (S/PRST/2000/10), and
underlines that timely funding for disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration is a critical factor to the successful implementation of the peace
process in Guinea-Bissau. The Council commends the support provided by the
Bretton Woods institutions to the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process in Guinea-Bissau, and stresses the importance of the
coordinated support of Member States for these activities.

* Reissued for technical reasons.

00-77211* (E)
`````````

011200

S/PRST/2000/37

“The Security Council recalls the statement of its President of 29
December 1998 (S/PRST/1998/38), and recognizes that the challenges of the
post-conflict situation in Guinea-Bissau require an integrated and consolidated
approach by all actors to support the Government of Guinea-Bissau, including
the United Nations system, the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund, as well as bilateral donors. In this regard, the Council once again
underlines the importance of ensuring a smooth transition from conflict
management to post-conflict peace-building and reconstruction, which can be
greatly enhanced through adequate coordination of the efforts of all. The
Council stresses the special position of the United Nations Peace-building
Support Office in Guinea-Bissau (UNOGBIS) in this regard.
“The Security Council recognizes and commends the important role
played by UNOGBIS towards helping consolidate peace, democracy and the
rule of law, including the strengthening of democratic institutions, and
expresses its appreciation for the activities of UNOGBIS. In order to optimize
the efforts of UNOGBIS, some degree of flexibility on the part of donors and
financial institutions is required concerning issues such as debt relief, trade
policies and internal budget constraints.
“The Security Council reiterates that economic rehabilitation and
reconstruction constitutes one of the major tasks facing Guinea-Bissau as it
emerges from conflict and that significant international assistance is
indispensable in promoting sustainable development there. The Council
underlines that an integrated and coordinated approach is required for GuineaBissau combining sustainable post-conflict peace-building and economic and
development issues.
“The Security Council calls upon Member States to provide generous
support at the next round table scheduled for February 2001 in Geneva.
“The Security Council acknowledges the relevance of the regional
dimension. It welcomes the initiatives the President of Guinea-Bissau and the
President of Senegal have taken towards stabilization of their common border
region. The Council encourages both Governments to explore further
possibilities to achieve peace and stability along the regional borders. It
commends the Economic Community of West African States and the
Community of Portuguese-Speaking Countries for their continuing
contributions towards the return of peace and democracy in Guinea-Bissau.
“The Security Council expresses its intention to keep the situation in
Guinea-Bissau under regular review and to coordinate with all actors in the
post-conflict peace-building process.”

2
