United Nations

S/PV.4928

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-ninth year

4928

th meeting
Thursday, 18 March 2004, 4 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. De La Sablière . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (France)

Members:

Algeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Angola . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Benin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Philippines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Romania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Baali
Mr. Gaspar Martins
Mr. Adechi
Mr. Sardenberg
Mr. Muñoz
Mr. Zhang Yishan
Mr. Fischer
Mr. Akram
Mr. Baja
Mr. Motoc
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Arias
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2004/220)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

04-27659 (E)

*
0
4
2
7
6
5
9
*

S/PV.4928

The meeting was called to order at 4.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199
(1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Letter dated 17 March 2004 from the Chargé
d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security
Council (S/2004/220)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Albania, Ireland, Japan, Jordan,
Serbia and Montenegro and The former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Security Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Goran Svilanovic, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, and invite him to
take a seat at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Svilanovic
(Serbia and Montenegro) took a seat at the
Council table; the representatives of the other
aforementioned countries took the seats reserved
for them at the side of the Council Chamber.
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda. The Council is meeting in response to the
request contained in a letter dated 17 March 2004 from
the Chargé d’affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of
Serbia and Montenegro to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
which is contained in document S/2004/220.
I should like to acknowledge the presence at the
Council table of His Excellency Mr. Joschka Fischer,
Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of

2

Germany. On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to him.
I welcome the Secretary-General, His Excellency
Mr. Kofi Annan, and I invite him to take the floor.
The Secretary-General: The Secretariat briefed
the Council this morning on the deplorable events of
the past two days in Kosovo. The overall security
situation throughout Kosovo is still highly unstable.
The number of fatal casualties now stands at 31. I
cannot emphasize strongly enough my deep
disappointment and sadness at this resurgence of
violence, which has already left many people dead and
hundreds wounded.
We cannot close our eyes to the fact that this
violence is ethnically motivated, with communities
attacking each other. Such violence must be strongly
condemned. The deliberate targeting of houses as well
as religious sites — such as churches, cemeteries and
monasteries — is shameful and inexcusable, as are the
subsequent attacks against mosques in other parts of
Serbia and Montenegro.
We must also condemn, in the strongest possible
terms, deliberate attacks on representatives of the
international community — in particular the staff of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and the troops serving with KFOR.
The situation in Mitrovica has become sufficiently
serious to warrant the relocation of international staff
from Mitrovica to a safer place in the region.
The recent events have highlighted the fragility of
the structures and relationships in Kosovo. It shows
that despite the progress that has been made since
1999, we have not come far enough. Mutual respect
between different communities is still not the accepted
norm that it should be. It is clear that we need to study
very carefully the implications for Kosovo’s future.
Our first priority must be to restore safety and
security. I thank NATO for its decision to reinforce its
troops in Kosovo.
The violence must cease. The leaders of Kosovo’s
communities and the representatives of its Provisional
Institutions must work with the international
community, with each other and with the people of
Kosovo to restore calm. Allow me in particular to
remind the leaders of the Kosovo Albanian community
that as the largest ethnic group, they have the

S/PV.4928

responsibility to protect and promote the rights of all
people within Kosovo, particularly its minorities.
I trust that the Security Council will give the
situation the urgent and serious attention it requires.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Goran
Svilanovic, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro.
Mr. Svilanovic (Serbia and Montenegro): I wish
to express my appreciation to you, Mr. President —
and, through you, to all other members of the Security
Council — for responding so quickly to my
Government’s request urgently to convene this
meeting. Indeed, yesterday’s extremely grave
developments in Kosovo and Metohija warrant
immediate and resolute action by the Security Council.
The violence committed against the Serbian
population in Kosovo and Metohija on 17 March is
jeopardizing the United Nations Mission there. All
efforts by the international community aimed at a
peaceful resolution of the problems of this southern
Serbia province are endangered. The Serbian
population has suffered a purge whose objective was its
ethnic cleansing from Kosovo and Metohija. KFOR
and the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) have failed so far to stop that
action.
It is particularly distressing that such an outbreak
of violent attacks on such a wide scale by Kosovo
Albanian extremists against the Serbian community in
the province has happened almost five years after the
establishment of an international presence there. Many
people have been killed; many more have been
wounded and injured. In the process, a number of Serb
patrimonial sites have been set ablaze. On behalf of the
Government of Serbia and Montenegro, I would like to
express our deepest condolences and sympathy to the
families of all the victims.
The attacks on the Serbian community in Kosovo
and Metohija are sending more than one signal. To the
Serbs, the signal is that there is no life for them in the
province and that they should leave. To KFOR and
UNMIK, the signal is that they have no real authority
and power in their area of operation. To the Security
Council, the signal — or rather the challenge — is that
its resolution 1244 (1999) will not be implemented,

especially with regard to the return of all refugees and
internally displaced persons and the creation of a
secure and safe environment for all communities in
Kosovo and Metohija.
Another signal from the Provisional Institutions
of Self-Government and Kosovo Albanian political
leaders to the international community is that they
cannot or do not want to go out in the streets to prevent
that kind of mass violence from happening. They want
authority, and a lot of authority was transferred to
them. However, they ignore the responsibilities that
come with authority.
The timing of the attacks is also indicative. In the
near future the Security Council was supposed to
finally receive the standards implementation plan.
Instead, we all received the signal that I have just
mentioned: Serbs should leave; after that it will be
much easier to fulfil standards. Secondly, just after the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
announced the date for the upcoming province-wide
elections, the Serbian community was given notice that
they should not think about participating in the
elections, but instead should pack and go. Thirdly, is
the situation now really conducive to continuing the
long-awaited dialogue that just recently started?
The current crisis is extremely serious and may
have far-reaching negative consequences. Nobody
should take it as yet another incident in a long
sequence of incidents over the past five years. On the
contrary, everybody involved should approach the
problem responsibly.
First and foremost, a resolution should be adopted
condemning Kosovo Albanian extremism and
terrorism. A political and security framework for
further action by the civilian and military missions in
these new and grave circumstances should be defined.
International forces should be strengthened and should
adopt a much more resolute stand. Extraordinary
measures are needed to physically protect the Serbian
population, which is already preparing to flee to central
Serbia.
Authorities and security forces of Serbia and
Montenegro are ready to provide any assistance and
cooperation to the United Nations Mission in applying
those measures. The situation in Kosovo and Metohija
calls for urgent and complete security stabilization. The
international presence must regain full control on the
ground.

3

S/PV.4928

In that regard, it is of utmost importance that
urgent measures be taken to secure the international
border between Serbia and Montenegro and Albania
and Macedonia in the area of Kosovo and Metohija.
According to our information, that border is completely
unguarded now and groups of armed terrorists are
coming into Kosovo and Metohija with large quantities
of arms and other military equipment. That could lead
to further deterioration of the security situation in the
province.
Most recent events clearly highlighted the fact
that political extremism — in terms of both demands
and methods — cannot lead to resolution of the
problem. Additional efforts are required, as well as
additional institutional guarantees. In that regard,
decentralization is essential and could be a potential
step towards stabilizing the situation of the Serbian
community in Kosovo and Metohija. Serbia and
Montenegro is ready to participate in the preparation
and implementation of a dialogue on the most
important matter of institutional guarantees and
decentralization.
Albanian extremism and terrorism in Kosovo and
Metohija has to be condemned. However, that is not
enough. The Security Council should define the
appropriate political and security instructions and
guidelines for the civilian and military missions in the
province in these new and difficult circumstances,
since organized violence such as occurred yesterday is
undoubtedly the single most serious threat to peace and
security in the entire region.
As a matter of urgency and as a minimum, all
planned reductions in the composition and resources of
KFOR and UNMIK should be cancelled. Also, KFOR
should re-establish protection for communities that
were gradually deprived of that. Religious and cultural
sites must be also protected full time.
It is obvious that statements and declarations of
good intentions are not sufficient if the issue of Kosovo
and Metohija is to be dealt with seriously. Such
statements are understood and taken by the extremists,
who actually control Kosovo and Metohija, as
expressions of weakness, not as a sign of resolve on the
part of international community, specifically UNMIK
and KFOR. Therefore, concrete and urgent action is
required to immediately put an end to the present wave
of violence. Otherwise, the objective of creating a

4

multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo and Metohija will
very soon be irreversibly damaged.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
for his statement. I now give the floor to the ViceChancellor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Mr. Joschka Fischer.
Mr. Fischer (Germany): I would like to thank my
colleague, Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro, for his statement, and the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive and informative
briefing. I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made later by Ireland on behalf of the
European Union.
We were shocked and dismayed as we learned of
the events unfolding in Kosovo yesterday. We
profoundly appreciate the great efforts made by the
Special Representative to the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, Mr. Holkeri, the staff of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
KFOR and the police to bring the situation under
control in the face of the dangers confronting them.
The violence has claimed many lives and caused injury
to large numbers of people among the Kosovar
communities as well as UNMIK, the international
police and KFOR, and it must be condemned in the
strongest words. Our hearts and our deeply felt
sympathies are with the victims and their families. I
would like to extend my condolences to them.
The international community as well as political
leaders in Kosovo, both ethnic Albanian and ethnic
Serb, have great responsibilities over the next few
days. The most important immediate task is to restore
and maintain order. KFOR troops and the police will
have our full support as they take whatever steps are
necessary to stop the violence. We were deeply
disturbed by reports that KFOR troops were themselves
the object of attack yesterday. Germany supports the
decision made to bring in additional KFOR troops.
All leaders of Kosovo, especially those who have
been elected, must show the utmost political courage in
order to prevent the violence from undoing all the
painstaking efforts made over the past several years
toward building a tolerant and democratic Kosovo. The
joint statement made yesterday by politicians together
with the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral was a useful first step. It rightly emphasized
the need to support the police and KFOR and noted the

S/PV.4928

importance of responsible media behaviour. Political
violence is fed by misinformation, and the press should
not abet the plans of extremists by crediting unfounded
rumours.
But political leaders in Kosovo must go further.
Inter-ethnic violence is absolutely unacceptable and
must be condemned. We expect those leaders not only
to speak out against violence but also to actively
promote inter-ethnic understanding. They must also
explain to their constituents that no political grievance
justifies taking the law into their own hands. Political
leaders should visibly support all efforts by law
enforcement authorities to apprehend and punish
anybody who committed crimes or abetted violence
and should explain clearly why those people are
enemies not only of public order but also of the
legitimate democratic aspirations of the people of
Kosovo. There will be no impunity for the perpetrators.
Now is the time for responsible Kosovo Albanian and
Kosovo Serb leaders to appear together before the
people of Kosovo and to defend democratic values
against anarchy and mayhem.
Political leadership in Belgrade should also
exercise its responsibilities. It is especially important at
this time to prevent acts of retribution in Serbia. That
would only lead to an escalation of violence and feed
into the hands of extremists. We urge Belgrade to do all
it can to prevent further attacks on religious sites such
as took place yesterday in Belgrade and Nis. We also
urge Belgrade to continue the direct dialogue with
Pristina that was begun this month with the working
groups on energy and missing persons.
Yesterday’s events highlight the stark choice
facing the people of Kosovo. Either they create a
society based on tolerance, multi-ethnicity and
democratic values, or they live in chaos and misery. It
is too early to say how the violence has set back the
process of implementing democratic standards. But
once calm has been restored, the only responsible
course is to proceed as quickly as possible with the
efforts to implement the “Standards for Kosovo” and to
finalize the implementation plan. Only by focusing on
achieving those standards can Kosovo put this ugly
series of incidents behind it and begin again to make
progress with regard to its European aspirations.
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with the understanding reached among Council
members, I wish to remind all speakers kindly to limit

their statements to no more than five minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate their texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber.
Mr. Muñoz (Chile)(spoke in Spanish): I would
like first to thank you, Mr. President, for having
convened this meeting to discuss the situation in
Kosovo. This debate is of great importance, given the
recent events that have taken place on the ground.
We welcome the presence among us of the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany, Joschka Fisher, and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro, Goran Svilanovic.
Their participation is powerful testimony to the gravity
of the events that we are considering today.
My Government condemns with the utmost
vigour the atrocious acts of violence — the worst since
1999 — that have taken place between Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs in Mitrovica, Pec and
elsewhere, resulting in a tragic loss of life, injury to
hundreds, including personnel of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR, and substantial material damage. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. Impunity must
not be allowed to take hold in Kosovo.
We would like in particular to offer our
condolences to and express our solidarity with the
families of those who have died.
The acts of violence, which now seem to be out
of control, cannot and should not pressure us to attempt
interpretations regarding the ultimate motivation of
such violence or cause us to falter in our efforts to
achieve a multi-ethnic, democratic Kosovo capable of
integrating all its inhabitants, without exclusion of any
form, pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999).
We are concerned about the political damage that
may be done to the process by those reprehensible acts.
We therefore call on all the parties involved to abandon
their combative posture and use available peaceful and
democratic means to resolve their differences.
The guns must be silenced and dialogue resumed.
Without constructive dialogue between Belgrade and
Pristina, or between UNMIK and the Kosovo
Assembly, a concrete response to the enormous
challenges that exist will remain a remote expectation.

5

S/PV.4928

Worse still, the most important of all the objectives —
ensuring that all the inhabitants of Kosovo can live in
their homeland in dignity, freedom and security —
would be undermined.
Finally, we would like to reaffirm our full support
for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, the personnel of UNMIK and the maintenance
of the policy of “standards before status”.
Mr. Zhang Yishan (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
should like first of all to express my gratitude to you,
Mr. President, for having convened this necessary and
timely meeting.
The Chinese delegation would like to welcome
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Germany to today’s meeting. I would also like to
welcome in particular the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Kofi Annan.
The Chinese delegation is shocked by the serious,
bloody events that have taken place in recent days in
Mitrovica and other cities in Kosovo, resulting in many
deaths and injuries. We condemn those acts of violence
in the strongest terms. I would like to take this
opportunity to express our deep condolences to the
families of the victims. We call upon the Albanian and
Serb communities in Kosovo to exercise maximum
restraint so as to prevent the situation from worsening.
Those tragic events have demonstrated that,
almost five years after the Security Council adopted
resolution 1244 (1999), the situation in Kosovo is still
very fragile and there is still a long way to go before
peace, stability and multi-ethnic harmony and peaceful
coexistence can be achieved in Kosovo. The
international community, the Government of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment must redouble their efforts to that end.
We welcome the joint statement made on 17
March by UNMIK, the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment, political leaders and other parties. We
support all the efforts made by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNMIK and
KFOR to re-stabilize the situation. We earnestly hope
that the Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
and other relevant parties will work closely with them
so as to prevent such events from recurring.
Mr. Motoc (Romania): The Romanian authorities
are deeply concerned about what has happened in

6

Kosovo in recent days. I believe that all the countries
in our region share this serious concern. We are also in
full agreement with the statement on Kosovo issued by
the European Union, with which we have associated
ourselves.
We believe that the gravity of the situation is
clearly evidenced by the presence at this meeting of the
German Vice-Chancellor, Mr. Joschka Fischer, and of
the Federal Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro, Mr. Goran Svilanovic. My delegation
appreciates the personal presence at this important
Security Council meeting of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Kofi Annan.
First and foremost, all violence should stop
immediately. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR have our full support to use their capabilities
and powers to restore calm and protect Kosovars,
regardless of their ethnic identity. We welcome
NATO’s decision to send reinforcements to Kosovo,
demonstrating the alliance’s will to carry out its
mission in Kosovo and its stability to do so. Any attack
against KFOR troops and UNMIK personnel is
unacceptable to us. The perpetrators of such attacks
and of all of the violent acts that have erupted in
Kosovo must be brought to justice as soon as possible.
Romania is profoundly saddened by the deaths
and injuries that occurred during the events in Kosovo,
including the casualties among KFOR troops and the
UNMIK international civilian police. We extend our
condolences to the families of the victims and our
sympathy and support to the injured.
Romania is also outraged and disappointed by the
massive display of ethnic hatred that was shown in
Kosovo at a time when our hopes were going towards a
committed implementation of the standards laid out by
the international community.
The deplorable and tragic events in Kosovo have
demonstrated beyond doubt that the international
community should remain focused and determined, and
that the highest priority should be given to enforcing
the rule of law, ensuring proper security for all ethnic
minorities and bringing to justice the perpetrators of
criminal acts. Until we have tangible progress in these
issues, we cannot approach successfully other problems
related to Kosovo’s future.

S/PV.4928

At the same time, we should not allow five years
of tremendous efforts in Kosovo to be washed out by
these events. Once normalcy is restored, there will be
important lessons to be taken by all concerned. But the
international community should be undeterred in its
fundamental objective of establishing a stable, multiethnic and democratic Kosovo, in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). There should be no turning
back to the past and no giving back to extremists.
The political leaders in Kosovo must exercise
their democratically established authority over the
population in order to unequivocally protect all
minorities and their extremely important religious,
cultural and historical heritage. This is a fundamental
value for Europeans, and we would want to make sure
in the future that it is equally appreciated and observed
by Kosovo society.
As I have mentioned before, Romania continues
to be fully committed, politically and as well as in very
concrete terms, to Kosovo’s stabilization. As a token of
this commitment, we are proud that yesterday a
Romanian gendarmes detachment faced up to the
pressure and fulfilled their responsibilities in helping
restore the situation in Mitrovica, along with their
colleagues of the multinational KFOR and UNMIK
troops.
Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I,
of course, join you, Mr. President, in welcoming the
Secretary-General, the Foreign Minister of Serbia and
Montenegro and the Foreign Minister of Germany, to
this Council meeting.
The events that have taken place in Kosovo
threaten the security of Kosovo and the wider region.
These are the most serious security incidents since the
end of NATO’s intervention in Kosovo in 1999. They
must halt and must not be repeated.
The United States fully supports the strong efforts
of KFOR and of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri, to re-establish order
and to calm the situation. KFOR, together with the
international civilian police and the Kosovo Protection
Force, are fully engaged. Those responsible for the
violence, on whatever side, should be brought to
justice.
My Government resolutely condemns these
incidents of serious violence in Kosovo. It is tragic that
a still undetermined number of people, perhaps 30 or

more, both Serbs and ethnic Albanians, have been
killed and many more injured. Churches and homes
have been burned. The United States extends its sincere
condolences to the families of all who have lost their
lives in Kosovo in the last days or who been injured or
have seen their property lost. We also condemn attacks
on the international presence, which are completely
unacceptable and which must cease.
We call on all people in Kosovo immediately to
restore calm, observe order, return to their homes, stop
damaging cultural, religious and historical sites, lift the
blockage of transportation arteries and support the
efforts of KFOR and the international civilian police.
We also urge the people and the Government of Serbia
and Montenegro to continue to support our efforts to
restore calm in Kosovo and to stop arson attacks on
religious sites in Serbia.
There can be no way forward for the people of
Kosovo other than to respond to yesterday’s joint
appeal of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and the leaders of the
Kosovo Provisional Institutions of Self-Government
urging the restoration of calm and order. The rule of
law is an essential condition for the future. We urge
leaders of the Provisional Institutions of SelfGovernment from all communities to continue to urge
their constituents to desist from violence fully and
unconditionally.
My authorities have asked me to conclude with an
appeal to the leaders of Kosovo: that they understand
that the complete cessation of violence is the
prerequisite for us to make decisions on Kosovo’s
future political status. This cannot be accomplished
through violence.
Mr. Gaspar Martins (Angola): We thank you
very much, Mr. President, for convening this timely
meeting on Kosovo. We welcome particularly the
presence of the Secretary-General, Kofi Annan, and the
presence of the Vice-Chancellor and Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Germany, Joschka Fischer and of
Foreign Minister Goran Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro.
The events taking place in Kosovo are
unexpectedly threatening years of hard work by
dedicated peace-builders and the huge financial, human
and political investment in peace by the international
community.

7

S/PV.4928

When, a few weeks ago, the Council considered
the Secretary-General’s report on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK),
(S/2004/71) and we heard the statement by the head of
the Mission, it was quite far away from our minds that
events like those occurring now could take place.
Despite difficulties and the awareness of the long way
to go before a democratic and multi-ethnic society
could be established in Kosovo, we were comforted by
assurances that real progress had been achieved and
that the benchmarks established by the international
community towards that end could be met in the
foreseeable future. The disturbing events occurring
now in Kosovo deserve our strongest condemnation
and are a wake-up call to the international community.
At the last meeting of the Council devoted to the
situation in Kosovo (see S/PV.4910), the Assistant
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
called our attention to a number of facts: the decrease
in ethnically-motivated crimes, but with the authors of
such crimes enjoying impunity; the discouraging
number of returns of displaced persons; and the lack of
political will to create conditions for the effective
participation of the Kosovo Serbs in the political
process. The Assistant Minister considered that
UNMIK’s main task should be to create sustainable
conditions for a multi-ethnic Kosovo, where all
communities could live freely and accede on an equal
footing to the Institutions. I mention these facts since
pointing them out will help us remember that
something was brewing and that there was a warning to
the Council.
In the view of my delegation, this is not a time
for despair, despite the gravity of the situation. The
international community’s commitment to Kosovo
must continue. In our view, the strategy applied so
far — the “standards before status” policy — is a just
one, which, with determination and preservation, will
bear results.
The events occurring now show that the
attainment of the final objective is further away than
planned, but we are still confident that the people of
Kosovo, with the assistance of the international
community, will be able to meet the objectives set out
in resolution 1244 (1999).
Before concluding, a word of condolence and
sympathy to the families of the victims, as well as a
word of encouragement for all those who strive for a

8

better future for the population and for a democratic
and multi-ethnic Kosovo.
I end by expressing my delegation’s full support
for the Special Representative, UNMIK and KFOR in
their efforts to stabilize the situation in Kosovo.
Sir Emyr Jones Parry (United Kingdom): I
would like to associate myself with the statement to be
delivered later by Ambassador Ryan on behalf of the
European Union, with the comments of all those who
have called for an end to violence and with those who
have expressed sympathy for the victims and their
families. And like others, the United Kingdom
welcomes very much the presence of the SecretaryGeneral and the two Ministers at this very important
debate.
Yesterday was a very bad day for Kosovo. As the
inter-ethnic violence spread, so the clock was turned
back. The truth is that Kosovo has too much history.
There has been too much inter-ethnic bloodshed in the
province. Instead, Kosovo has no choice but to move
forward. In the short term, its leaders must not only
condemn violence; they must use their influence
actively to work with the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and
KFOR to restore order.
This is the time to encourage calm, not the time
for rhetoric or irresponsibility. It is the time for
measured, considered action, not impetuosity. It is the
time to show solidarity between the different
communities, not to increase division. And it is the
time for democratic credentials to be burnished, not an
opportunity for anarchy and riot. Lastly, I think it is a
time for a continued and strengthened dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade.
At the request of the Secretary-General of NATO,
the United Kingdom is at this moment deploying a
spearhead battalion into Kosovo. It is the Operational
Reserve Force, and it will be there from tonight. It will
start to deploy to help stabilize the situation on the
ground.
But looking forward, resolution 1244 (1999)
charts a future. It sets a clear vision for Kosovo. It
gives an opportunity to Kosovo leaders. The
international
community
has
invested
very
substantially in that future and in that vision of a
tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic Kosovo. UNMIK,
Special Representative Holkeri and KFOR enjoy the

S/PV.4928

full support of the British Government in trying to help
achieve those goals.
That is why the Council has endorsed the
“Standards for Kosovo” paper and the review
mechanism. That remains the only way forward for
Kosovo. Those attempting to derail the process will not
be allowed to prevail, nor will the perpetrators of
violence succeed in speeding up final status
negotiations — quite the reverse. The international
community is entitled to expect and require the
implementation of those standards, to demand an end
to violence and to insist that Kosovo, its institutions
and all its people renew their commitment to the rule of
law, to the tolerant coexistence of communities and to
establishing a real democratic future for the province.
Mr. Adechi (Benin) (spoke in French): I thank
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting to
examine the tragic situation prevailing in Kosovo. My
delegation expresses its full appreciation to the
Secretary-General, whose presence among us at this
critical moment for the future of Kosovo demonstrates
his personal commitment to the international
community’s rapid and concerted action in the face of
the latest developments of which we have just been
informed.
I also welcome the presence at this meeting of the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Germany.
The tragic events, which we condemn,
demonstrate that the process of reconciliation among
the ethnic communities living in Kosovo still has far to
go. At the very least, we can say that mutual trust
between the two communities has not been fully
established and that, rather, mistrust runs so deep that
the slightest incident is liable to trigger an outburst of
violence, with incalculable consequences for the
process of building the rule of law in Kosovo. Benin
vigorously condemns the acts of violence, the instances
of ethnic cleansing and the attacks on the integrity of
the international missions in Kosovo. As well, we
extend our condolences to the families of victims.
The damages suffered by the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR are completely unacceptable, as are the loss
of human lives in the two communities and the
destruction of property and cultural artefacts, which
constitutes a grave attack on the shared patrimony of
humankind. The perpetrators of those acts are

personally responsible for their actions. The
international community must ensure that no crime or
violation of human rights in Kosovo goes unpunished.
We believe that in the current situation the
Security Council must urgently send a strong message
to the Serbian and Albanian communities of Kosovo,
calling on them to show greater restraint. The multiethnic character of the province, tolerance and the
equal rights of all communities must be respected. The
acts of intimidation and inter-community violence
hinder the establishment of a democratic Kosovo that
respects the rule of law. We should therefore do
everything
to
prevent
another
humanitarian
catastrophe.
In that regard, we support the efforts of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, who
should make use of all his authority in Kosovo to
prevent an escalation of violence and a humanitarian
disaster in the province. We also support the
reinforcement measures to restore order and calm.
That said, in Kosovo, we should put more
emphasis on measures to strengthen trust between the
two communities, to promote the reconciliation of
ethnic groups and to strengthen the authority of the
established democratic institutions, rigorously applying
the norms established by the international community
before the decision on the final status of the province.
Mr. Sardenberg (Brazil): I thank you, Mr.
President, for convening this very timely meeting. I
would like to welcome the presence of the SecretaryGeneral on this occasion, and I express our greetings
to the Foreign Ministers of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro.
As the sound of gunfire and explosions is heard
once again in the streets of Mitrovica and many other
localities, Brazil shares the indignation and sorrow of
the international community at another surge of
intolerance, revenge and ethnic violence in that region
of the world.
The peacekeeping and international police forces
reacted quickly to try to defuse yesterday’s riots.
Unfortunately, their efforts could not avoid the
escalation of violence that resulted in the death of
civilians and left hundreds injured. Moreover, to our
deep regret, they became themselves victims of blind
violence, as a number of KFOR soldiers and civilian
police of the United Nations Interim Administration

9

S/PV.4928

Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) were among the
wounded. We expect that those responsible for such
acts will face justice and that the announced
deployment of three new peacekeeping units will
strengthen the efforts of KFOR and UNMIK to prevent
further clashes.
During its five years of tireless work there, the
United Nations has helped fight the scourges of crime,
terror and ethnic cleansing. It is disheartening to see
that, despite that strenuous endeavour, the situation
threatens once again to deteriorate into rioting and
chaos. This is undoubtedly the most severe case of
unrest since the end in 1999 of the conflict in the
region, as many of those who spoke before me have
pointed out.
Our delegation has reaffirmed on many occasions
our commitment to a stable, democratic, peaceful and
multi-ethnic Kosovo. We firmly support joint action to
promote reconciliation and stability. We believe that
the full protection of human rights is essential to
achieve peace on the basis of international law. Brazil
continues to support the full implementation of
resolution 1244 (1999) and the “standards before
status” policy as the only reasonable choice for a
peaceful Kosovo.
We condemn ethnically motivated brutality. In
this regard, we add our voice to that of the SecretaryGeneral in his strong condemnation of the incidents
and in his call for an immediate halt to the ethnic
violence. We also fully support the work of the
Secretary-General’s Special Representative, Harri
Holkeri.
This alarming outbreak of violence calls for an
appropriate and vigorous reaction by the international
community. It reminds us that many important
challenges still remain. Nevertheless, nothing can
really be done without serious efforts by all parties
involved, including local authorities, both in Pristina
and in Belgrade.
A truly multi-ethnic society can be built only
through decisive involvement and participation by all
individuals and groups, including all minorities. The
ultimate responsibility for preventing Kosovo from
being engulfed once again in conflict rests with their
people and leaders. Their commitment to the
Provisional Institutions, their peaceful engagement in
the political process and their willingness to fight
corruption and adopt the necessary economic reforms

10

will determine their ability to find a way out of the
present deadlock.
Mr. Arias (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I wish to
express my gratitude for the presence in our midst of
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Germany and of
Serbia and Montenegro, as well as that of the
Secretary-General.
My delegation fully endorses the statement to be
made later by the European Union presidency.
We vigorously condemn the clashes that have
taken place in Kosovo, which have resulted in many
deaths and injuries as well as in attacks against
international organizations in Kosovo. We appeal to all
Kosovo communities to put an end to the acts of
violence and to return to dialogue and negotiation in
order to resolve their differences.
Lastly, we reaffirm our conviction that resolution
1244 (1999) is the sole legal framework for the
establishment of a democratic and multi-ethnic society
in Kosovo.
Mr. Akram (Pakistan): Mr. President, we would
like to thank you for convening this meeting today with
regard to the grave events in Kosovo. We are grateful
for the presence of the Secretary-General and for the
eloquent statement he made to the Council this
afternoon. I would like also to welcome warmly the
participation of Foreign Minister Fischer of Germany
and of Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro at this meeting.
Pakistan condemns the violence in Mitrovica and
other parts of Kosovo in the strongest terms, especially
the loss of human life, including the death of innocent
children. We condemn also the attacks against the
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and of KFOR and against
religious sites, and demand that such acts be stopped.
Like others, we call for legal investigations to ascertain
the origins of these alarming events and to bring the
perpetrators to justice.
Pakistan fully supports the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Holkeri,
and the call made by the Secretary-General to help
restore calm and stability.
The disturbing events in Kosovo underscore the
urgent need to uphold the rule of law, ensure proper
security for all ethnic communities and bring to justice

S/PV.4928

all those involved in criminal acts. We join others in
urging all the people of Kosovo to work through the
recognized legitimate channels, including UNMIK and
the Provisional Institutions, to address their grievances.
We also agree that the establishment of a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic and peaceful society in Kosovo
remains a fundamental objective in the implementation
of resolution 1244 (1999).
The present disturbances are the worst that
Kosovo has experienced since 1999. We must reflect
deeply on the reasons for this. We must evaluate
whether our approach so far requires any adjustment.
We must note the perception, brought to our attention
today, that the international community is not being
seen in Kosovo as taking credible steps towards a final
and durable solution.
Our fundamental aim must be to address the root
causes of the tensions and conflict in Kosovo. In that
regard, I wish to conclude by offering some
observations on what steps should be taken to address
the challenge, which I would like to submit for the
Council’s consideration.
First, there is a need to press all parties to rein in
their respective extremists and to ensure that such
violence, especially
against innocent civilians,
including women and children, is no longer tolerated.
Secondly, there is a need to intensify security
efforts against those extremist elements as well as
against organized crime, which feeds them, including,
as far as possible, the securing of Kosovo’s borders.
Thirdly, it is necessary to seriously prepare the
ground for the peaceful, legal and democratically
rooted process of resolving Kosovo’s final status.
Without movements towards this, the solution to the
problems in Kosovo may continue to remain elusive.
Mr. Baja (Philippines): Mr. President, we thank
you for having convened this afternoon’s meeting on
Kosovo
and
the
Secretary-General
for
his
comprehensive and informative briefing. We are
honoured also by the presence in our midst of the
Foreign Ministers of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro.
Yesterday Kosovo once again became a war zone
when the longstanding ethnic animus between the
Serbs and the Albanians erupted in an orgy of death
and destruction — the worst since the international
community stepped in five years ago to put an end to a

bloody conflict which neither side seems willing to
forgive and forget.
We condemn the violence, which has resulted, as
reported this morning, in 31 people dead and more than
200 wounded, including 11 peacekeepers and 61 police
officers. These are only initial figures. The number of
dead and wounded is expected to rise. The extent of the
property damage has still not been fully assessed,
although we know that a number of houses and public
buildings have been torched by rampaging mobs across
the country. We have been informed by our embassy in
Budapest that even the Philippine police contingent’s
quarters in Kosovo have been burned and looted.
My delegation joins the rest of the Security
Council in expressing our indignation at these
reprehensible acts of violence, which have dealt a
severe blow to the international community’s efforts to
bring about a tolerant, multi-ethnic and democratic
Kosovo. Such outbreaks of ethnically related violence
have no room in Kosovo’s future. This violence has to
stop, and it must stop now.
What happened in Kosovo yesterday is indeed
unfortunate. Only a few weeks ago, we heard the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr.
Harri Holkeri, speak of how Kosovo was slowly but
surely moving in the direction that the international
community wants it to take. It is also regrettable this
violence should happen only a few days after Mr.
Holkeri announced the holding of elections in Kosovo
in October and following the visit there, a few days
ago, of the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean-Marie Guéhenno.
Yesterday’s violence may seem to be a
spontaneous release of collective anger and frustration,
but we should note that it took some time to build up
and did not take place without warning. Before
yesterday’s violence, there had been indications that
Kosovo remains the ethnic tinderbox that it has always
been.
This outbreak of violence has dealt a severe blow
to efforts to bring peace and stability to Kosovo. What
happened yesterday should prompt us to take a second
look at the situation there and make adjustments if
necessary. We should ask ourselves whether the
violence could have been prevented. We should ask this
not to put blame on anyone, but to allow us to come up
with an appropriate response and to prevent such
incidents from happening again. Right now, the most

11

S/PV.4928

important thing is to restore order there. The
international community must take the necessary steps
to make sure that the rule of law prevails in Kosovo
and that elements from both within and without are
given no opportunity to sow further discord in the
province in order to advance their agenda. Ethnic Serbs
and Albanians must be prevailed upon to exercise
restraint and avoid taking any action that would lead to
further chaos. Appropriate measures should also be
taken to ensure that those responsible for the latest
wave of violence are brought to justice.
We join the call for Kosovars and their leaders to
employ their best efforts to implement the “Standards
for Kosovo,” while keeping in mind that peace efforts
cannot be implemented as a political project, even by
the most well-meaning — or the best-armed — unless
the soil is fully cultivated.
Mr. Baali (Algeria) (spoke in French): Mr.
President, I would like to thank you for having
organized this emergency meeting, following the
serious deterioration of the security situation in
Kosovo. I would also like to welcome the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro and to thank
him for having come to New York to give us an update
on the situation in Kosovo.
My country is following with serious concern the
developments in Kosovo after the acts of violence
provoked by the inter-ethnic clashes between Kosovo
Albanians and Kosovo Serbs that have left 22 dead and
several hundred wounded. We condemn these acts of
violence, which, if unchecked, will stir up inter-ethnic
rivalries, exacerbate the feelings of alienation between
Kosovar communities, revive the confrontational
mindset that led the country to the brink of chaos, and
compromise everything that has been patiently and
painstakingly achieved in Kosovo.
As a result, my country calls on all parties to put
an end to these lethal clashes and to work together for a
return to calm and an improvement of the security
situation. Maintaining order and a return to normalcy
in Kosovo are also the responsibility of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) and KFOR. They must fully shoulder that
responsibility. The reinforcements dispatched to
Kosovo in order to stabilize the situation and restore
calm in the province are thus very encouraging. The
police investigation currently being conducted to
determine who was responsible for these confrontations

12

and to bring the perpetrators to justice will help
restraint to prevail and put an end to these clashes.
This abrupt outbreak of violence is especially
regrettable since it follows striking progress and a
significant improvement in the political and operational
conditions in Kosovo and since it comes at a time when
intense efforts have been deployed to build a Kosovo
which is multi-ethnic, tolerant, democratic and
prosperous, in which the rule of law prevails and
human rights are respected.
However, these tragic incidents have revealed the
ongoing nature of these ethnic schisms and have
reinforced, at the same time, our deep conviction that
there is no alternative to a multi-ethnic and tolerant
society in Kosovo. Kosovars have no other choice than
to live together, harmoniously and in peace with one
another. Multi-ethnic integration in Kosovo obviously
requires that reconciliation and understanding among
the different Kosovar communities be promoted and
that differences and resentments resulting from the
period of confrontation be overcome. Reconciliation
among all segments of Kosovar society is the key to
any progress towards that end. This aspect must
henceforth be one of the international community’s
highest priorities, and the international community will
need to support fully the reconciliation process.
To conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support for the efforts of UNMIK,
KFOR and the provisional authorities to establish
stability and to allow for a return to calm in Kosovo.
Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of the Secretary-General and of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of Germany and of Serbia and
Montenegro. Their involvement shows the importance
of today’s discussion.
Russia is deeply concerned as it follows the
developments of the situation in Kosovo. As a result of
the abrupt outbreak of inter-ethnic violence, we have
seen numerous casualties in the region, the dead and
wounded including staff of the international presences
in Kosovo. The scope of the violence, apparently first
perpetrated by the representatives of the Kosovar
Albanian community against ethnic minorities and the
international presences, allows us to speak of targeted
actions to squeeze the non-Albanian population out of
the region. According to the information reaching us,
the situation in the district continues to heat up,

S/PV.4928

particularly in the Kosovska and Mitrovica region. The
Kosovar Albanians in that region are concentrated
around the bridges over the Ibar river. They are
building shelters in order to prepare for a transition
into action. The Serbs are seriously concerned that the
KFOR contingent deployed in that region will not be
able to prevent a deterioration of the situation. The
Security Council cannot remain on the sidelines.
The major challenge now is to stop the violence,
to do our utmost to stabilize the situation, to give the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) and KFOR the chance to restore law
and order in the region. We are convinced that unless
we quickly take decisive measures to restore order,
there is a credible danger of the peace process — so
painstakingly organized by the efforts of the
international community — being undermined.
We are deeply concerned by the scope of the
violence and the speed with which it has spread
throughout the district. In our view, this once again
demonstrates how fragile and unstable the peace was in
Kosovo and how much more needs to be done to build
trust among the ethnic groups populating the region.
But for now, we must note that the process of building
a multi-ethnic society in Kosovo in conformity with
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) has not merely
bogged down; it is, in fact, back to square one.
Russia has repeatedly spoken of the need for a
multilateral approach to the Kosovo settlement process,
calling for the resolution of socio-economic problems
and for ensuring equal security for all inhabitants of the
region and full observance of their political rights and
freedoms. How can we speak about implementing the
plan approved by the international community, the
“Standards for Kosovo”, when, in reality, one of the
parties is blatantly violating these standards? We deem
it essential for the Security Council to vigorously
demand that all parties to the conflict, first of all the
Kosovar Albanian majority in the district, immediately
cease all acts of violence.
UNMIK, along with KFOR, must undertake
urgent additional measures aimed at the unconditional
restoration of legality and public order and at ensuring
the safety of the representatives of all ethnic
communities in the district.
On that basis, the Russian delegation is prepared
to support the draft presidential statement as a strong
signal to the Kosovo Albanian side, which bears main

responsibility for the ongoing inter-ethnic violence. For
its part, as a permanent member of the Security
Council, Russia is ready to participate actively in
seeking a solution to the problem of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of France.
Like previous speakers, I wish at the outset to
welcome the participation in today’s debate of the
Secretary-General, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia and Montenegro and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Germany. Their participation clearly attests
to the gravity of the situation.
I associate myself with the statement that will
shortly be made by the Permanent Representative of
Ireland on behalf of the European Union, and I shall
confine myself now to a few brief comments.
France condemns in the strongest terms
yesterday’s deadly clashes in Kosovo between the Serb
and Albanian communities. Our first thoughts are for
the families of the victims.
The violence also targeted the international
presence in Kosovo, which has been working for peace,
stabilization and reconstruction. Some dozen KFOR
soldiers were wounded, and the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) too was a
target: several UNMIK buildings and vehicles were set
on fire. This flareup of violence is the greatest
challenge posed to the international community in
Kosovo since 1999.
Whatever the causes, recourse to such acts of
violence cannot be tolerated. Inter-ethnic violence and
violence against KFOR and UNMIK are unacceptable
and must end immediately. Those responsible must be
arrested and brought to justice.
We urge all of Kosovo’s political leaders, both
Albanian and Serb, to act responsibly and to call on the
population to put an immediate end to violence and to
restore calm. They must set aside confrontation and
work together to put an end to the violence.
France attaches the greatest importance to the full
and complete implementation of Security Council
resolution 1244 (1999). Only the “Standards for
Kosovo” will make it possible for Kosovo to draw
closer to Europe. Here, respect for multi-ethnicity is

13

S/PV.4928

among the key conditions, and under no circumstances
must it be jeopardized by violence.

and crucial role in Kosovo and that it will successfully
fulfil its mandate there.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.

The recent sad events in Kosovo should not be
considered as reflecting a failure of the process or of
the positive engagement there; they do not. Only those
who are not interested in the progress of the standards
and who are not confident with respect to the
international community in Kosovo can say that.

The next speaker is the representative of Albania.
I invite him to take a seat at the Council table and to
make his statement.
Mr. Nesho (Albania): The Albanian Government
is following with great concern the latest developments
in Kosovo. We deeply regret the recent escalation in
the situation there and the loss of human lives. In
response to the recent deplorable events, I should like
to reiterate the firm position of the Albanian
Government against violence and violent acts,
regardless of the motives behind them. We strongly
condemn the violence as unacceptable and damaging.
Such events run against the general trend in
Kosovo of progress towards a democratic and multiethnic society. They run against the general will of the
people of Kosovo to build, and live in, a free and open
society where the rule of law is not replaced by the
violence of the past and by ethnic hatred.
The Albanian Government stresses that this
situation of violence threatens the process of
democratization and reconciliation in Kosovo and that
it must end immediately. We call upon all the citizens
of Kosovo to demonstrate maturity, maintain calm and
cooperate in full confidence with the legitimate local
and international authorities — the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR — in order to restore law and order; we
express our confidence that they will do so.
UNMIK and KFOR have accomplished an
admirable task in Kosovo, building democratic
institutions, increasing stability and, ultimately, laying
the foundations of a multi-ethnic society. The
implementation of the standards set by the Security
Council has shown the determination of the
international community to create the future society of
Kosovo. UNMIK and its activities should not be
judged through the prism of the interests of those who
feel frustrated and who cannot function under its
guidance. Nor should it be judged through the prism of
the interests of those who cultivate parallel structures
that seek to challenge its authority. We are fully
confident that UNMIK will continue to play a central

14

The Government of Albania takes this
opportunity once again to reaffirm its support for the
policy of the Security Council towards Kosovo and for
its resolution 1244 (1999). We also reaffirm our full
support for the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Harri Holkeri, UNMIK and KFOR, and
we extend that support to them. We continue to
strongly believe that the standards policy is the
fundamental basis of a peaceful, prosperous and
democratic Kosovo that will spread yet more stability
and security in the western Balkans and that will be a
part of the regional and European integration
processes.
What happened yesterday in Kosovo was not the
result of coexistence. To the contrary, it was the result
of a lack of engagement or action towards
coexistence — or even the result of efforts to
undermine such coexistence. It was the product of a
constant policy of keeping alive parallel administrative
structures that continue to feed ethnic isolation and to
drive new waves of ethnic separation, with the purpose
of dividing Kosovo. These tragic events strongly evoke
the imperative need to respect law and institutions.
They give rise to serious concerns about the obstacles
raised by parallel structures in Kosovo. The need to
dismantle those structures grows increasingly urgent if
we are to strengthen legitimate institutions, the rule of
law and order, the continuity of democratic processes
and the development of multi-ethnicity there. At the
same time, we ask that more responsibility be devolved
upon the Provisional Institutions.
In conclusion, I would stress that the
implementation of the policy of the international
community, in particular the Security Council’s
recommendations for Kosovo, will succeed if the
regional political actors support the spirit of
cooperation, European integration and coexistence
there. It should be clear to all that the path that Kosovo
should follow cannot be the product of any imposed
unilateral initiative. It should lie within the framework

S/PV.4928

established by the international community, at the core
of which are dialogue and understanding, not
intolerance and violence.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Ireland. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Ryan (Ireland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union. The acceding
countries Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Estonia,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia
and Slovenia, the candidate countries Bulgaria,
Romania and Turkey, and the European Free Trade
Association countries, Iceland, Liechtenstein and
Norway, members of the European Economic Area,
declare that they align themselves with this statement.
I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
the presence of the Secretary-General, Foreign Minister
Svilanovic of Serbia and Montenegro and Foreign
Minister Fischer of Germany.
The European Union calls for an immediate end
to the violence which has claimed lives and caused
injury to large numbers of people in Kosovo. We add
our voice to those of Special Representative Harri
Holkeri and Secretary-General Kofi Annan in
condemning the violence which has erupted between
Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs and which has
resulted in many deaths as well as in injuries to a large
number of civilians, KFOR soldiers and civilian police
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK). Our deep sympathies are with the
families of the victims. We extend our condolences to
them.
The immediate priority is that calm must be
restored in Kosovo. It is essential that the violence stop
now and that it not be allowed to escalate. There is also
no place for those who burn churches and mosques,
schools and hospitals, and who destroy the religious
and cultural heritage which is the common property of
us all. The European Union calls on all local leaders to
act responsibly at this dangerous moment and to use all
their influence to bring an end to the violence and to
restore calm.
The European Union strongly supports the efforts
of the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri, to calm the situation. I would like to
underscore the European Union’s strong support for

Special Representative Holkeri in his task of
implementing in full Security Council resolution 1244
(1999) and UNMIK’s policy of “standards before
status”. These remain the foundation of the
international community’s commitment to Kosovo. The
path ahead for Kosovo lies in the implementation of the
standards, and these violent events risk undermining
the painfully achieved progress which has been made
thus far.
Those responsible for the violence must be
brought to justice. There is a heavy responsibility on
all to avoid actions which would undermine the work
under way to ensure a stable future for a secure,
democratic and multi-ethnic Kosovo within its place in
Europe.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Japan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Haraguchi (Japan): Let me say at the outset
that Japan strongly condemns the new wave of violence
in Kosovo, which erupted yesterday and has already
resulted in many injuries and deaths. My Government
calls for an immediate end to the violence and demands
that the perpetrators be brought to justice. We also
strongly deplore the attacks on KFOR soldiers and on
personnel of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). It is particularly
regrettable that those incidents occurred and that so
many were killed or injured at a time when concerned
parties from the international community — especially
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Harri Holkeri — have been making sincere efforts
aimed at constructive peace-building. We also wish to
extend our sincere condolences to the families of the
victims.
The people of Kosovo have endured massive
losses in precious lives and property in the past.
Moreover, the international community has invested
enormous resources, in terms of personnel, diplomacy
and financial resources, in the hope of resolving this
tragic situation. Japan considers that all parties to the
conflict must keep those facts fully in mind. We
strongly urge all parties concerned to make a
determined effort to resolve the issue on the basis of
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999) and the
“standards before status” policy, through strengthened

15

S/PV.4928

dialogue and without further escalating this tense
situation.
On the other hand, my Government believes that
the international community must continue its efforts in
the areas of the consolidation of peace and economic
development — which is a precondition for peace — in
order to ensure that this kind of violence does not break
out again. In that connection, we hope that there will be
a useful exchange of opinions at the ministerial
conference on peace consolidation and economic
development of the western Balkans, which we plan to
hold in Tokyo in April. Japan also would like to
underscore, as a concrete measure to prevent such
incidents, the importance of enhancing security in
Kosovo through initiatives such as the illicit small
arms control projects of the United Nations
Development Programme, which my Government has
been supporting.
Japan intends to maintain its commitment to
achieving the stability and prosperity of the SouthEastern European region, in cooperation with the
international community, in the firm belief that the
stabilization of the situation in Kosovo is essential for
attaining that goal.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. I invite him
to take a seat at the Council table and to make his
statement.
Mr. Nikolov (The former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia): Permit me at the outset to join other
speakers in welcoming the presence of the SecretaryGeneral, Foreign Minister Svilanovic of Serbia and
Montenegro and Foreign Minister Fischer of Germany.
Allow me also to join those who have associated
themselves with the statement made by the Permanent
Representative of Ireland on behalf of the European
Union.
The Government of the Republic of Macedonia is
following the situation in Kosovo with great concern.
Yesterday’s tragic developments run counter to the
efforts of the international community and the people
of Kosovo for further democratization and for the
stabilization of the situation in Kosovo.
I would like to express my Government’s deep
regret and strong condemnation at the escalation of the
violence between Kosovo Albanians and Kosovo Serbs

16

in Mitrovica, Lipljane, Pec, Gnjilane and other places,
which has already claimed lives and caused hundreds
of injuries among civilians, KFOR soldiers and civilian
police of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We urge the people of
Kosovo to demonstrate wisdom and to restore calm and
normalcy. It is of great importance and immediate
priority to stop the violence, which jeopardizes
Kosovo’s stability and security and undermines the
efforts made and the achievements accomplished in the
process of building a stable, democratic and multiethnic Kosovo. The destabilization of Kosovo could
also jeopardize the situation in the region as a whole.
My Government strongly condemns extremism,
no matter where it comes from. It can only cause
further escalation of the situation, which will not
contribute to the normalization of the situation and
could have further negative implications in the region.
We fully support the efforts of UNMIK and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Harri Holkeri,
as well as those of KFOR and the rest of the
international community, to calm the situation
immediately.
Let me emphasize once again that the recent
tragic developments in Kosovo are only minimizing the
efforts of the international community to democratize
the situation in Kosovo, to fully implement the policy
of “standards before status” and to continue the
necessary dialogue.
The President (spoke in French): The next
speaker inscribed on my list is the representative of
Jordan. I invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to make his statement.
Mr. Al-Khasawneh (Jordan): Allow me at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you on your assumption of
the presidency of the Council for this month and to
express confidence that through your leadership you
will guide its deliberations successfully. In the same
vein allow me to extend my delegation’s appreciation
to your predecessor, His Excellency the Permanent
Representative of China, for the skilful manner in
which he presided over the Council during the previous
month.
I would also like to express our profound
gratitude for the convening of this open meeting of the
Council
to
deliberate
upon
the
regrettable
developments in Kosovo.

S/PV.4928

My delegation wishes to express its grave
concern over the outbreak of violence throughout
Kosovo in a manner and on a scale that is being
characterized as the most far-reaching since 1999. We
condemn all manifestations of such violence, in
particular the targeting of all places of worship. The
renewed outbreak of violence compels us to reflect on
the timeliness of the downsizing plans for the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK).
Furthermore, Jordan, being one of the
contributors to UNMIK, expresses its concern over the
injuries sustained by the United Nations Mission
personnel in Kosovo and damages incurred to their
equipment. UNMIK is operating in Kosovo with a
mandate to preserve, sustain and assist in the
restoration of peace and security to Kosovo and the
process of institution-building therein.
We are mindful of the fact that guaranteeing
continued protection and safeguards for UNMIK and
other international personnel in Kosovo is of
paramount importance and should be observed and
respected by all parties concerned on the ground, at all
times and under all circumstances. In that context
resolution 1244 (1999), adopted under Chapter VII of
the Charter, stresses that the Council is
“Determined to ensure the safety and
security of international personnel and the
implementation by all concerned of their
responsibilities under the present resolution.”
Moreover, we should like to point to the fact that the
Rome Statute establishing the International Criminal
Court clearly classified all attacks directed against
United Nations and humanitarian international
personnel as war crimes in recognition of the gravity of
such acts.
My delegation wishes to call on all parties
concerned in Kosovo to desist from taking any action
that could further aggravate the situation and to take
immediate steps aimed at bringing about an immediate
end to violence and the genuine de-escalation of
tension in Kosovo. Furthermore, we wish to remind all
parties concerned of their responsibilities in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), including in particular the
obligation to ensure the safety and security of all
international personnel.

Finally, I wish to reiterate my delegation’s
appreciation to Mr. Harri Holkeri, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo
and chief of UNMIK, and to all United Nations and
international personnel for their dedication and
relentless efforts in the performance of their mission in
Kosovo.
I would also like to extend my Government’s
most profound condolences to the families of the
victims of this regrettable wave of violence.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
representative of Jordan for his kind words addressed
to me.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and
Montenegro would like to make another statement. I
give him the floor.
Mr. Svilanovic (Serbia and Montenegro):
Mr. President. I greatly appreciate the opportunity you
are giving me to speak. I would like to brief the
Council on several issues.
First, unfortunately the violence is continuing
today. Attacks by Albanians have been continuing, and
that is why we hope that our joint efforts today will
bring us to concrete action that will stop those attacks.
I would also like to clarify one thing. There is no
violent conflict between Albanians and Serbs at this
moment. But it is a permanent violence of the
Albanians against the Serbs, who are living there in
small numbers. Five per cent of the people living in
Kosovo now are Serbs. They live in enclaves, in
villages or in several houses grouped within larger
cities. They have been attacked in an attempt to
ethnically cleanse Kosovo before we go to the
implementation of standards, following the policy of
“standards before status”. And that must be stopped. In
a couple of days it may be too late.
Also, attacks against international staff, as far as
KFOR or United Nations troops or officers are
concerned, are exclusively committed by Albanians.
The international officers are only doing their jobs.
They are trying to guard the people in villages or
houses, and they have been attacked by Albanians.
Furthermore, I would like to say that we stay
committed to continue the dialogue that was launched
in October in Vienna between Belgrade and Pristina. It
might be more difficult today, but we are determined to
fulfil our international commitments and obligations.

17

S/PV.4928

What we would like the Security Council to do is
to try to find a mechanism that would also include our
side in the joint efforts being made to implement the
standards. We want to be part of the process of
implementation, and we believe that the Council might
be able to find a mechanism that would also include
our side. We are not asking for veto power; we want to
be part of a process.
Secondly, there will be an evaluation process that
will see how far and how much the standards have been
fulfilled and achieved. We want to be part of that
evaluation process also. At certain points we will
discuss that status and would appreciate if at that time
all options would remain open and not be pre-defined.
I do not want to finish my statement without
saying that we are very sorry for what happened in
several cities in Serbia yesterday, particularly in
Belgrade and Nis. I would also like to say that full
control is in the hands of the Government, which has
taken the upper hand in further protest demonstrations
in order to be sure that there will be no violence.
I would also like to mention that in spite of the
fact that those mosques have been burned — we are
sorry for that and say that it might be that police action
was not as accurate and decisive as it should be —
there was not a single attack against Bosniacs or
Albanians or people of other ethnic background among
the incidents yesterday and the day before in Belgrade
or other cities. That was not happening against
minorities.
Finally, I would like to say that we remain
supportive of every non-violent action, because we
believe in the attitude of non-violence of the Security
Council and all of us.
The immediate task is to bring more troops in
order to prevent any further violence and then to
continue the political process that has already been
defined.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia and Montenegro
for his statement.
After consultation among members of the
Security Council I have been authorized to make the
following statement on behalf of the Council.
“The Security Council strongly condemns
the large-scale inter-ethnic violence in Kosovo

18

(Serbia and Montenegro) that began yesterday
and in which many people have been killed and
hundreds injured. It also strongly condemns the
attacks on the troops of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and the personnel and sites of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). Such violence is unacceptable
and must stop immediately. Those responsible
must be brought to justice. The perpetrators must
understand that an attack on the international
presence is an attack on the international
community as a whole and that extremism has no
role in Kosovo's future.
“The Security Council calls on all
communities in Kosovo, taking into account their
respective responsibilities, to stop all acts of
violence, to avoid further escalation and restore
calm. The Council urges the parties to refrain
from irresponsible and inflammatory statements
and accusations. The Council reiterates that the
population in Kosovo must employ peaceful,
democratic means and work through the
recognized and legitimate channels, including the
United Nations and the Provisional Institutions of
Self-Government (PISG) structures, to address
their grievances. It stresses that legal
investigations, in particular into the incidents
involving the shooting of a Kosovo Serb teenager
in Pristina and the deaths of three Kosovo
Albanian children in Mitrovica, are under way by
the authorities in Kosovo, and calls for a
thorough investigations of all other incidents.
“The Security Council deplores the reported
deaths and injuries among the population of
Kosovo, as well as casualties among the Kosovo
Police Service, UNMIK international civilian
police, and KFOR troops. The Council extends its
condolences to the families of all the victims.
“The Security Council reiterates the urgent
need for the authorities in Kosovo to take
effective steps to enforce the rule of law, ensure
proper security for all ethnic communities and
bring to justice all the perpetrators of criminal
acts. The establishment of a multi-ethnic,
tolerant, democratic society in a stable Kosovo
remains the fundamental objective of the
international
community
in
implementing
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
Security Council will closely monitor the

S/PV.4928

implementation by the parties of their obligations
according to the ‘Standards for Kosovo’
document.
“The Security Council expresses its full
support for the efforts of the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, UNMIK
and KFOR, and welcomes that the international
security presence is continuing to undertake
additional measures, as deemed necessary, to
stabilize the situation throughout Kosovo. It calls
on the PISG, the authorities in Belgrade and all

concerned to cooperate fully. The Council takes
note of the joint statement of the Special
Representative, PISG, political leaders and others
of 17 March 2004.”
This statement will be issued as a document of
the Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2004/5.
There are no further speakers on my list. The
Security Council has thus concluded the present stage
of its consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

19
