discussion of the question, the President having informed
the Council that Jordan had accepted, for the purposes
of the dispute, the obligations ~f pacifi~ settlement
provided in the Charter of the United Nations.

de Ja question, le President ayant informe. le Conseil
que la Jordanie, avait accept~, aux fi?s du d1fferend, Jes
obligations de reglement pac1fique prevues par la Charte
des Nations Unies.

At its 514th meeting, on 20 October 1950, the Council
decided to invite the Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine to take a
place at the Council table at the next meeting on the
Palestine question.

Asa 5J4e seance le 20 octobre 1950, le Conseil a decide
d'inviter le Chef d'6tat-major de l'Organisme des Nati~ns
Unies charge de la surveillance de la_ treve en Palestme
a prendre place a la table d_u Consetl lo~s de la seance
suivantc consacree a la question de Palestme.

At its 517th meeting, on 30 October 1950, the Council
decided to invite Mr. Ralph J. Bunche, former Acting
United Nations Mediator in Palestine, to take a place
at the Council table.

A sa 517e seance, le 30 octobre 1950, le Conseil a
decide d'inviter M. Ralph J. Bunche, ancien mediateur
par interim des Nations Unies en Palestine, a prendrc
place a la table du Conseil.

89 (1950). Resolution of 17 November 1950

89 (1950). Resolution du 17 novembre 1950

[S/ 1907)

[S/1907)

The Security Council,
Le Con.seil de securite,
Recalling its resolution 73 (1949) of 11 August I 949
Rappe/ant sa resolution 73 (1949) du 11 aofit 1949,
wherein it noted with satisfaction the several Armistice par laquelle il a pris acte avec satisfaction des differentes
Agreements concluded by means of negotiations between Conventions d'armistice que les parties impliquees dans
the parties involved in the conflict in Palestine; expressed le conflit de Palestine avaient conclues par voie de negothe hope that the Governments and authorities concerned ciations; exprime l'espoir que les gouvernements et
would at an early date achieve agreement on the final autorites interesses parviendraient rapidement a un
settlement of all questions outstanding between them; reglement definitif de toutes Jes questions sur lesquelles
noted that the various Armistice Agreements provided , ils ne s 'etaient pas encore mis d 'accord; note que Jes
that the execution of the Agreements would be supervised differentes Conventions d'armistice prevoyaient que leur
by mixed armistice commissions whose chairman in application serait contr61ee par des commissions mixtes
each case would be the Chief of Staff of the United d 'armistice dont le president, dans chaquc cas, serait le
Nations Truce Supervision Organization in Palestine or Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme des Nations Unies
his designated representative; and, bearing in mind ' charge de la surveillance de la treve en Palestine ou un
that the several Armistice Agreements include firm representant designe par Jui; et, tenant compte de ce
pledges against any further acts of hostility between the que les diverses Conventions d'armistice contiennent le
parties and also provide for their supervision by the parties ferme engagement d'eviter tous actes ulterieurs d'hostilite
themselves, relied upon the parties to ensure the continued entre Jes parties et prevoient aussi le contr61e de I'appliapplication and observance of those Agreements.
cation de ces conventions par Jes parties elles-memes, a
fait confiance aces dernieres pour continuer ales appliquer
et a les respecter,
Taking into consideration the views expressed and the
Prenant en consideration Jes vues exprimees et Jes
data given by the representatives of Egypt, Israel and renseignements fournis par les representants de l'Egypte,
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan and by the Chief d 'Israel et du Royaume hachemite de Jordanie, ainsi que
of Staff of the Truce Supervision Organization on the par le Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme charge de la
complaints 16 submitted to the Council,
surveillance de la treve, au sujet des plaintes 18 adressees
au Conseil,
I. Notes that, with regard to the implementation of
l. Constate, en ce qui concerne !'application de
article VIII of the Israel-Jordan General Armistice l'article VIII de la Convention d'armistice general
Agreement, 17 the Special Committee has been formed conclue entre Israel et la Jordanie 17, que le Comite
,. See Official Records of the Security Council, Fitfh Year, Supplement for September through December 19.50, documents S/1790,
S/1794 and S/1824.
17
Ibid., Fourth Year, Special Supplement No. I.

1 • Voir Proces-verbaux officiels du Consei/ de securite, cinquieme
annee, Supplement de septembre d decembre 1.9.50, documents S/1790,
S/1794 et S/1824.
11
/hid., quatrieme annee. Supplement special 11" I.

9

and has convened, and hopes that it will proceed expeditiously to carry out the functions contemplated in paragraphs 2 and 3 of that article;

special a ete consi·:1,e et s'est reuni; exprime I'espoir
que ce comite s'acquitte:-a sans retard des fonctions
envisagees dans Jes paragraphes 2 et 3 de cet article;

2. Calls upon the parties to the present complaints
to consent to the handling of complaints according to
the procedures established in the Armistice Agreements
for the handling of con: ,1laints and the settlement of
points at issue;

2. Invite les parties aux differends actuels a accepter
de suivre, pour les plaintes, la procedure prevuc dans
Jes Conventions d 'armistice et applicable aux plaintes
et au reglement des litiges:

3. Requests the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice
Commission to give urgent attention to the Egyptian
complaint of expulsion of thousands of Palestine Arabs;

3. Frie la Commission mixte d 'armistice egyptoisraelienne d'examiner d'urgence la plainte de l'Egypte
relative a !'expulsion de milliers d'Arabes de Palestine;

4. Calls upon both parties to give effect to any finding
of the Egyptian-Israel Mixed Armistice Commission
regarding the repatriation of any such Arabs who in
the Commission's opinion are entitled to return:

4. Invite les deux parties a mettre en ccuvre toute
conclusion que formulerait la Commission mixte d'armistice egypto-israelienne au sujet du rapatriement des
Arabes qui, de l'avis de la Commission, devraient etre
rapatries;

5. Authorizes the Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization, with regard to the movement of nomadic
Arabs, to recommend to Israel, Egypt and such other
Arab States as may be appropriate such steps as he may
consider necessary to control the movement of such
nomadic Arabs across international frontiers or armistice
lines by mutual agreement;

5. Donne qualite, en ce qui concerne les deplacements
des bedouins, au Chef d'etat-major de l 'Organismc
charge de la surveillance de la treve pour recommander
a Israel, a l'Egypte, et le cas echeant a d'autres Etats
arabes, de prendre d'un commun accord les mesures
qu'il jugera necessaires pour controler les deplacements
de ces bedouins a travers Jes frontieres internationales
,iu les lignes de demarcation d'armistice;

1

6. Calls upon the Governments concerned to take in . 6. Invite lcs gouvernements interesses a ne prendre,
the future no action involving the transfer of persons i a l'avenir, aucune mesure qui entrainerait le transfert
across international frontiers or armistice lines without , de personnes a travers les frontieres internationales ou
prior consultation through the Mixed Armistice Commis- lcs lignes de demarcation d 'armistice sans en refercr au
sions;
prealable aux Commissions mixtes d'armistice;
7. Takes note of the statement of the Government of
Israel that Israel armed forces will evacuate Bir Qattar
pursuant to the 20 March 1950 decision of the Special
Committee provided for in article X, paragraph 4, of
the Egyptian-Israel General Armistice Agreement, 18 and
that the Israel armed forces will withdraw to position~
authorized by the Armistice Agreement;

7. Frend acte de la declaration du Gouvcrncmcnt
d 'Israel scion laquelle Jes force'> armees israeliennes
evacueront Bir Qattar, conformement a la decision prise
le 20 mars 1950 par le Comite special institue en application des dispositions du paragraphe 4 de !'article X
de la Convention d 'armistice general conclue entre
I'Egypte et Israel 18 , et se retireront sur Jes positions
definies dans ladite Convention d 'armistice;

8. Reminds Egypt and Israel as States Members of
the United Nations of their obligations under the Charter
to settle their outstanding differences, and further
reminds Egypt, Israel and the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan that the Armistice Agreements to which they
are parties contemplate "the return of permanent peace
in Palestine", and, therefore, urges them and the other
States in the area to take all such steps as will lead to
the settlement of the issues between them;

8. Rappe/le a l'Egypte et a Israel qu'ils sont tcnus
par la Charte, en tant qu'Etats Membres de !'Organisation
des Nations Unies, de regler les differends qui les separent
encore et rappelle en outre a I'Egypte, a Israel et au
Royaume hachemite de Jordanie que les Conventions
d 'armistice auxquelles ils sont parties cnvisagent « le
retablissement de la paix permanente en Palestine » et,
en consequence, invite ces Etats et Jes autres Etats de la
region a faire le necessaire pour regler leurs litiges;

9. Requests the Chief of Staff of the Truce Supervision
Organization to report to the Security Council at the
end of ninety days, or before if he deems it necessary,
on the compliance given to this resolution and upon
the status of the operations of the various Mixed Armistice
Commissions, and further requests that he submit
periodically to the Security Council reports of all decisions
made by the various Mixed Armistice Commissions and

9. Prie le Chef d'etat-major de l'Organisme charge
de la surveillance de la treve de faire rapport au Conseil
de securite, dans quatre-vingt-dix jours, ou plus tot s 'ii
le juge necessaire, sur I'execution de la presente resolution
et sur l 'etat des travaux des differentes Commissions
mixtes d'armistice; prie en outre le Chef d'etat-major
d 'adresser periodiquement au Conseil de securite des
rapports sur toutes Jes decisions prises par les differentes

•• !hid., Special Supplement No.

" !hid .. Supplement sp<'cial n" ::.

10

the Special Committee provided for m article X, paragraph 4, of the Egyptian-Israel General A rnfr,1 ice
Agreement.
Adopted at the ;i:!-lth mcl.'!i1i-'i
hv !J votes to none, with _,
tibstentions (Egypt, U11io1,
SrJ1•ict \"ocialist RqJ11h!ics , _

11

Commissions mixtes d 'armistice ainsi 4uc par le Comite
special prevu au paragraphe 4 de I'article X de la
Convention d'armisticc general conclue cntre l'Egypte
, et Israel.
Adoptee ,; la -i:!P' seance par
.'I voix contre :::,fro, avec :! abs-

tentions ( Eg)pte, Union des
Republique.,· rncialistes .rnvietiqun 1.
