General Assembly-Tbirtieth Session

154

5. Expresses its appreciation to the Swiss Federal
Council for convoking the third session of the Diplomatic Conference on the Reaffirmation and Development of International Humanitarian Law Applicable in
Armed Conflicts from 21 April to 11 June 197 6 and to
the International Committee of the Red Cross for convoking a second Conference of Govemment Experts
on Weapons That May Cause Unnecessary Suffering or
Have Indiscriminate Effects, to be held at Lugano from
28 January to 26 February 1976;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-first session on relevant
developments concerning human rights in armed conflicts, in particular on the proceedings and results of the
1976 session of the Diplomatic Conference;
7. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session the item entitled "Respect for
human rights in armed conflicts".
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3501 (XXX).

lmplementation by States of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 and measures
to increase the numher of parties to the
Convention

The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of normal diplomatic
relations for the maintenance of international peace and
security and for the development of friendly relations
and co-operation among States,
Emphasizing the need far observance by ali States
of the principies and rules of international diplomatic
law for ensuring normal diplomatic relations,
Concerned at instances of violations of the rules of
diplomatic law and, in particular, of the provisions of
the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961, 18
Noting jurther that not all States have yet become
parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
Recognizing the necessity to ascertain the advisability
of studying the question of the status of the diplomatic
courier in the light of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 1961,
l. Reaffirms the need for strict implementation by
States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations of 1961 in the interest of maintaining normal relations between them, strengthening
intemational peace and security and developing international co-operation;
2. Deplores instances of violations of the rules of
international diplomatic law and, in particular, of the
provisions of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961;
3. Urges States which have not yet done so to become parties to the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic
Relations of 1961 ;
4. Invites Member States to submit to the SecretaryGeneral their comments and observations on ways and
means to ensure the implementation of the provisions
of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations of
1961 as well as on the desirability of elaborating provisions concerning the status of the diplomatic courier;
18 /bid.,

vol. SOO, No. 7310, p. 95.

5. Requests the Secretary-Generalto submit a report
on the comments and observations of Member States
to the General Assembly at its thirty-first session;
6. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-first session an ítem entitled "Implementation
by States of the provisions of the Vienna Convention
on Diplomatic · Relations of 1961 : report of -the Secretary-General".
2 441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975

3502 (XXX).

United Nations Programme of
As1!istance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider App~iation of lnternational Law

The General Assembly,
Noting with appreciation the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of the United Nations
Programme of Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Jnternational
Law 19 and the recommendations made to the SecretaryGeneral by the Advisory Committee on the United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law, which are. contained in that report,
Considering that international law should occupy an
appropriate place in the teaching of legal disciplines at
ali universities,
Noting with appreciation the efforts made by States
at the bilateral leve! to provide assistance in the teaching and study of intemational law,
Convinced, nevertheless, that States, international organizations and institutions should be encouraged to
give further support to the Programme and to increase
their activities to promote the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
in particular those activities which are of special benefit
to persons from developing countries,
Recalling that, in the condúct of the Programrne, it
is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities made available by Member States, international organizations and others,
l. Authorizes the Secretary-General to carry out in
1976 and 1977 the activities specified in his report,
including the provision of:
(a) A mínimum of fifteen fellowships in 1976 and
1977. at the request of Govemments of developing
countries,

( b) Assistance in the form of a travel grant for one
participant from each developing country invitcd to the
regional activities to be organized in 1976 and 1977,
to be financed from provisions in the regular budget
and also voluntary financia! contributions which would
be received as a result of the requests set out in paragraphs 7 and 8 below;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General far his constructive efforts to promote training and
assistance in international law within the framework of
the United Nations Programme of Assi9tance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational Law in 1974 and 1975;
19 A/10332.

Resolution11 adopted on the reports of the Sixth Committee

3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for
its participation in. the Progranune, in particular for tl;le
efforts made to support the teachíng of intemational
law;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the Unüed Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its participation
in the Programme, particularly in the organization of
regional meetings and in the conduct of the fellowship
programme in international law sponsored jointly by
the United Nations and the Institute;
5. Expresses its appreciation to the Govemments of
Sierra Leone and Zaire for providing host facilities for
the regional training and refresher courses held in 197 5;
6. Urges all Governments to encourage the inclusion of courses on intemational law in the programmes
of legal studies oflered at institutions of higher leaming;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
publicize the Programme by periodically inviting Member States, universities, philanthropic foundations and
other interested national and intemational institutions
and organizations, as well as individuals, to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme or otherwise assisting in its implementation and
possible expansion;
8. Reiterates its request to Member States and to
interested organizations and individuals to make vol-

untary contributions towards the financing of the Programme and expresses its appreciation to those Mernber States which have made voluntary contributions for
this purpose;
·
·
9. Decides to appoint the following thirteen Member States as members of the Advisory Committee on
the United Natiops Programme of Assistance in the
Teaching, Study, Dissetnination and Wider Appreciation of Intemational Law, for a period of four years
beginning on 1 January 1976: Barbados, Cyprus, El
Salvador, France, Ghana, Hungary, Italy, Mali, Syrian
Arab Republic, Union of Soviet Socialis,t Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania and United States of
America;
10. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1976 and
1977 and, following consultations with the Advisory
Committee, to submit recommendations regarding the
execution of the Programme in subsequent years;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its thirty-second session the itero entitled "United
N ations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of lnternational Law".
2441 st plenary meeting
15 December 1975
*

*

155

*

Other decisions
Measures to prevent international tetTOrism which endangen or takes
innocent hum,m livea or jeopardizee fundamental freedoms, and study
of the underlying causes of those forms of terrorism and acts of
violence wbich lie in misery, frmtration, grievance and despair and
which cause eome people to sacrifice human lives, including their own,
in an attempt to eflect radical changes
(ltem 116)
At its 2441st plenary meeting, on 15 December 1975, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee,20 decided to include in the provisional agenda of its ,thirty-first session the ítem entitled "Measures to .prevent
intemational terrorism which endangers or takes innocent human lives or jeopardizes fundamental freedoms, and study of the underlying causes of those forros of
terrorism and acts of violence which lie in misery, frustration, grievance and
despair and which cause sorne people to sacrifice human lives, including their own,
in an attempt to effect radical changes".
Resolutions adopted by the United Nations Conference on the Representa•
tion of States in Their Relations with lnternational Organizations:
(a) Resolution relating to the obeerver 8tatus of national liberation
movemenb reeognized by the Organization of African Unity
and/or by the League of Arab States;
( b) Resolution relating to the application of the Convention in future
activities of international organimtions
(ltem 118)
At its 2441st plenary meeting, on 15 December 1975, the General Assembly,
on the recommendation of the Sixth Committee,21 decided to include in the provisional agenda of its thirty-flrst session the item entitled:
t.o Offecial Records of the General Auembly, Thirtieth Session, Annexes, agenda item 116,
document A/10465, para. 6.
21 /bid., agenda item 118, document A/ 10466, para. S.
