/

UNITED NA TIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-FIRST

YEAR

1938’”

MEETING:

,*j j f-: 2-i*i

*

JUN 51985

29 JUNE 1976

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l938)

Puge
1
... ... .. . ... ... .. .. ... .. .. ... .. ... .. .

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..i.

1

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution
3376 (XXX) (S/12090) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...*.

1

S/PV. 1938

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements
of the OfJicial Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions
of the Security
Council.
The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1938th MEETING
Held in New York, on Tuesday,
President:

Mr. Frederick

R. WILLS

(Guyana).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Reptiblit of Tanzania, United States of America.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

agenda (S/Agenda/l938)

of the agenda

The question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)
The meeting

was called to order at 3.45 p.m.
Adoption

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The question of the exercise by the Palestinian people
of its inalienable rights:
Report of the Committee established under Genera1
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) (S/12090)’

29 June 1976, at 3 p.m.

(Cyprrrs). Mr. smid (Czechoslovakia),
Mr. Ashtal
(Democratic
Yemen), Mr. Abdel Meguid (Egypt),
Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic), Mr. Camara (Gainen), Mr. Bbnya’sz (Hungary), Mr. Jaipal
(India),
Mr. Marpaung
(Indonesia),
Mr. Zahawie
(Iraq), Mr. Sharaf (Jordan), Mr. Botrlom (Lao People’s Democratic
Republic), Mr. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. Zaimi (Morocco), Mr. Al-Said (Oman),
Mr. Jarostek (Poland), Mr. Baroody (Sartdi Arabia),
Mr. Hassen (Somalia), Mr. AIIaf (Svrian Arab Repprrblit), Mr. Driss (Tunisia),
Mr. fiirkmen
(Tat-key),
Mr. Hamaidan (United Arab Emirates) and Mr. PetrZ
(Yugoslavia) took the place! reserved fro them at the
side of the Council chamber.
2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
members of the Council that I have just received a
letter from the representative of Qatar, in which he
asks to be invited to participate in the discussion.
Accordingly,
I propose, in accordance with the usual
practice and with the consent of the Council, to invite
him to participate in the discussion, without the right
to vote, under the provisions of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure.
3. in view of the limited number of places available
at the Council table, I invite the representative
of
Qatar to take the place reserved for him at the side of
the Council chamber, on the understanding
that he
will be invited to take a place at the Council table
when it is his turn to speak.

1. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with the decisions taken at the 1924th, 1928th and the 1933rd to
1937th meetings, I shall now invite the Chairman and
other members of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, the
representative of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Bahrain, Bulgaria,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt, the German Democratic
Republic, Guinea, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Jordan, the Lao People’s
Democratic
Republic,
Mauritania,
Morocco, Oman, Poland, Saudi Arabia,
Somalia, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tunisia,
Turkey,
United Arab Emirates and Yugoslavia to participate
in the Council’s discussions without the right to vote.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jamal (Qatar)
took the place reserved for him at the side of the Coancil chamber.
4. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform the
Council that a draft resolution bearing on the agenda
item under consideration was submitted in the course
of this morning’s meeting by Guyana, Pakistan, Panama and the United Republic of Tanzania [S/f2//9].
5. Mr. BENKHAYAL
(Libyan
Arab Republic):
Mr. President, my delegation would like to join others
in expressing great pleasure at having you, Mr. Minister, among us today presiding over our deliberations.
It is a great honour for me to see an eminent son of
the third world presiding over the work of the Council.
I should also like to salute your country for its firm
stand of solidarity with the noble causes of liberation,
peace and justice. It is particularly gratifying to me to

At the invitation of the President, the delegation of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian
People and Mr. AI-Hour
(Palestine
Liberation
Organization)
took places at
the Council table and Mr. Siddiq (Afghanistan),
Mr. Rahal (Algeria), Mr. Al Saffar (Bahrain), Mr. Grozes (Bulgaria),
Mr. Alar&n
(Cuba), Mr. Rossides

1.

express my delegation’s great pleasure to Ambassador Jackson for his wisdom and skill, which greatly
contributed to the success of the work of the Council
during the current month.

adverse social, economic and political
conditions
under which Jews were living in eastern and central
Europe and influenced by nineteenth century European colonialism,
Zionist leaders set as an objective
for themselves the establishment
of a Zionist State
in Palestine where all the Jews of the world would be
gathered.

6. I should like to express my delegation’s condolences to the delegation of the United States on the
occasion of the death of the Ambassador of the United
States in Beirut and his companions.

12. For manv centuries Palestine had been an Arab
land like any other part of the Arab homeland. The
Zionist movement made many efforts to take advantage of any .opportunity to win the support of Western
Powers in its endeavour to convert Arab-inhabited
Palestine into an .exclusively Jewish State. Britain,
the most powerful super-Power at that time, issued
the Balfour Declaration* of November 191’7, pledging
British support for the Zionist goal. The drafting of
that document can only be termed a blatant conspiracy
against the Palestinian people.

7. For the first time, the Security Council has begun
to direct greater attention to the Palestinian question,
after having ignored the rights of the Palestinians for
almost three decades. The Council opened the debate
at the beginning of this year on the Middle East problem including the Palestinian question with the full
participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization,
and for the first time, the Council accorded that organization the same rights as those conferred upon a
Member State under rule 37 of the provisional rules
of procedure. Again, during this month, the Council
is focusing upon the core of the Palestinian question
-the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights.

13. It is significant to note that when the Balfour
Declaration was proclaimed there were still no more
than 56,000 Jews in a Palestinian population of some
700,000, despite all the efforts made to encourage
Jews all over the world to emigrate to Palestine. The
native Jews and the new Jewish immigrants,
who
together constituted only 8 per cent of the population,
owned 2.5 per cent of the land of Palestine. Moreover, even after 30 years of British control and organized mass immigration
and land acquisition,
Jews
constituted only one third of the population and owned
less than 6 per cent of the land.

8. These steps reflect continuation
of the work of
the General Assembly. During its historic twenty.ninth session the General Assembly overwhelmingly
adopted two resolutions-resolutions
3236 (XXIX)
and 3237 (XXIX).
Resolution 3236 (XXIX) affirmed
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people, -including the right to self-determination
without external
interference and the right to national independence
and sovereignty. That resolution also reaffirmed the
inalienable right of the Palestinians to return to their
homes and property from which they had been displaced and uprooted, and called for their return.
Resolution
3237 (XXIX)
recognized the Palestine
Liberation Organization as the legitimate representative of the Palestinian people and granted it observer
status at the United Nations.

-14. The Zionists conducted a series of barbaric
aggressions against the Palestinian people, resulting
in the displacement of hundreds of thousands of inhabitants from their land, forcing them to start a new
refugee life far away from their homes and lands.
Moreover, the Zionist policy of expansionism has not
been restricted to Palestine. Its true expansionist
nature was revealed by the 1956 and 1967 wars, and
the occupation of the West ,Bank, the Gaza Strip, the
Egyptian Sinai and the Syrian Golan Heights.

9. These decisions and actions taken by the General
Assembly and the Security Council reflect the profound changes and developments that have occurred
in the attitude of the United Nations and of intemational public opinion. In addition, they point up the
universally favourable response to the struggle of the
Palestinian people to recover their inalienable-rights.

15. The Palestinian people have no choice but to
continue its struggle against the racist Zionist entity in
Palestine in order to regain their rights. This struggle
of the Palestinians is increasingly recognized by ,the
international community and is particularly supported
by the third-world ans socialist countries.

10. During its thirtieth session,. in its resolution 3376
(XXX), the General Assembly reaffirmed its resolution 3236 (XXIX) and decided to establish the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of
the Palestinian People. On this occasion I should like
to pay a tribute to Ambassador Fail of Senegal, Chairman of the Committee,
to the Rapporteur, Mr. Gauci
of Malta, and to all the members of the Committee.for
their dedicated work and sincere efforts.

16. The Arab people, including the Palestinians, will
continue their ardent struggle against this Zionist,
racist and colonialist entity. Peace in our part of the
world can never be-achieved so long as the’palestinian
problem ,continues to exist. This problem can be
solved only when the Zionist entity withdraws from
all the occupied Arab lands and the legitimate national
rights of the Palestinian people are recognized and
restored. The restoration of those rights is central to
any solution of the Middle East problem. Restoration-of the legitimate rights of the Palestinians calls

11. Towards the end of the nineteenth century the
Zionist movement
was created. Reacting to the
2

22. My delegation is pleased to see the representative of the Palestine Liberation wanization
with us’
in the Council, for it is logical thlt at a time when we
are discussing the inalienable ri@s of the Palestinian
people the true and authentic re-atatives
of Palestinians should be here. In that regard my delegation
is disturbed by Israel’s boycot&ag of this series of
Council meetings. My delegatim had expected that
Israel would show greater co-opesation with and consideration and respect for the U&d
Nations; which
brought it into existence.

for the establishment
of a democratic secular State
in Palestine including all the Palestinians,
be they
Moslems. Christians or Jews, all sharing equal rights
and responsibilities.
17. It is very appropriate at this stage of our debate
to reiterate the position of my delegation concerning
Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973).
Because those resolutions have been overtaken by
events and developments both inside and outside the
United Nations, they are irrelevant as a framework
for any just and lasting solution to the Middle East
question.

23. Once again, for the third time this year, the
problem of the Middle East is before this Council.
This time the Council is considering the report of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights
of the Palestinian People. May I take this opportunity
to congratulate the Committee on the comprehensive
report it has produced. In that context, let me thank
the Committee’s
Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal, and the other officers for the leadership they gave
the Committee,
which has produced such an important report.

18. In my delegation’s
view, it is high time the
Council took effective measures enabling the Palestinian people to obtain their rights, to return to their
homes and to decide their future in the framework of
self-determination,
national independence and sovereignty in Palestine. That, we believe, is the only way
that can lead to a just and lasting peace in the Middle
East.
19. If the Council fails to make a concrete contribution to resolving the Palestinian tragedy, the people of
Palestine will not fail to continue their struggle, with
the support of their Arab brothers and the peaceloving people all over the world, to achieve their just
goals and to acquire their national rights.

24. The Committee
was set up in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX) to consider
and recommend a programme of implementation
of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. It was
only fair, therefore; that the Committee should address
itself to the question referred to in that resolution.

20. Mr. CHALE (United Republic of Tanzania): It
gives me great pleasure and satisfaction, Mr. Minister, to see you presiding over our deliberations.
Your
presence here is a great honour to the Council and a
clear manifestation
of the importance your country
attaches to the United Nations. My delegation has
already had occasion, at the 1927th meeting of the
Council on 15 June, to say that the Co-operative
Republic of Guyana and the United Republic of Tanzania have close bonds of friendship and co-operation.
For that reason, therefore, my delegation is very
pleased to see you presiding over our deliberations at
a time when the Council is considering this important
question. Similarly,
my delegation wishes to express
its satisfaction and gratitude to Ambassador Jackson
for the able and energetic manner in which he has
guided the Council’s deliberations during the month
of June. He has done so with wisdom, tact, conscientiousness and impartiality.
It has been rightly
pointed out by preceding speakers that the month of
June has been a very busy one for the Councii, which
has had to deal with important and even urgent matters. Yet your Permanent
Representative
and his
coileagues of the Guyana Mission, in a team spirit,
have spared no effort to make the work of the Council
a success. We give them credit.

25. It is precisely because the issue of Palestine is
the core of the Middle East problem that the General
Assembly saw fit to set up the Committee.
As my
delegation has had occasion to state before, it is a selfdelusion to treat the question of Palestine as a mere
question of refugees. That evasive approach, which
ignores the realities in the Middle East, could not lead
us to a solution. It was, I believe, because of that
consideration that the Committee chose to formulate
paragraph 59 of its report as follows:
“The question of Palestine is at the heart of the
Middle East problem and, consequently, the Committee stresses its belief that no solution in the
Middle East csn be envisaged which does not fully
take into account the legitimate aspirations of the
Palestinian people.”
My delegation therefore cannot accept assertions to
the effect that the report is unbalanced, nor can it
accept statements to the effect that we have been
presented with a one-sided report.
26. As I have indicated, the mandate of the Committee was geared to the rights of the Palestinians,
which represent an element that is fundamental
to
any solution of the Middle East question. The Committee clearly understands this relationship
of the
rights of the Palestinians to the whole question. Thus,
it has dealt extensively with that aspect, as reflected
in many sections of the report, and especially in sec-

21. May I also express my delegation’s condolences
to the Unites States delegation on the killing of the
United States Ambassador to Lebanon Mr. Meloy,
and his colleagues. Indeed, it is tragic whenever
human life is lost through violence.
3

tion R of chapter IV, it cannot therefore justifiably be
said. that, in addtessing itself to the rights of the Palestinians, the Comtllirtee has tackled the matter in isolation, for unless Qlere is a recognition of those rights
to self-determirlalion,
national
independence
and
sovereignty, there cannot be a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East. That is all the Committee
has
attempted’to
achieve in its recommendations.

tion of the Palestinian
problem,
the Arab-Israeli
conflict is worsening and continues to endanger
international peace and security. The fifth preambular
paragraph emphasizes that a just and lasting peace
in the Middle East cannot be realized without the
achievement,
among other things, of a just solution
to the problem of Palestine on the basis of the recognition of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people.

27. My delegation believes that the Council cannot
afford to ignore that report. We believe that it contains
important elements, including the following: (a) the
right to self-determination,
national independence and
sovereignty of the Palestinians;. (b) the right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes; (c) withdrawal
by Israel from all occupied Arab territories;
and
(d) the right of all States in the region to exist in peace
within recognized boundaries.

32. Operative paragraph 1 takes note of the report
of the Committee; that is exactly what we in the Council have been doing for many days. Paragraph 2 affirms
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people to selfdetermination,
including the right of return and the
right to national independence
and sovereignty in
Palestine, in accordance with the United Nations
Charter.
33. We believe that to affirm the rights of the Palestinian people is the least the Council can do to reflect
the desire of the international
community.
On behalf
of the sponsors, I commend the draf resolution to the
Council.

28. The Palestinians who were expelled from their
land and those who were reduced .to the status of
second-class citizens are looking to the international
community
to help them achieve their rights. The
people of Palestine have suffered for too long. They
have waited for too long. It is high time that the conscience of the international
community
refused to
acquiesce in that injustice. The United Nations, which
was founded to defend human dignity and justice for
all, cannot, 30 years after the calamity that befell the
Palestinians,
pretend that their problems are of no
consequence. We cannot hope to obtain peace in the
Middle East in the face of this continuous injustice,
for peace cannot coexist with injustice. The Council
has an opportunity
and a responsibility
to do something about the problems of the Palestinians-and
that
is our considered view. For how else can this Council
pay a fitting tribute to the enduring and valiant Palestinians then by recognizing their rights?

34. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of Qatar. I invite him to take a place at
the Council table and to make his statement.
35. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar): It is indeed an honour for
me to address the Council under the presidency of
none other than the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Guyana. Your presence proves the attachment of your
nation to the cause of justice and peace in the world
and, in particular, to the cause of the inalienable right
of the Palestinian people to self-determination,
which
is the subject of our present deliberations.
May I also
take this opportunity
to express my delegation’s
gratitude and appreciation
to Ambassador Jackson,
the Permanent
Representative
of Guyana, whose
competence and devotion are to be commended.
I
should like also, through you, Mr. President, to
express my sincere thanks and gratitude to the members of this Council for allowing my delegation to
participate in this debate.

29. It is with those considerations in mind that my
delegation fully supports the recommendations
contained in the Committe,e’s report, which it commends
to the Council.
30. It is with pleasure that, on behalf the delegations
of Guyana, Pakistan, Panama and my own delegation,
I have the privilege of introducing the draft resolution
contained in document S/12119.

36. I wish to associate myself most sincerely with
the sentiments expressed by the speakers who preceded me on the tragic death of Ambassador Meloy
and his colleagues in Beirut two weeks ago. I should
like to convey to the representative
of the United
States my condolences and sympathy on that sad
news.

31. The first preambular
paragraph refers to the
subject of our discussion, namely, the question of the
exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable
rights. Our consideration of that item is in accordance
with the request contained in paragraph 8 of General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX). The second preambular paragraph speaks for itself. The third preambular paragraph refers to the consideration by the
Council of the report of the Committee,
transmitted
to the Council in accordance with the provisions of
paragraph 7 of General Assembly resolution 3376
(XXX). The fourth preambular paragraph refers to
our deep concern that, owing to the lack of a just solu-

37. Equally, I wish to thank the Chairman of the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, Ambassador Fall of Senegal,
and the members of the Committee for the untiring
efforts they have exerted in examining the question
of the exercise by the Palestinian people of its inalienable rights.
I2
‘_
38. The tragic death of many thousands of innocent
Lebanese and Palestinians
in Lebanon is a. direct
4

result of Zionist colonialism and expansionism in the
area, which, by its racist policies and discrimination
against the indigenous Arab population of Palestine
and the dispersal of that population, has caused all the
conflicts and wars in the region since the inception of
the Zionist State. Furthermore,
the events in which
the South African police repressed unarmed demonstrators and school children and which culminated in
the death of some hundred persons so far, are a crime
against mankind. The situation that led to the urgent
meeting of the Council last week must awaken the
conscience of those who can compel the racist apartheid regime in South Africa to recognize the rights of
the indigenous majority of the population.
The problem we have on hand is the continuation of colonialism
in the third world, through the illegal regimes of Pretoria and Salisbury and their alliance with the Zionist
regime in Tel Aviv.
I
39. My delegation has expressed the desire to participate in the debate on the basis of the position of
.principle and the profound conviction of my Government that the time has come to consider a just and
lasting solution to the Palestine problem that would
eliminate once and for all this protracted and constant
source of tension and conflict in the Middle East and
the world at large.
40. The Council has before it the report of the Committee which was established pursuant to General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX). The recommendations of the Committee, which appear in the part two
of the report, represent a programme of implementation designed to enable the people of Palestine to
exercise the rights which were recognized in .paragraphs 1 and 2 of General Assembly resolution 3236
(XXIX). That resolution clearly and precisely defines
the right of the Palestinian people to self-determination without external interference, and its right to
national independence
and sovereignty.
The same
resolution
“Reaffirm
also the inalienable
right of the
Palestinians to return to their homes and property
from which they have been displaced and uprooted,
and calls for their return.”
The right of every people to return to its homeland
has always been recognized as an inalienable,
universal right. Article 13, paragraph 2, of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights provides that “everyone has the right to leave any country, including his
own, and to return to his country”.
41. In its report the Committee
makes a series of
recommendations
based on the position formulated
in paragraph 59 that “the question of Palestine is at
the heart of the Middle East problem”, and that therefore, no solution in the area can be envisaged “which
does not fully take into account the legitimate aspirations of the Palestinian people”. And in paragraph 64,
the Committee recommends that the United Nations,
‘5

and the Security Council, in particular, “should take
appropriate
action to facilitate tke exercise by the
Palestinians of their right to return to their homes,
lands and property”.
42. In the view of my delegation. the situation in the
Middle East constitutes a threat rut only to peace in
the region, but to international
security throughout
the world. International
peace and security will not be
achieved as long as the people of Palestine remain
deprived of the most elementary rights enshrined in
the Charter, in the numerous resolutions
adopted
since 1948, and in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. I am fully convinced that the situation in the
Middle East will continue in a state of constant turmoil, punctuated by wars and cease-fires, until the
problem is solved at its roots, justly and correctly.
43. It is now clear that the events of recent years
have had an effect on world public opinion, which
finally understands that stability in the Middle East
cannot be brought about without the recognition of
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. It is
my delegation’s
strong belief that the Committee’s
report is a positive step towards the provision of a
framework within which the people of Palestine, as
represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization,
their sole and legitimate representative,
can exercise
thiir right to self-determination,
sovereignty
and
independence in their rightful homeland.
44. Mr. President, I should like to conclude my
statement by calling upon ,the Council, under your
wise leadership, to exercise pressure by all means
available to it to bring about an immediate,
total and
unconditional
withdrawal of Israeli occupation forces
from all occupied Arab territories.
We believe that
the Council has a duty to take the necessary measures
to put an end to the establishment
of Israeli settlements, to bring about the dismantling of the existing
ones, and to make Israel refrain from making any
demographic changes in those territories. The Council should not be afraid to invoke punitive sanctions
against Israel if it persists in refusing to implement
the various United Nations resolutions which have
recognized the legitimate aspirations of the people of
Palestine, duly represented by the Palestine Liberation Organization.
45. My Government
believes that the Security
Council is one of the institutions which have enough
credibility and moral impact to be able to direct the
course of events towards a just and lasting peace in
the Middle East. I urge all members of the Council
to seize this opportunity
and courageously adopt a
resolution that will endorse all the recommendations
of the Committee
as a first step towards alleviating
the plight of the Arab people of Palestine and averting
a major eruption of violence in the area.
46. The PRESIDENT:
The next sueaker is the
representative of Cyprus, whom I invite to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.

47. Mr. ROSSIDES
(Cyprus): Mr. President, may
I ‘join previous speakers in expressing our warm
congratulations
and our gratification that you, Sir, are
honouring the subject matter of our deliberations
by
your personal presence, conducting these proceedings
and lending to them the wisdom of your guidance
and determination.
I am happy to say that your country, with which we have the best of friedly relations,
since joining the United Nations, has been a paragon
in its adherence to the Charter for the peaceful solution of problems through the Organization.

gradual implementation
of the resolution on repatriation which were very reasonable and‘ which would
have created a new situation, but which, unfortunately, were not accepted. The right of the Palestinian
people to return to their homes and lands is, however,
increasingly and widely recognized, as it is by its very
nature legitimate and inalienable. No passage of time
can affect that basic right.
52. The Palestinian problem has been further aggravated by intermittent
wars, as a result of which the
extent of the occupied area and the number of refugees
were considerably increased with the occupation of
the West Bank and the Gaza Strip in 1967. In consequence of these developments,
the original limited
refugee problem, a part of the Middle East question,
has become the much wider problem of the Palestinian
people. It has thus acquired its own distinct identity
while at the same time being at the very core of the
Middle East problem.

48. I take this opportunity to convey to the mission
of the United States our deepest sympathy on the
tragic death of Ambassador Meloy and his aides in
such cruel circumstances. We feel and wish to express
indignation at such an outrageous crime. The growing
manifestation of uncontrolled aggression and anarchy
in the international
field is now increasingly reflected
in individual acts of terrorism which reveal a sharp
decline in the standards of legal order and security in
our times.

53. The report of the Committee represents a positive and comprehensive
effort at the implementation
of the rights of the Palestinian people, and consequently at the elimination
of the basic difficulty and
stumbling-block
in the solution of the over-all Middle
East problem.

49. The Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People, which was set up
under General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), was
given a distinct mandate to recommend to the Assembly a programme of implementation
designed to enable
the Palestinian people to exercise the rights recognized in resolution 3236 (XXIX), namely, their inalienable right to self-determination,
national independence
and sovereignty and their equally inalienable right to
return to their homes and property from which they
have been displaced and uprooted. The resolution
further specifically calls for the return of the Palestinian people to their homes and property.

54. In carrying out its task, the Committee proceeded
in a judicious way, basing itself on the Charter of the
United Nations, on the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 19494, on the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly, commanding
overwhelming
support, and
on mandatory decisions of the Security Council on
the subject. The Committee also took due account of
the present-day facts of the situation, bearing in mind
at the same time, however, the basic precepts and
binding norms of contemporary
international
law,
among which’are the inadmissibility
of the acquisition
of territory by force and the unacceptability
of situations resulting from a forced change in the demographic structure of a conntry. Such actions in violation of international
law, of the Charter and of the
fourth Geneva Convention of 1949, are universally
condemned and. can never create valid or acceptable
situations.

50. I need not enter into the details of the Palestinian
question. The report of the Committee is an eminently
clear and unambiguous document, both in its explanatory part and in its recommendations;
Furthermore,
the comprehensive statement of its Chairman [192&h
meeting], Ambassador Fall, presents the salient facts
of the whole question with admirable lucidity and
objectivity. I take this occasion to pay a tribute to the
wise and enlightened chairmanship of the Committee
by Ambassador Fall and to his dedicated initiative in
guiding the Committee’s
work. We also warmly congratulate Mr. Gauci of a sister small island, Malta, who
performed the duties of Rapporteur with exemplary
assiduity and skill, which have been greatly appreciated .

55. The Committee, while being guided by the essential merits of the case, has also shown judicious flexibility in its recommendations
so that their application
could be pragmatically
achievable. Participation
in
the work of the Committee by the Palestine Liberation
Organization has brought a constructive contribution
by its reasonableness of approach regarding the recommendations.
Provided that there is good will on
the part of the interested parties with regard to reasonable adjustments,
a just and lasting solution of
this great problem may realistically
emerge, and the
solutions will, of course, have to be peaceful, for in
a technologically
transformed world in our nuclear
era, problems can no longer be solved by the use ~of
force. Peaceful solutions under the Charter, however,

51. As is well known, there is a plethora of United
Nations resolutions calling for the return of the refugees to their homes or for compensation
for their
property if they do not wish to return. While these
resolutions have remained unimplemented
year after
year, the problem has been festering and growing in
its dimensions.
My delegation early. took an active
interest in promoting a solution of the proglem, and in
19623 we made specific proposals -for phased and
6

death of the American Ambassador to Lebanon, his
economic counsellor and their driver. This terrible act
brings to our realization, as often our words do not,
the seriousness, the explosiveness, the tragedy of the
whole situation in the Middle East.

can be achieved only through respect for principles
and for justice. Thus, the moral rather than the materialistic approach is the true realism of our times. As
a pertinent cartoon in the New Yorker magazine of last
week put it, “Things aren’t so simple any more,
Alston. The ethical high road may be more practical
now than the practical low road”. So, the practicality
of solutions must be sought in the morality of the
approach to problems.

61. The subject that is before us today, the report of
the Committee
on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People, is an effort to come
to grips with one aspect-a
very central aspect--of
the Middle East conflict. My Government
does not
doubt that the effort has been well-intentioned
and
that members of the Committee
have worked hard
and seriously to draft recommendations
that will promote a Middle East settlement. But I must say, in all
candour, as my delegation has said before, that the
basic approach that has been followed strikes us as
misguided. The Middle East conflict is probably the
most complex dispute on the international
scene.
Is it realistic to assume such a problem can be resolved by committees,
no matter how well-meaning?
Or is it not the duty of the United Nations to encourage
the parties to resume negotiations
on the serious
issues that confront them?

56. This is perhaps the first instance of a Committee
established by the General Assembly with a mandate
of implementation,
that is, a mandate to recommend
means for the effective implementation
of United
Nations resolutions
which remain unimplemented.
By remaining
inoperative,
such resolutions
most
prejudicially
affect the very purpose of the United
Nations and its effectiveness in its primary responsibility for the maintenance
of international
security
and peace. This case may thus be considered as a test
case of implementation,
that is, of how far in actual
pratice the Security Council can function in the manner required of it by the specific provisions of the
Charter for the implementation
of its own resolutions,
by which the whole structure of international
security
and peace through the United Nations stands or falls.

62. Peace will come about through a negotiated,
comprehensive
settlement taking into account all the
issues involved in the Arab-Israeli dispute. The framework for this settlement exists in resolutions 242 (1967)
and 338 (1973). In the numerous meetings of this
Council since the beginning
of the year touching
various aspects of the Middle East situation,
the
United States has made clear its position on the principles that must underlie a Middle East settlement, on
the Palestinian question as a whole and on the situation
in the territories occupied by Israel.

57. Independently
of this item, the growing awareness in the United Nations and in the world of the vital
need for implementation
of Council decisions on
matters of international
security can be gauged from
the increasing number of items on the agenda of the
General Assembly during the last few years pertaining
to matters of international
security, on which there
seems to be such characteristic failure.
58. We express the hope that this case may be the
beginning of a more careful investigation of the question of implementation,
because what indeed can be
the purpose of so much effort being put into resolutions and so much expense on the functioning of the
United Nations, if its primary purpose of maintaining
international
security and peace is not fulfilled? It is
our hope that, before it is too late, there will be a turn
towards more respect for the Charter and those provisions regarding international
security.

63. Our position is also clear on the report that has
occasioned .our meeting. We voted against General
Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), which created the
Committee, just as we voted against General Assembly resolution 3236 (XXIX), which it seeks to implement. Our reason is not lack of concern for the Palestinian people. We have consistently made clear our
concern on that score and our conviction that there
must be a solution to the Palestinian issue if there is
to be a lasting settlement.
We are convinced that
resolutions and committee
reports are not the most
effective way of dealing with the question of the political future of the Palestinians.
The United States
will do its utmost to bring about the early resumption
of serious negotiations looking towards a settlement
of all the issues, and we believe it is through such
negotiations that we must seek a solution to the issue
of the Palestinians.

59. Mr. SHERER
(Unitid
States of America):
Mr. President, at the outset I should like to say that
you pay us a high honour in presiding over the Council
during this debate and in visiting my country on the
eve of its bicentennial celebration. We pay a tribute
as well to Guyana’s celebration last month of its tenth
anniversary of independence.
Further, I should like
to add my voice to those of other members of the
Council who have expressed their highest admiration
for Ambassador Jackson’s very able conduct of the
pressing affairs of the Council this month.

64. I should like to explain my Government’s
position on the draft resolution that is before the Council
[S/12119]. There are, in our view, two fundamental
flaws to this draft. First, the text is totally devoid of
balance, stressing the rights and interests of one party
to the Middle East dispute and ignoring the rights and

60. I also take this opportunity once again to thank
all .those in the Council who have so generously
expressed their sympathy to the United States on the
7

interests of other parties.
Council

Secondly,

and helpful endeavours of the international
community in its attempt to bring about peace with justice
in Palestine and in the Middle East.

in that draft, the

“Affirms the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people to self-determination,
including the right of
return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine...“.

69. The tragic Ioss of life in our region and the continuing strife are the direct result of the continuing
Zionist aggression. Not only did the Zionists deny the
Palestinian people the exercise of their national rights
in Palestine but they continue to oppress our people
under occupation
and attack our people living in
forced exile. Zionist external aggression has already
engulfed the Middle East region .and undermined its
peace.

The political interests of the Palestinians and their
role in a final Middle East settlement constitute, in
my Government’s
view, a matter that must be negotiated between the parties before it can be defined in
resolutions of the Council. For those reasons, my
delegation intends to vote against this draft resolution.

70. Not only has peace eluded the region for about
30 years but everyone is fully aware that world peace
itself is equally threatened.
We deeply regret the
senseless murder of the Ambassador of the United
States in Lebanon, of the Economic Counsellor of
the Embassy and their driver, a senseless crime
strongly condemned
by the Palestine
Liberation
Organization.
My delegation wishes to extend our
condolences to the people of the United States and to
the families of the murdered men. Is it too much to
expect that these acts, following upon thousands of
equally senseless murders, may move the Council to
deal effectively, courageously and correctly with the
basic elements which have produced the strife in
Palestine and threatened the peace of the Middle East?

65. In closing, I should like to second the appeal
made by my British colleague for special contributions
to the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East to enable it to
continue its humanitarian work touching the daily lives
of Palestinians in need. We are heartened by the news
of the generous contribution
of Saudi Arabia and of
the intentions of the Governments of Japan and the
United Kingdom.
President Ford has submitted a
request to Congress for substantial additional money
to add to the United States contribution to the Agency
for 1976. We believe this is an appropriate way to deal
with immediate
Palestinian needs as we resolve to
make a better future for the Palestinian people and
the Middle East as a whole.
66. The PRESIDENT:
The
representative
of the Palestine
tion, on whom I now call.

71. The Council has had ample opportunity
to
express itself on one or more of the questions that
undermine the peace of the Middle East region but
over the years its will and resolve have been rendered
impotent by the unilateral acts of the Zionist regime,
which thrives on aggression. Zionist aggressions and
transgressions have been made immune to effective
international
censure and action by the unilateral
interposition
of the .veto by Israel’s protector in the
Council. Members of this body are fully cognizant of
the grave consequences of the Council’s previous
inability
to exercise its legitimate authority or the
powers vested in it by the Charter; the peace which it
is supposed to protect and promote has been turned
into a nightmare. Thus far the principal victims of the
aggression and wars waged by the Zionists and sustained by the United ‘States have been Palestinians
and other Arabs. There is no doubt that others will be
gradually-as
some have already been-victims
of the
same events. Should the Council fail once more in the
exercise of its legitimate
authority,
for whatever
reason, its ability to act decisively in other areas where
peace is threatened and to halt aggression by any
Power will have been severely curtailed.

next speaker is the
Liberation
Organiza-

67. Mr. AL-HOUT
(Palestine Liberation
Organization): Mr. President, I should like you to know how
gratified we are that the debate on the Committee’s
report and the discussion of the question of the exer-.
cise of the rights of the Palestinian people are being
guided. by you. Your commitment
to a progressive
international
order based on the freedom, dignity and
independence of ail oppressed people makes it possible for us to hope that the Council’s debate will be
successfully concluded by the adoption of just measures that will assist our people in the exercise of their
national rights in Palestine. Your wise and constructive role is deeply appreciated by our delegation.
68. The Council is once more attempting to address
itself to the question of Palestine. As in the debate of
January 1976, the Palestine Liberation
Organization
notes the deliberate absence of the representative of
the Zionist occupation forces in Palestine. It is quite
clear that their absence is more than compensated for
by the presence of those who sponsor and sustain
Zionist occupation and aggression in the Middle East.
While Zionist views will be expressed by proxy,
members of this Council will remember that this is
not the only manifest way by which Zionism ignores
and insults the international
community;
Zionism and
the Zionists have repeatedly rejected the wise counsel

72. The Council has before it an important
document which is the outcome of long and thoughtful
deliberations
on the part of wise, sincere and able’
representatives
of the international
community.
On behalf of the Palestine Liberation
Organization
I should like to convey to each member of the Committee our appreciation,
and our high esteem to its
8

people of Africa against the aparthaid authorities of
Pretoria is of the same genre as the comprehensive
revolt of the Palestinian people in Nazareth, Nablus,
Ramallah,
Gaza, Jerusalem and everywhere else.
They are natural revolts of the oppressed, and there
can be only one response to these revolts. The racist
occupier and colonizer reinforces its means of oppression, and the oppressed intensify their struggle to
attain freedom and dignity. The international
community finds it natural to support the victim. Yet the
same racist and imperialist
Powers which oppressed
the majority of mankind in the past now render military and diplomatic support to the same racist occupation forces, whether in Pretoria or in Tel Aviv.

Chairman, Ambassador Fall of Senegal. The Committee followed closely the terms of reference contained in General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX).
We find its report protective of the spirit of that resolution and consistent with its understanding of the
totality of the Assembly’s resolutions on the question
of Palestine. We are therefore not at all surprised that
those Powers that traditionally
have promoted aggression in the Middle East and that have traditionally
opposed the self-determination
of the Palestinian
people and those who have facilitated the destruction
of our Palestinian homeland and the dispersal of our
people should try once more to halt the process of the
orderly attainment of independence and sovereignty
by the Palestinian people as envisaged by the Assembly. I should like to take this opportunity
to inform
those Powers, once more, that their efforts are
doomed; whether they use procedural tactics or resort
to pseudo-legal arguments or more lethal instruments,
let there be no doubt that our struggle will successfully culminate in the independence and sovereignty
of our people in Palestine. The only question which
such hostile Powers must ask themselves is simply
this: Do they prefer the attainment of independence
and sovereignty by the Palestinian people in Palestine in an orderly, relatively peaceful fashion, or must
they, in accordance with their historical opposition to
the independence and freedom of all oppressed people, endeavour once more to delay and prolong and
unsuccessfully try to halt the natural course of history?

75. It is evident that the members of the Committee,
the majority
of whom represent countries which
endured similar oppression and deprivation
of their
national rights in the past, have a similar judgement
of the confrontation
between the colonizer and the
colonized, between the oppressor and the oppressed.
Accordingly,
they have called first and foremost for
the immediate and unconditional
termination
of the
Zionist occcupation
so that the Palestinian
people
can exercise their national rights in Palestine. The
members of this Council should have no difficulty in
endorsing that request by the Committee.
The Council’s pronouncements
and the provisions of the Charter are clear on this point: the acquisition of territory
by force is inadmissible,
illegal and contrary to any
principle of recognized international
law. The termination of military occupation is not conditional,
is
not subject to any limitations.
It is an absolute principle; it cannot and certainly it should not be in any
form or shape modified or made contingent on something else. For to condone the placing of conditions
on it in one area will undoubtedly lead to its invalidation throughout
the world. The international
community, acting through the General Assembly, has
recognized the right of the Palestinian people to independence and sovereignty; the exercise of that independence is possible and feasible with the termination
of the Zionist occupation of the Palestinian homeland.
The Council is therefore called upon to reaffirm its
commitment
and adherence to the unacceptability
of
the principle of conquest and must urgently take
effective measures to bring the Zionist occupation of
Palestine to an end.

73. The members of the Council know that our rights
to independence
and sovereignty in Palestine are
inherent rights; our national rights have been recognized and affirmed by the international
community.
The report of the Committee
emphasizes this international recognition. The Council’s task is to assist in
the orderly and firm implementation
of these rights
for two principal reasons: because that is right, and
because that would contribute to the restoration of
peace in the Middle East.
74. Recent events elsewhere in the world, particularly in southern Africa, remind us once again that
imperialism
and racism continue to guide the action
and policies of the same Powers. The implicit and
explicit financial and military support which those
Powers continue to give the racist regimes of South
Africa and Rhodesia enable those regimes to practise
their oppressive apartheid policies, to occupy African
lands and to frustrate the operation of democratic
processes. Recently the Council had an occasion to
pronounce itself rightly on the logical consequences
of these oppressive policies. These policies, whether
practised in southern Africa or in Palestine, necessarily lead to violence and pose a threat to intemational peace. For it is clear that military occupation,
apartheid and racism and settler colonialism
can be
maintained only by violence inflicted and generated
by the racist occupation. The victim of colonialism,
occupation and racism must respond to this violence,
and there can be only one response. The revolt of the

76. I should like to remind the members of this Coun-’
cil that our aspiration is to attain our independence in
Palestine and not elsewhere. Just as we struggle
against Zionist occupation of our lands, we abhor the
occupation of any land by any Power or regime external to that land. Whereas we promote the sovereingty
and integrity of all States, the Zionists have worked
for years to undermine the independence and sovereignty of the Arab States. While the Zionists justify
their conquest of Palestine, they have suggested to
the international
community
that their principle of
conquest ought to become a universal principle; thus,
they have suggested that the Palestinians
should
9

establish their independence
other people’s lands.

and

sovereignty

on

77. The members of the Committee
recognized
clearly and explicitly that the rights of the Palestinian
people can be exercised solely in Palestine. Thus they
have called-and
rightly so-for the repatriation
of
the Palestinian people who have been expelled from
their national homeland. The report provides useful
suggestions concerning the practical aspects of the
repatriation
of the Palestinians to their homes and
lands. That principle too should come as no surprise
to members of this Council. Even those Powers that
have been principally responsible for the innumerable
tragedies of the Palestinian people have endorsed the
principle in the past. That their behaviour and policies
contributed to the effective Zionist blocking of the
implementation
of this principle neither undermines
its correctness nor detracts from its legitimacy. The
principle has been affirmed and reaffirmed by several
General Assembly and Council resolutions. What is
required now, therefore, is the adoption of effective
measures that will translate this principle into concrete international
action. The Palestinian people will
return to their lands in Palestine. The question is
simply this: Will we return home in an orderly and
relatively peaceful fashion or must we struggle by
all the means at our disposal and with the support of
friendly Powers at a tremendous cost in human lives
in order to return?; Must the Zionists and their protectors threaten international
peace and security in
order to prevent our people from returning-and
to
prevent our people from exercising their national
rights in Palestine?

79. The Council therefore now has an opportunity
to confront the core of the question and to begin to
devise appropriate measures to promote the effective
implementation
of the resolutions of the General Assembly. It cannot abdicate its responsibihties
and
must not fall victim to procedures and modalities
which might be appropriate to other questions; for
now, the Council must address itself to the core of
the conflict in Palestine. The Council has not addressed itself to that question in the past; it now has
the opportunity to do so. The report of the Committee
provides the basis for the adoption of measures by
the Council that will facilitate the exercise of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people in Palestine. We trust that the Council will adopt such measures and thus contribute significantly to the restoration of justice and peace in Palestine.
80. The PRESIDENT:
I should like now to make a
statement as the representative of GUYANA.
81. May I first of all express to the representative of
the United States the profound sympathy of my Government and myself on the recent death of the Ambassador, the Economic Counsellor and .their driver in
Beirut. I ask him to convey these sentiments not only
to his Government
but also to the relatives of the
deceased. Those tragic deaths underline all too grimly
the continuing urgency of the Middle East problem
and the need to tackle it.
82. There are some who accuse the Council of pursuing sterile debate at the expense of current reality.
What is overlooked is that current reality is rooted
in a human condition,
which, though it may have
originated in the past, in intractably and stubbornly
preserved for the future by those advocates of current
reality.

78. The members of the Council are fully aware of
the intimate and organic link. between the question
of Palestine and the so-called Middle East question.
We are fully conscious of that link. But it is now.recognized, even by those Powers that oppose the Palestinian people, that the question of Palestine is the core
of the other question. Yet the Council has found it
necessary repeatedly
to deal with the derivative
question; it has dealt with the question of Palestine
only derivatively.
Its efforts therefore have not borne
fruit, for that as well as for other reasons. The General
Assembly, on the other hand, has successfully disentangled the two questions while recognizing the
link; it has placed an important .priority on reaching
a just solution to the question of Palestine and affirmed
the national rights of the Palestinian people; it has
created an appropriate
mechanism
to handle the
implementation
of its resolutions. It has further elaborated a legitimate procedure for handling the question
of implementation.
Thus the General Assembly has
recognized that somewhat different and specific resolutions are needed for the two separate, yet linked,
questions; it has recognized that somewhat different
frameworks are required for the needed solutions;
and it has devised different mechanisms of implementation.

83. The most outstanding
problem bequeathed to
mankind at the conclusion of the Second World War
was the conflict of cultures and interests in the Middle
East. Few problems have taxed the strength of the
United Nations as an institution more than this one;
and few problems have called in question the capacity
of the United Nations to defuse potential conflict more
than this one. The old League of Nations, the precursor of the present institution, floundered and failed
on the question of global security. As members of the
Security Council we are enjoined by the dictates of
history and of precedent to reflect on the causes of
that failure and from such reflection to derive the will
and the clarity of vision to focus our energies effectively.
84. Many have been the long hours of debate already
expended during the course of this year on’the intertwined difficulties of the enduring Middle East problem. Of one thing I remain convinced: any search for
a solution that seeks to bypass the United Nations
system and the many resolutions that we have adopted
loses legitimacy, loses credibility and loses the stamp
10

1

.

ever spurious military justificab.
Security is not
obtained by the unlawful retention of permanent
symbols of injustice;
security is not obtained by
committing
constant and enduw
injuries to contiguous nationalisms.

of universal consensus. It would be pointless to
fashion an institution for the organized expression of
world opinion if that world opinion is to be flouted
with impunity
and with the brazen assertion that
advantages which derive from unlawful and successful violence are not negotiable,
and that regional
aggrandisement is international
virtue.

91. Secondly, all States in the n-including
the
State of Israel-must
have the rigbr to exist and to do
so within boundaries that are urrircrsally recognized
and scrupulously
respected. Our march along the
path of time has not accorded to aU nation States the
convenience of frontiers that suit & military defence
perceptions of modem warfare. Nevertheless,
this
should not be made the excuse for covetous expansionism and the digestion of wrongfully retained land
by the intrusion of alien settlements, settlements that
are strategically
and economically
conceived
to
perpetuate an original injustice.

85. The report of the Committee on the Exercise of
the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People is the
occasion of our immediate concern with this problem.
My delegation wishes to congratulate the Chairman,
Ambassador Fall of Senegal, for this valuable contribution and for the excellent manner in which he
presented the report.
86. There are some who venture criticism of our
present efforts because, as they allege, this report
deals with only one of a number of factors comprising
the total problem. We, on the other hand, are concerned lest the’ importance of this debate should be
lost to a questionable preoccupation
with the arithmetic of numbers. We believe that the prospects for a
lasting peace in the Middle East begin and end with
the satisfaction of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. It is intolerable
that any portion of
mankind should be condemned to the lingering indignity of refugee camps and the condescending kindness
of global compassion.

92. The .Palestinians have shown and continue to’
show an admirable and touching faith in the United
Nations system. Their authentic representative,
the
Palestine Liberation
Organization,
has participated
diligently and constructively
in the work of the Committee whose report is now before us. They have.
placed their faith in a positive response by the Security Council and the General Assembly to a programme of action such as the one included in that
report.

87. The struggle of the Palestinian
people is an
integral part of the liberation
struggle which rages
throughout the world. It takes place in an area which
has been notorious throughout history as the hotbed
of contending cultures. Their struggle has been complicated by the false global defence perceptions of
others who live far from their region, by unrelenting
preoccupations
with the control of global communications and with preoccupations
about the vital destiny of energy resources. The plight of the Palestinians
makes a mockery of protestations of concern over
the condition of every single human being on the
planet.

93. The recommendations
in the report provide a
positive programme of action, the implementation
of
which would greatly enhance the prospects for a
comprehensive
settlement.
It is significant that the
Committee
affirms the necessary role and responsibility of the United Nations in the search for a just
and lasting solution. Its recommendations
are based
on the many unimplemented
resolutions on the Middle
East which have been adopted by the United Nations.
We are therefore afforded here the opportunity
of
breaking out of the current stagnation and taking the
initiative
to pave the way for a final over-all settlement.
.’

88. It was the United Nations that created Israel; it
is the responsibility
of the United Nations to see to it
that this creation does not abrogate the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people nor allow any schemes
of fortuitous selectivity permanently
to dispossess,
deprive and disadvantage those whose claims merely
reflect rights which we jealously guard and protect in
our own selves.

94. We have listened carefully to the many statements made in the course of this debate. The lack of
recognition by the Council of the inalienable national
rights of the Palestinians is a monstrous omission,
occurring at a time when a growing majority of people
and international
organizations have eome to such a
recognition. It is an omission on our part that clamours
for .correction. We must never flag or fail; we must
never tire of debate; we must never waver in our
constancy. We must not leave to succeeding generations the half-fulfilment
of our task. We must allow
the imposition of no qualifications
on the concept of
inalienability.
We must as a body affirm and continue
to affirm that the Palestinians have -a right to selfdetermination
and a right to national independence.

89. Apart from the aforementioned
principle, there
are two others which Guyana considers to be essential
in any solution of the Middle East problem.
90. First, Isiael must withdraw from all Arab territories occupied since 5 June 1967-and do so quickly.
Guyana can never condone the occupation by force
of territory belonging to other peoples and nations on
whatever pretext, by whatever fiction, or with what;

95. Mr. MALIK
lics) (interpretation
11

(Union of Soviet Socialist Repubfrom Russian): At yesterday after-

“The Soviet Union and the socialist community
have been the most faithful champions of the Palestinian cause.. . The USSR was on our side throughout the October war. Arabs should not forget that
their victory was achieved by Soviet arms. In
October 1973 the Soviet Union established air
bridges linking Moscow with Damascus and Cairo.
Across these bridges arms were sent to Syria and
Egypt, and this helped the Arabs in their just struggle against Israel. We must strengthen our friendship with the Soviet Union.”

noon’s meeting j!I!J6rh meeting], the members of the
Security Council@I&e
again were obliged to listen to
one more. routin-eX&k,
filled with lying anti-Soviet
fabrications and. @I$ most shameless slanders, in the
statement of th@ Qlinese
representative,
Mr. Lai
Ya-ii. In his slanmus
attacks, not for the first time,
he usedgthe metho& of Goebbels’ propaganda, namely, to make the li@so big that naive people can come
to believe it and@%t and foremost the author of the
lie tiimself.
96. In attempting falsely to slander the Soviet Union
and to distort its just policy-that
of a friend and ally
of the Arab peoples-that
speaker, without flinching,
described the Soviet Union as an enemy of the Arab
peoples, an opponent of the attainment of peace in the
Middle East and a super-Power aiming at a new world
war and hegemonism.
The enemies of the Soviet
Union have slandered our country ever since the very
first days of the Great October Socialist Revolution
and continue to do so. Now the dirty work of slan- ~ dering the Soviet Union is being undertaken by the
Maoists.

That is the best possible answer to the Chinese slanderers. It is sufficient to contrast that friendly statement of Mr. Khaddoumi’s
with’ the lies of Mr. Lai
Ya-Ii in order to see the true depth of moral degradation and shamelessness of the Chinese Maoists.
99. What are the goals sought by the Chinese delegation in the Council? ‘First, to denigrate and split the
socitilist countries, including the Soviet Union, and
to separate them from the Arab countries, as well as
from the non-aligned countries. Secondly, as everyone can see, by his slanderous attacks against the
Soviet Union,‘and
by his distortions of its policy, the
Chinese representative is attempting to divert attention from those really responsible for the tragedy in
the Middle East: the leaders of Israel, the militant
Zionist circles and their rich protectors. China, by
means of anti-Sovietism,
is attempting to justify Israeli
aggression against the Arab countries, just as it attempted by means of anti-Sovietism
to justify in the
Council the aggression of South Africa against Angola,
but was properly
rebuffed by representatives
of
African countries.

97. However, if one gives some thought to the substance of what was said by the Chinese representative,
it.is obvious that there are discrepancies-loose
ends
that cannot be tied up. On the one hand, he expresses
his admiration for the heroic and victorious struggle
of the Arab peoples-including
the Palestiniansagainst Israeli aggression in October 1973. On the
other hand, he slanders those people whose active
assistance and support-and
primarily whose armswere instrumental
in achieving that brilliant victory.
But it was not those chatterers in Peking and their
hostile attacks on the Soviet Union that helped in the
achievement of that victory, it was the positive policy
of peace and the genuine assistance of the Soviet
Union, as is well known to the whole world. It is
precisely thanks to that assistance and support that
success was achieved in the October 1973 war. As
Comrade Brezhnev stated in his report to the Twentyfifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union:

100. Thus, as can clearly be seen by all, the Peking
leadership is not assisting in a settlement of the Middle
East conflict. Quite the contrary: they are actually
diverting attention from that settlement and deflecting
it towards anti-Sovietism.
By so doing they are helping
Israel and its protectors to continue to consolidate
their domination
over the occupied Arab territories,
to avoid an over-all settlement of the Middle .East conflict and to delay the solution of this problem. Indeed,
Peking and its representatives at the United Nations
are playing the role of devil’s advocate and patrons of
Israeli aggression.

“All these years, the Soviet Union has consistently supported the Arab peoples’ struggle to
eliminate the consequences of the Israeli aggression.. Our country helped-and
effectively, as the
October 1973 war showed-to build up the military
potential of the countries opposing the aggressor,
that is, Egypt, Syria and Iraq. We supported the
Arab political
struggle both within the United
Nations and outside it.”

101. This also sheds light on another question-namely, why Israel itself does not need to take part in the
Security Council discussion of the Palestine question.
Israel is convinced that the Chinese delegation will
do all the dirty work of distorting and slandering the
policy of the Soviet Union and is counting on this.
One cannot help being reminded, in this connexion,
of our saving, “Why bark yourself when you have
bought a bad-tempered dog that barks loudly”?

98. This help has won the recognition
and great
gratitude of the Arab peoples, and particularly of the
Palestine Liberation Organization.
A member of the
Executive. Committee
of the Palestine Liberation
Organization,
Mr. Khaddoumi,
said in an interview in
the Beirut weekly Monday
Morning
at the end of
March this year:

102. With regard to the false assertion that the Soviet
Union is an enemy of the attainment of peace in the
Middle East, as alleged, we have every ground for
saying-and
this again is obvious to everyone-that
12

no State has made such efforts to achieve a just and
peaceful settlement in the Middle East as has the
Soviet Union. In the course of the discussions in the
Council, the delegation of the Soviet Union has repeatedly set forth the principles for a just and peaceful
settlement of the Middle East conflict which were
once again proposed by the Soviet Government in its
statement of 28 April [S/1206.3]. But China did not
support those principles:
it prefers military tension
in the Middle East, and the consolidation of the fruits
of Israeli aggression.
103. And now a few words about this “new world
war” and “hegemonism”.
Let me recall that the Soviet
Union gave 20 million lives--the lives of our sons and
daughters-in
the years of the Great Patriotic War
against Hitlerite fascism, so that neither the Soviet
people nor any other people, would ever again be
subjected to war. Ever since the end of the Second
World War, the Soviet Union has been making tireless efforts to strengthen international
peace and
security, and we are happy and proud that in this vital
question of the day the position of the Soviet Union
coincides entirely with the position of the non-aligned
countries-something
which cannot be said of China’s
position.
104. The Soviet Union and the non-aligned countries
are in favour of the non-use of force in international
relations, and the permanent prohibition of the use of
nuclear weapons. China is against that. The Soviet
Union and the non-aligned countries are in favour of
disarmament and the convening of a world disarmament conference. China is against that. The Soviet
Union and the non-aligned countries are in favour of
calling a halt to the senseless arms race, and of the
reduction of military budgets. China, along with the
United States and certain other countries, is against
that. The Soviet Union and the non-aligned countries
are calling for a cessation of the testing of all forms of
nuclear weapons. China is against that. Twenty-five
non-nuclear countries have declared their readiness,
without any conditions, to take part in talks on concluding a treaty banning all forms of nuclear testing.
China is against that. Moreover, a check of actual
concrete facts in the United Nations reveals the
demagoguery of the Chinese representatives:
specifically, it reveals who is in favour of peace and disarmament, and who is against it and is preaching the
inevitability
of a new world war.

That is a monstrous

106. It is quite clear why it was necessary for the
Chinese representative to repeat in his statement the
hostile fabrications against the Soviet Union from the
Hsinhua news agency with regard to a new world war
and hegemony. By this kind of deception, lying and
slander against the Soviet Union, China is attempting
to divert attention from the general orientation of its
foreign policy, which is aimed at provoking a new
world war in order to achieve world hegemony.
107. The main purpose of the great-Power hegemonistic plans of the Chinese leadership is to try to convert China into a State that is able to dictate its will
to other peoples, and to become the sole world Power,
the “mono-super-Power”.
In order to achieve this
purpose, China has been developing at an increasing
rate its military and industrial potential. At the present
time, China is spending more than 40 per cent of its
budget for military purposes. That is why China is
against disarmament.
In order to achieve its goal,
China is attempting to use the non-aligned countries,
claiming the role of leader of the third world. In pursuing its hegemonistic policy with regard to the nonaligned countries. China’s leadership is attempting
to establish pro-Maoist
regimes in most of them.
Peking is continually
provoking
internal disorders
and organizing armed actions in these countries.
108. At the recent session of the All-China Assembly
of People’s Representatives,
the great-Power hegemonistic purpose was put forward: to convert China
by the end of this century into a great world Power.
This is, in fact, a repetition of the well-known thesis
of Mao Tse-tung: “We must become the first country
of the world”. This is what he said as far back as
1956. Three years later, in 1959, Mao Tse-tung stated,
“We .must be masters of the world”. In their greatPower hegemonistic plans, the leaders in Peking have
assigned a particular role to Asia. They view the Asian
countries as the first bridgehead of their annexionist
goals. That is why they come out so furiously against
collective security in Asia. In determining the policy
of China with regard to South-East Asia, Mao Tsetung stated in August 1965:
“We must take control of South-East
Asia,
including
South Viet-Nam,
Thailand,
Burma,
Malaysia and Singapore. That region of SouthEast Asia is very rich. It has a lot of minerals and
it is certainly worth great expense to get it... After
we get hold of South-East Asia, we can then increase
our strength in that area.”

105. With regard to the inevitability
of a new world
war, we have repeatedly heard the Chinese delegation
making statements about that officially,
from the
rostrum of the General Assembly, as is well known
to everyone. I have here a quotation from the Nemo
York Pusf containing a comment on one such militaristic statement by the head of the Chinese delegation.
The article, under the title “Happy days will soon be
here again”, in the issue of 30 September 1975 reads
as follows:
“China told the General Assembly- session here
that a new world war is inevitable and that, as a
result, the future of the world will be bright.“*
* Qu’oted

in English

statement.

That is precisely the arm of the leading circles in
Peking and that is why they are counting on a world
war.
109. As far back as 18 years ago, Mao Tse-tung
baldly stated that he saw nothing terrible in the death
of half the population of the world and half the population of China in the case of an atomic war. The speeches
of the representatives of China in the United Nations
have once again shown that in the years which have

by the speaker.

13

.

elapsed nothing has changed in Mao’s position. In
fact, his position has hardened. Even in his latest
poem, “Conversation
of birds”, published in Jen Min
Ji Pm on 1 .January 1976, he exalts a “world of people” where “everything
is upside down”, where
“flames from weapons lick the skies”, and “the
whole earth is tom apart by bomb craters”.
110. This misanthropic concept of the exaltation of
war reminds us of the barbaric ideas of Hitler, who
dreamt of world domination by German fascism. Mao
Tse-tung’s official statements and his poetic works
reveal the same concept, which is an open invitation
to a new world war and can be applicable only to
international
reaction, to aggressors, the Chilean fascists and the South African racists, who voted in the
United Nations along with China against the proposal
of the Soviet Union on the non-use of force in international relations and the permanent prohibition of the
use of nuclear weapons, in spite of the fact that the
non-aligned countries voted with the Soviet Union and
other socialist countries in favour of that proposal.
111. These are the facts which characterize the real
agressive, expansionist and great-Power hegemonistic
position of China, and no slander against the Soviet
Union can possibly camouflage that. This is something
that cannot possibly be refuted by the Chinese representative. This concept of war and of hegemonism is
hateful to all honest men, who have opposed resolute “no” to a new world war and hegemonism.
112. In so far as concerns the Soviet Union at the
present time, we are waging a mass campaign to collect signatures for the Stockholm appeal of the World
Peace Council for a halt to the arms race and for disarmament. The Soviet people, in signing this appeal,
demand that a halt be called to the arms race and that
the relaxation of international
tension be made irreversible. They are deeply convinced that the victories
won in the struggle for peace and detente have engendered new hopes, new faith and new conviction and
optimism among the peoples. Peace can be preserved.
It is preserved in our efforts to ensure peace throughout the world. The Soviet Union stands for world
forces-and
above all, the socialist and non-aligned
countries in solidarity-overcoming
the obstacles
which still stand in the way of the establishment of a
just and lasting peace and banishing aggression,
oppression, exploitation,
hunger and misery for ever
from the life of mankind.

Union, will be put into effect and that the world will
witness the triumph of the Soviet concept of the
inevitability
of lasting international peace and security,
and not the Chinese concept of the “inevitability”
of
a new world war.
114. The PRESIDENT:
If no other representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I shall take it that the
Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the draft
resolution contained in document S/121 19.
115. The representative
of Japan has asked to be
allowed to speak in explanation of his vote before the
vote, and I now call on him.
116. Mr. ABE (Japan): I have already explained in
the Council [1936th meeting] the basic position of the
Government of Japan regarding the Middle East problem. Any just and lasting settlement should be based
on the three following requirements: first, withdrawal
of Israeli forces from all the territories occupied since
June 1967; secondly, respect for and acknowiedgement of the sovereignty,
territorial
integrity
and
political independence of all States in the area, including Israel, and their right to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries; and, thridly, recognition of and respect for the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people in accordance with the Charter.
I wish to reaffirm once again that in any solution of
the Middle East problem, ail three of these requirements are equally indispensable, and all of them must
be met together. I wish to make it clear, therefore,
that any draft resolution which is not in line with the
aforementioned
position of Japan will not be acceptable to my Government.
117. Let me turn to the contents and the wording of
the draft resolution before us. First, with respect to
operative paragraph 1, while my delegation appreciates the work of the Committee,
especially that in
Part One of the report, it cannot support the recommendations on the implementation
of the inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people because they are, in
the view of my delegation, hardly to be implemented
either legally or politically.
None the less we are able
to support that paragraph since it merely takes note
of the report of the Committee and does not prejudge
the assessment of its contents. Secondly, as regards
paragraph 2, my delegation believes that certain inalienable rights, as enunciated in the report, should
be recognized to the Palestinian people, and accordingly it can support the affirmation of these rights. It
goes without saying that certain of the rights that are
to be recognized to the Palestinian people should be
equally recognized to any people or peoples in the
region. Thirdly, the first preambular paragraph refers
to General Assembly resolution 3376 (XXX), on which
my delegation abstained. My delegation understands
that that reference was considered necessary for the
reason that the Committee was established under that
resolution-namely,
for procedural
reasons. Consequently, my delegation can go along with that paragraph .

113. We are firmly convinced that no amount of
deceit, lies or slander, distortion of the truth or of
reality by the Peking leadership and its representatives
in the United Nations can prevent the triumph of our
just cause, namely, the strengthening of international
peace and security. We are also firmly convinced that
the programme of further struggle for peace and international co-operation and for the freedom and independence of the peoples, approved at the Twentyfifth Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet
14

as an integrated whole. Because this draft resolution
did not take account of this essential point, my delegation was unable to vote in favour of it.

118. Having put on record the position and comments of my Government,
the delegation of Japan is
ready to vote in favour of the draft resolution, on the
understanding
that it supplements -resolutions
242
(1967) and 338 (1973).

125. Mr. de GUIRINGAUD
(France) (interpretcrtion
from French): It was with regret that my delegation
felt compelled to abstain on the text submitted to the
Council. The reasons for that attitude are clear from
the statement I made here on 25 June [ihici.]. While
France recognizes the right of the Palestinian people
to an independent homeland, we consider that that
right can be implemented
only within an over-a!! settlement, which is the only way to reconcile the legitimate rights and concerns of all the parties, since that
would not dissociate the various elements of the
problem. Thus we were unable to associate ourselves
with an approach which, since it covered only one of
the elements, did not take into account the others also.

119. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now put to the vote
the draft resolution sponsored by Guyana, Pakistan,
Panama and the United Republic of Tanzania in document S/121 19.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour: Benin, China, Guyana, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Republic of
Tanzania
Against:

United

States of America

Abstaining:
France, Italy, Sweden, United
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
The result of the vote was 10 in favour,
crnd 4 ahstentions.

126. This genera1 reservation applies more particularly to the following points. In the fourth preambular
paragraph, it does not seem to us that there is occasion
to emphasize that the problem of Palestine is “the
core” of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Furthermore,
that
affirmation is contradicted
in the next paragraph, in
which we read that the solution to this problem must
be found “inter alia” in order to arrive at a just and
lasting peace. We think that by mentioning in the fifth
preambular paragraph the search for solution to the
Palestine problem, the draft resolution does not take
account in an appropriately strict manner of the terms
of reference of the Committee,
which were simply to
consider modalities for the exercise of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian
people. The second
operative paragraph is an affirmation
of principle
which we do not object to, but which should not be
isolated from the other elements of a settlement.

King-

I against,

The draft resolution was not adopted. the negative
vote being that of a permanent member of the Council.
120. The PRESIDENT:
I shall now call upon those
representatives who wish to speak in explanation of
vote after the vote.
121. Mr. THOMAS
(United Kingdom):
I should
like briefly to explain why my delegation abstained
on the draft resolution on which the Council has just
voted. My delegation regrets that in the end it did not
prove possible to conclude this debate in a more positive manner with a statement from the President which
would have reflected the views of the Council as a
whole.

127. Furthermore,
in regard to operative
paragraph 1, we do not believe that the Council’s taking
note of the report of the Committee justified having
recourse to the formula of a draft resolution.
The
result we have just recorded proves this. It seemed
to us that at this stage, when the report is still a provisional document to be reviewed by the Committee
before being transmitted
to the Genera! Assembly,
we could have left it to our President to draw conclusions from the debate.

122. The reasons why my delegation abstained will
be evident from the statement which made on 25 June
[193&h meeting]. In particular, my delegation cannot
accept a draft resolution which singles out one of the
aspects of the question-namely,
the need, which we
fully accept, to recognize the rights of the Palestinian
people-but
which does not mention the other aspects
of which, in our view, it forms an integral part.

128. The question of Palestinian rights is too fundamental an element in the search for a settlement in the
Middle East for us not to feel genuine regret over the
outcome of our present work. But this is only a provisional outcome.
The report of the Committee,
although it aroused certain reservations on our part,
is an interesting contribution
for consideration by the
Council-for
reflection on the problem does not cease
this evening. Of necessity it will have to continue until
we finally define in a manner acceptable to all parties
the recognized components
of a settlement,
until
they are taken into consideration at the same time in
negotiations, and until, at last, we endorse the results
of those negotiations.

123. As we made clear in this debate, my Government fully recognizes the need to supplement resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) in order to take account
of the political rights of the Palestinian people and to
enable them to express their national identity. But,
in our view, that must be done in a way which can be
reconciled with the right of all States in the area, including Israel, to live in peace within secure and recognized borders.
124. The three fundamental requirements for a settlement must in our view be taken together <and seen
15

129. Mr. CAVAGLIERI
(Italy): I should like to say
a few words in explanation of the abstention that my
delegation has just recorded with regard to the draft
resolution contained in document S/12119.
130. As Ambassador
Vinci stated yesterday my
Government believes that “the solution of the Palestinian problem is crucial to the achievement of a just
and lasting peace in the Middle East” [1935th meeting,
para. 50). My Government believes as well that
“the recognition of the national rights of the Palestinian people, including the right to establish
their own independent State, is one of the three
indispensable
prerequisites
that must be taken
together for a final, just and lasting settlement of
the Middle East crisis.” [ibid. para. 53.1
131. We were gratified to notice that the aforementioned principles enjoy very wide acceptance in the
Council and at the United Nations, as shown by so
many statements in this debate. We therefore should
have very much liked to see them reflected in a draft
resolution aimed at giving an up-to-date and clear
definition of the rights of the Palestinians for the purpose of supplementing
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338
(1973), where all the various elements of the Middle
East crisis are indicated. This not having been the
case, we had to resign ourselves to the idea of abstaining.
132. We should like at the same time to confirm our
deep interest in this politically crucial and most human
problem as well as our firm wish to contribute within
the limits of our capabilities to its gradual reduction
and final solution.
133. Mr. Chou Nan (China) (translation from Chinese): The Chinese delegation voted in favour of the
draft resolution
contained
in -document
S/12119.
Nevertheless, we deem’ it necessary to reiterate the
position of the Chinese delegation as set forth in our
statement of 28 June [193&h meeting].
To put it
briefly, we maintain that the Council must unequivocally recognize the complete restoration
of the
Palestinian people’s national rights without external
interference. It must also recognize that the Palestinian
people are entitled to resort to all means to regain its
rights. At the same time, the Council must enjoin
Israel to withdraw from all the illegally occupied territories, immediately
and unconditionally,
completely
and not partially. We support the content of the report
of the Committee
which is in conformity
with the
spirit of the foregoing. With regard to the inadequacies
and ambiguities of the report, amendments and additions should be made in accordance with the spirit of
General Assembly resolutions 3236 (XXIX) and 3376
(XXX).
134. In our statement
the Chinese delegation
expounded the essence of the Palestine problem and
the MiddIe East question and pointed to the crux of

the matter. Before these iron facts, Mr. Malik found
himself bereft of all arguments and had to. resort once
again to lies, denials and abuse. However, the fabrications and the slanderous statement which Mr. Malik
and his colleagues spent a whole day and night preparing will be of no help to him at all. Let the facts
speak for themselves.
135. Everyone knows how Soviet social-imperialism
undermined
the October war waged by the Arab
countries against aggression. The revelations made
recently by the leaders of many.Arab countries have
further brought to light the ugly features of the new
tsars who practise extortion,
arrogate privileges to
themselves claim military bases and frantically carry
on infiltration,
subversion and expansion. While some
Arab countries were fighting shoulder to shoulder
with the Palestinian people in their struggle to resist
aggression under difficult circumstances, other Arab
countries offered generous contributions as assistance
to those in need. Yet you reaped windfall profits by
plundering others’ burning houses by most despicable
means. Compared with your high-handed
way of
practising extortion and pressing for the repayment
of debts by certain Arab countries, even Shylock, that
merchant of Venice so notorious for his avarice and
cruelty, is no match for you. But you did not stop at
that. On the ground of providing the Soviet fleets with
facilities, you asked others to give you military bases
where you reserved certain areas for the establishment of a State within a State, in which the Soviet
national flag was flown and no admittance was granted
to the local people, thus unscrupulously
trampling
underfoot the sovereignty of other States. When these
aggressive activities met with resistance, you did not
hesitate to engage in subversive activities for the
overthrow of certain lawful Governments.
Such
behabiour is of course intolerable to countries and
peoples that have any sense of national respect. Small
wonder that the leader of a victimized Arab country
rightly pointed out that you encroached upon that
country’s independence and sovereignty and that the
new tsar was a venimous snake to be guarded against.
Now that your hypocritical
and vicious behaviour
has been exposed to the light of day, what is left for
you to brag about?
136. It is even more difficult for you to ‘cover up
your collusion with Israel. Over a long period, the
Soviet Union has been sending a steady flow of emigrants to Israel. Particularly
during the October war,
when there was an acute shortage of manpower in
Israel, the Soviet Union drastically increased the
number of emigrants to Israel, reaching a monthly
total of 4,000. Some Soviet Jews were enlisted &to
active service and sent to the front for aggression
against the Arab countries immediately
upon their
arrival in Israel. Arab public opinion indignantly
pointed out that this was a war in which Israel was
fighting the Arabs with one super-Power providing
the arms and the other super-Power providing the
manpower. Is it not crystal clear who is really helping
‘i::
Israel?

137. After the October war, over 20 African countries severed diplomatic
relations with Israel, and
Israel was in great isolation. And it was precisely at
this juncture that Soviet social-imperialism
stepped
up its flirtation with Israeli Zionism, going so far as to
secret talks between the two foreign ministers so as to
help Israel extricate itself from its difficulties.
Were
not you, Mr; Malik, an active participant yourself?

to provide a watchword for the building of a new
Greater Russian Empire. Let me quote some of it:
“Any potentate with a land army has one hand but he
who also has a fleet has two hands.” Gorshkov extols
Peter the Great for “his resolute actions which showed
convincingly
his understanding of the essence of the
notion of supremacy at sea and his ability to put it
into practice.” What then is the purpose of thenew -tsars’ quest for supremacy at sea? The author admits
that “the Soviet Navy continues to believe that that
rivalry for supremacy at sea is not an end in itself’
but “a prerequisite”
for “dominating
the world” so
as to “establish the order the Soviet Union needs in
waters belonging to no one.” These are the words of
the Commander-in-Chief
of your naval forces himself,
printed black on ‘white in his book. They cannot possibly be anyone’s lies or fabrications. Is not this statement by Gorshkov, combined with the new tsars’
wanton acts of aggression and expansion, sufficient to
reveal socialist-imperialism’s
ambitions
for world
domination
and its design of launching a new world
war?

138. In fact, the Soviet policy on the Middle East
is totally geared to aggression and expansion in that
region and to its need to contend with the other superPower for world hegemony. You have done your
utmost to sow dissension and create division in the
Arab world, create and exacerbate tension between
States, and incite the different factions to kill each
other. For your part, you want to trouble the waters
as much as possible, because you can fish in troubled.
139. On the other hand, you deliberately
resort to
the trick of a thief crying “Stop thief”. Whom can you
deceive by all this? In a so-called statement issued
recently by your official press agency TASS on the
domestic situation of an Arab country, did you not
brazenly declare that you were entitled to interfere
simply because you were geographically closer to that
country than others? Is this not the gangster’s logic
of big-Power hegemonism,
pure -and simple? According to this logic, would you not have the privilege
of trampling upon the sovereignty of the neighbouring
countries and blatantly interfering in their internal
affairs? We should like to know who asked you to
play the role of “international
gendarme”.
Your
ambition really knows no bounds. Whenever there is
some opportunity for you to exploit, never mind how
far away, you invariably resort to intervention,
aggression and expansion. You did this to your so-called
fraternal neighbour
Czechoslovakia,
a member of
your big community.
You did the same to certain
Middle East countries which are some distance away.
Again, you are doing the same in an African State
which is thousands of miles away. This is the practice
of the theory of limited sovereingty as advertised by
Brezhnev, the new tsar. In other words, the sovereignty of all other States is limited,
whereas the
sovereignty of Soviet social-imperialism
is unlimited.

141. Does it not follow from these facts that all
Malik’s hypocritical
words and attempts at camouflage are completely unsuccessful? Do not the acts of
the new tsars, who, under the smokescreen of sham
disarmament and sham detente, are feverishly active
in the fields of expansion and aggression, reveal their
true face? However, your acts of aggression and your
expansionism
bear in themselves the seeds of their
own destruction. If you dare to start a world war, the
Soviet people will be on the side of the other peoples
of the world, and they will certainly rise up to overwhelm this clutch of wicked new tsars. We still believe
that the future of the world is bright, because it is
after all the peoples of the world that will decide it,
not a handful of imperialists.
142. Mr. MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) (interpretdon
from Russion):
The representative
of China has only confirmed what I said and my reference to the comment in the Nemo -York Post to the
effect that China is proclaiming
a bright future for
mankind, after a thermonuclear
war. That. is, in fact,
the essence of the issue and of the Chinese policy.
Long live nuclear war! And after that, there will be
a bright future for mankind!
However, the Chinese
warmongers will not be able to drag the world into a
thermonuclear ,war.

140. The rivalry over the Middle East is an important
component of the new tsars’ battle for world hegemony. This rivalry will lead to war some day. That is
why we say that you, the new tsars, are the main
source of a new world war. I am not going to go into
detail about the abundant evidence of your frenzied
war preparations or of your activities stretching like
tentacles to all parts of the world, because they are
well known to everyone. I wish only to quote here the
remarkable affidavit made with astonishing frankness
by the new tsars themselves. That is a new book by
S; G. Gorshkov, Commander-in-Chief
of the Soviet
Navy, entitled The Seer Power of the State, which was
published recently’. In this rare book Gorshkov quotes
from an edict of the Tsar Peter the Great in order

143. At the end of my statement this afternoon I said
that the concrete far& I had adduced could not be
refuted by the Chinese representative Mr. Lai Ya-li.
That was my assumption,. and it has been amply confirmed. It was not possible to refute a single one of
the concrete facts I adduced. He simply continued the
slanders of made yesterday by Mr. Lai Ya-li from a
prepared text full of quotations taken from the antiSoviet fabrications of the Hsinhua Agency. The Chinese representative, it seems, finds it difficult to react
to my statement today, which he heard only in inter17

pretation. I hope that after he has read it in the verbation record he will understand that yesterday’s antiSoviet slanders by his colleague Lai and his second
edition of those slanders today, full of fabrications,
are not only without foundation but devoid of common
sense.
144. The Chinese representative
was absolutely
silent about the hostile act against the Arab people of
Palestine committed
by a permanent member of the
Security Council who, acting as the protector and
defender of the Israeli aggressors, did not shrink from
misusing the veto, utterly disregarding the inalienable
rights of the Arab people of Palestine. This is also
revealing. The task of the Chinese representative is to
divert the attention of the Council from the discussion
of the substance of the question-the
inalienable
rights of the Palestinian people-by
his vicious antiSoviet slanders.

the majority by using the veto. This is not the first
time during this year that the Council’s diligent work
to arrive at an appropriate decision has ultimately
been thwarted by the negative vote of a permanent
member of the Council, namely, the United: States:
This fact supports my country’s view that it is high
time for the international
community
to reconsider
the right of veto.
149. However, the Council’s failure to take a decision on this issue owing to the use of the veto by the
United States will not hamper the Palestinian movement or the struggle of the Palestinians to achieve their
just objectives.
150. The PRESIDENT:
The representative
of
Saudi Arabia has asked to be allowed to speak. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make
his statement.

145. The people of the Arab East are very well
aware who their friends are and who their enemies are,
who is doing everything possible to achieve a just
peace settlement in the Middle East and who is provoking an exacerbation of the situation in both the
Middle East and Cyprus, as well as everywhere else,
so as to fulfil their dream of a new world war, which
they call inevitable.

151. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President.
although I paid a tribute-to a son of your country when
I addressed the Council at the second meeting it held
to discuss the question before us, it behoves me to
say how proud I feel to find the Foreign Minister of
Guyana sitting in the Chair, when it was beyond my
dreams 30 or 40 years ago that there would be such
independent States which would rise to the capability
that you and your brothers have manifested throughout the period since your country became a Member
of the United Nations.

146. Mr. SUNDBERG
(Sweden): As my delegation
said in its statement yesterday [1935th meeting],
Sweden recognizes the legitimate national rights and
interests of the Palestinian people, including their right
to a homeland. However, it was not possible for us
to support the draft resolution contained in document
S/121 19 because that draft is not sufficiently clear
about the relationship
between the exercise of the
rights of the Palestinian people and the rights of the
States in the area to sovereignty, territorial integrity
and political independence and to live in peace within
secure and recognized boundaries. The lack of a clear
reference to the last-mentioned
element was the deciding reason for the abstention of the Swedish deiegation.

152. Having said that, I find it my sacred duty to
address myself’ to what has happened during these
debates.
153. Sir, you may or may not know that I have personally been seized of this question since 1947, when
Palestine
unfortunately
was partitioned.
Let me
remind those sitting around this table that it was none
other than the late Mr. Woodrow Wilson, President
of the United States, who, in his Fourteen Points,
enunciated the principle of the self determination
of
peoples; and he had to leave Europe a sad man because of the greed of the victorious Powers of those
days. We all looked to the United States as the torchbearer of freedom and liberty; and that was nothing
new, since, after all, in 1776 it had fought to choose
its own institutions,
its own fate and its own political
life. Therefore, it surprises me, as one who has lived
for over three decades in this country, to see that none
other than the representative of the United Statesdf
course, following
instructions-has
exercised the
veto on a benign draft resolution
that had been
watered down so much as only to affirm the principle
of the right of a people to self-determination.
That selfsame principle was elaborated in the United Nations
into a full-fledged right, and it fell to me and some of
our colleagues-Mr.
Pazhwak of Afghanistan,
the
late Ahmed Bokhari of Pakistan, and none other than
the late Krishna Menon of India, among others-to
stand up for the colonial peoples in the 1950s in the

147. Mr. BENKHAYAL
(Libyan Arab Republic):
The misuse of the veto by the United States against
the draft resolution contained in document S/12119
does not surprise my delegation at ail. In fact, we
expected it, owing to the well-known stand of the
United States establishment,
which continues its full
support of the Zionist entity in Palestine. -The draft
resolution, which my delegation supports, is the least
that can be granted to the Palestinian people, which
asks for its right to self-determination,
a right recognized and guaranteed by divine law and international
constitutions,
including the United Nations Charter.
148. Despite international’
support of that right,
which has been very clearly expressed in international
conferences and in the Council, the United States
stubbornly continues its rejection of the opinion of
18

conviction that they should determine
litical fate.

their own po-

reported in the mass media. The mass media are not
sacrosanct: those correspondents
who listen to our
words send in full reports, but the mass media in this
country are Zionist-oriented.
And let me be frank with
my good .friend Ambassador Sherer: we understand
that this is an election year; we know that. I have
been here through how, many elections? I shook hands
with President Roosevelt in 1940 in Washington-yes,
since then I have seen many elections, but never have
I seen things reduced to such a sad state of affairs as
exists today. I realize I am on international
ground
here, but if I were not true to my good friend the
American representative,
who is a personal friend of
mine, I would be untrue to myself, too. What do those
contenders for offtce do? They wear yarmulkas, and
go to the synagogue to get votes. When my good
friend Ambassador Goldberg was contending for the
governorship of New York State against Mr. Rockefeller, I asked him: “Did you put a cross on .a chain
around your neck to get votes?” He said: “I don’t do
such things.” To which I .replied: “You are an honourable man, but you will lose..” And he did. Even
our friend Mr. Rockfeller went to the synagogues.

154. I have spoken perhaps a hundred times on this
question, but ‘it bears repetition: either the Charter
is to be taken seriously, or it is to be used just to serve
.the interests of those who exercise world .power. It
seems that we small nations and those who are struggling for their freedom are pawns in the hands of those
who exercise world power. And this brings me to a
very unfomutate
episode which I happened to hear
this afternoon, .but which is nothing new to me: an
altercation
two brothers in the Council, Ambassador Malik and my good friend from China, concerning
the differences that exist between them. I happen
to be a monarchist, but I do not revel in seeing two
brothers who share the same ideology springing at
each other and throwing mud and invective at each
other. What for? They have differences-and
this
brings me to the following comment.
155. We know very well that the question of detente
is nothing new: it was not invented by Mr. Kissinger.
To the glory of the French language, detente has had
special meaning ever since the fall of Napoleon in
1815, when Talleyrand and Mettemich
met in Vienna
to find out how they could preserve the peace of
Europe. But what did they do? They did nothing new:
they divided -Europe into spheres of influence, and
really there was detente in name only. -For the British
Empire-detente
.was a period of peace, because at that
time Britain had consolidated its empire-from
1815,
during the Victorian age and through the Edwardian
age, up until 1914. But, there were many wars in
Europe because of the spheres of influence.

159. This is an election Year. so we do not care: veto
or no veto, we. know and we excuse ybu. You have
your excuse. You .do not have to say it, I say it for
you. But whether you accept it or not is beside the
point, Baroody has to tell you the truth, once and for
all, after three decades of service in the United Nations. We are not fooling anybody; we are not fooling
ourselves either, but we should be frank. So let us not
expect- the United States to come up, with: a miracle.
This is an election year. There is an Assembly session
coming, and I believe that the election will be in November, so we shall see what will happen-whether
someone who wore the yarmulka or someone who did
not wear it becomes President.

156. I do not blame the Americans or the Russians
for not wanting to wage a nuclear war-with
all due
-respect to my Chinese friends-because
if they were
to do so, the danger .would not be from the enmity
that would flare up; they would be lynched by their
own people. The leaders--or
misleaders-would
go
down into’ caves and would save .themselves, but
there would be some people who -would survive, and
they would lynch those so-called leaders, should there
.be a war.

160. Those Zionists who have .permeated .the Westem world tried to permeate the world of this gentle.man sitting on my left, the representative of the Soviet
Union, .and because his country does not allow this,
it is called anti-Semitic.
I am called .an anti-Semite,
too. I am the original Semite and I am called an antiSemite by those Khazars who rule behind the scenes
through their money and their mass media, not telling
the American and European peoples the truth. Who
are these people stting here as observers, pleading
their cause? Palestinians? Let them be absorbed by
the Arab world. But the.y do not want to be absorbed
by the Arab world. They have their own entity. Why
did not the Americans let the ,British remain here in
America, although the Americans ,were British? The
Americans fought the British.

157. So the deterrent of fear is more important than
the word “detente”.
But, at the same time, anything
that is based on injustice is bound, sooner or later,
to totter and -fall. Everything that is built on a false
.foundation wil fall down. And this -is what we are
witnessing today: a people robbed of its country,
frustrated, a situation that has produced a ferment in
the whole Arab world, and indeed in the world at large.
And this ferment; as ,I say, affects not only the Palestinians, but the whole world and the activities of
the young, who are dissatisfied with their leaders.

161. These so-called
observers,
the people of
Palestine, are fighting the usurpers of their homes.
Do you think that they are like the Red Indians? This
is past. The Red Indians were valiant. Many American
writers have said in their books that it was always the
white man who broke the pacts with the Red Indians.

158. And you gentlemen here, your reduce yourselves, along with me, to mere peddlers of words,
without action. What for? What we do here is .not
19

The Arabs are not Red, Indians. They come in all
shades. Look at them-some of them are white, some
are brown, and there are blacks amongst them, and
we are proud of our brothers from the Sudan who are
black. We do not have discrimination among the
Arabs. Why are we being treated as if we did not exist?
Just because we do not have power? Remember that
power will fall if it is based on injustice. Where are
the empires of the past, including three of our empires?
They crumbled and went down the drain. Do you not
learn anything from history?
162. Three categories of activists could be mentioned. In the just category are those who are espousers of a good cause or of any case, whether it is
considered good or bad, depending on whether it
conflicts with the interests of certain parties; but from
this category are created the martyrs who are willing
to shed their blood, to die for their cause. Those are
genuine espousers of causes, whether they are right
or wrong. And they are not just the espousers of the
cause of their people; they have been robbed of their
home, of their patrimony. In the second category are
those ,who use activism to help them to jump on the
bandwagon of power; these are the politicians. And
then there is the third category, and it is now becoming
quite large, numerically speaking. They are on the
market to be bought, to create coups d’ht;
they are
the ugenrs provocuteurs, and for a simple reason:
because “detente” has.been imposed on us. The Russians do not date conflict with the Americans, and
likewise the Americans do not dare conflict with the
Russians. They would destroy each other. So what do
they resort to? Agents, provocuteurs. coups d’ktut.
They send money to make war by proxy. This is what
is happening. Now war is being waged by proxy.
163. We cannot go’on like this. It is my duty to mention once again that there should be a new approach
in the Security Council, lest we become the laughing
stock of the whole world and people cease to believe
in us. We will lose our credibility. I saw the League
of Nations dissolve, and I would not want before
I leave this earth to see this noble Organization,
endowed with the best of Charters,’ also dissolve.
What is the test? Justice. Render justice to those
people.
164. There is no doubt that the Jews suffered greatly,
but at whose hands did they suffer? At the hands of
the Europeans, not at our hands. If,the Europeans
have developed a sense of guilt, why should they
impose those Khazars-Jews converted in the eighth
century, who never saw Palestine-n the people of
Palestine? Incidentally, many of the people of Palestine
were also Jews, but they embraced Christianity, and
later on, when they got fed up with Christianity in the
days of Byzantium, they embraced Islam. There is
nothing wrong with that. There is no compulsion in
religion.
165. Here the Palestinians come, pleading their
cause, and all that some of the members, some of the

non-aligned members, are asking here is that the
Council take note of the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People. Who can object to any, of the words in it?
What is the objectionable word, and why did the
representative of the United States not submit an
amendment? Maybe it could have been accepted, and
maybe it would have been rejected. Veto,’ veto. What
is a veto? Sometimes a consensus is worse than a veto.
166. We cannot go on like this, Mr. President. I am
glad that you are in the Chair. You represent a new
country, and maybe from new countries there will
emerge new directives, so that we may put our house
in order, so that we may cease to go in circies, so that
we may not deviate from the subject and trade invectives, like those we have heard today and like those
I ‘was told about yesterday. There should be no difference between our friends from China and those
from the Soviet Union. I call them friends, although
I differ from them in ideology. Only the other day,
I was asked by an ambassador with his tongue in his
cheek, “Have you resolved your differences with
Ambassador Malik?“. I said,’ “What differences?”
He said, “You are a monarchist, while he is a Communist”. I said, “No, we believe in one -ism-humanism”. It supersedes and transcends all kinds of
-isms, whether socialism, communism, capitalism,
conservatism, leftism or what have you. The famous
Jewish author who lived in Vienna, Stefan Zweig,
when he was asked to join the Zionist movement by
none other than the late Mr. Herzl, said,“‘There are
too many-isms. We should only have humanism”.
And that was a Jew speaking. There is no such thing
as Jewish blood. He was a human being.
167. We have nothing against the ‘Jews. They say
we are anti-Semites, those Zionists. Shame on them.
If anybody is anti-Semitic, it is they, because they
set themselves above others. “The chosen people of
God.” God discriminates? He has differe~nt castes of
people, does God? And let me say one last word about
God. At least God was conceived in my region,
whether in Judaism, in Christianity or in Islam. People
were tribal or semi-tribal. All the Old Testament and
the New Testament and even some of the Koran is
written in parables, in flowery language. And the
fundamentalists take the letter, but according to all
those holy scripts the letter killeth. Those among the
Zionists who went to Oxford and Cambridge, do they
believe that God wrote them a title deed to Paiestine?
Come on. They play on the sentiments of the innocent
and the poor. For heaven’s sake!
168. As I once did when President Hambro asked
me to put an end to the quarrel between our Chinese
and our Russian friends, I will step in and say, “Please,
for heaven’s sake, if you want to discuss-your differences, come let us do so on the side, but do not do it
in public here, because it really pains many of us.”
We are friends; we are all brothers here under the
skin. We should not indulge in such behaviour. I will

175. On Cyprus, we adopted ‘a resolution which, if
implemented
in all its parts, would, I feel, make a
significant contribution
to the ultimate goal of the
Council and of the international community in general,
that of achieving a lasting solution to the Cyprus problem. In this respect, a heavy responsibility
devolves
on the parties concerned, to whom was addressed a
special appeal for their fullest co-operation with the
efforts of the United Nations. When the Council meets
again, before the end of this year, to consider the
report of the Secretary-General
on Cyprus, it will be
in a position to measure success against the decision
it took only a few weeks ago.

stop it, and when I say I will stop it, I will stop it.
I shall say, “Point of order”, and I shall stop it. ..
169. I must thank my colleagues for bearing with me.
This is not a tirade, but a frank talk.
170. There was nothing wrong with that simple draft
resolution. But we accept the fact that the host country
is going through an election year. We will give them
the benefit of the doubt and hope that, after they are
through with the mechanics of the elections, American
justice will prevail and the leaders will examine the
case of the Palestinians objectively,
dispassionately,
without following the old system of balance of power
and spheres of influence. And do not let anybody think
he is going to survive in power if the leaders are corrupted by injustice. Like others, they will totter and
fall. And we do not want to see them fall, because the
American people is a lovely people; the Russian people is a lovely people; the Chinese people-1 have yet
to see one of them not smiling when.1 see him. They
are always smiling and friendly. And here we have
altercations because the leaders of the Zionists, who
may number 3,000 or 4,000, have stirred up the whole
world. I feel sorry for them; the Zionists are human
beings too. We do not want them to suffer. But if they
want to bring suffering on their own heads, do not let
them overdo it and bring suffering on other peoples’
heads also.

176. In respect of South Africa, it is universally recognized that the root of the problem is the base,
mean, despicable, deplorable. and contemptible
system of npnrtheid.
The Council can feel satisfied that,
in the decisions it took, it assisted all those forces,
including those in the General Assembly, which are
determined to work resolutely for the eradication of
what can only be considered an abhorrent system.
177. It is well known that the Council was unable to
reach a decision on the application of Angola and the
question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of
its inalienable
rights. I can only express the hope,
which I know is widely shared, that Angola’s exclusion from this Organization will not be maintained for
too long a time.

171. Indeed, Sir, I am very grateful to you, and
I deem myself fortunate to have been able to speak
on this question and to have the last word when you,
the Foreign Minister of your country, are presiding
over the discussion of this question.
172. The PRESIDENT:
My dear colleagues, it is
with some trepidation that I must announce that we
have now come to the end-at least, I hope it is the
end--of active work by the Council in the month of
June.
.
173. It is widely acknowledged
that during this
month the members of the Council have been heavily
taxed by having to give consideration to a number of
important and complex issues some of which have
been defying solution by the international
community
for a long time. It has been a long and difficult month,
but I would venture to suggest that in general we feel
satisfied by the genuine and sincere efforts made by
all of us to contribute to the efficiency of the Council
and to keep alive the hope that it will be an effective
and successful instrument for international
peace and
security.

178. Finally, the question of, the exercise by the
Palestinian people of its inalienable rights has engaged
our continuous attention over the last few days. Many
speakers have made reference to the central role of j
the rights of the Palestinians in the search for an overall solution of the Middle East situation which can
lead to a just and lasting peace. Several speakers have
also acknowledged that the work of the Committee
appointed by the General Assembly under resolution 3376 (XXX) has made a valuable contribution
to
the international
community’s
appreciation
of the
complexities that are involved. The significance of this
debate should not be seen in the light of the lack of
tangible results, for it is worthy of note that for the
first time the Council has specifically discussed the
question of the exercise by the Palestinian people of
its inalienable rights. Further, the records of the debates will be available for utilization
by the various
organs of the United Nations which are dedicated to
advancing the cause of peace in the Middle East and
to working for a solution that is as just as it is equitable.

174. During the month, we have been concerned
with the question of Cyprus; the situation in South
Africa following the uprising in Soweto and in other
areas where the black population is concentrated in
that unhappy country; the application of the People’s
Republic of Angola for membership;
and, more recently, the question of the exercise by the Palestinian
people of its inalienable rights.

179. I wish to conclude by expressing thanks to you
all for the patient, fruitful, unstinted co-operation
you have displayed towards the President during my
own time in the chair and that of my dear friend and
colleague, Ambassador Jackson. I wish to reiterate
my thanks for the kind, generous and sometimes
rather flattering remarks you have made about me and
21

180. The Council has thus concluded its consideration of this item.

my country, Guyana. I hope it is .appreciated that my
country feels so strongly about the U&ted Nations
system that my presence here.&not accidental or the
result of whim or caprice. It is a-symbol which we feel
will indicate to the world- community., how central a
role the United Nations plays in our forward planning
and in our aspirations for mankind some day to ascend
the slopes of peace to the broad uplands where justice
and the development of all mankind, including the
individual human being, remains the paramount consideration.

The meeting

rose at 6.50 p.m.
Notes

’ For the report, see OJflciul Records
of the General
Assembly,
Thirty&t
Session, Supplement
No. 35.
1 O~ciul
Records
of the General Assembly,
Second
Session,
Supplement
No. II, vol. II, annex 19.
a Ibid.. Seventeenth
Session,
Special Political
Committee,
372nd

meeting.
4 United Nations, Treaty

Series.

vol.

75.

22
-r
Ljthg in United Nations, New York

m400

83-60801-February

1985-2300
