S/PV.8878

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8878th meeting

Thursday, 14 October 2021, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kimani/Mrs. Toroitich . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Kenya)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Jürgenson
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Aougi
Ms. Heimerback
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Gonsalves
Mr. Ben Lagha
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mrs. Tra Phuong Nguyen

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

21-28839 (E)
*2128839*

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham, Acting Assistant
Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs and
Deputy Emergency Relief Coordinator, Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs; and Ms. Maysaa
Abdulrahman Shujaa Al-Deen, Fellow at the Sana’a
Center for Strategic Studies.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Since I briefed the Council last
month (see S/PV.8854), I have conducted numerous
consultations with Yemeni, regional and international
actors. In all those discussions, I focused on the question
of how to move towards a sustainable political solution
to end the conflict. I asked my interlocutors to assess
what has and has not worked in the past and for their
views on the way forward. Member States reiterated
their support for the efforts of the United Nations, for
which I am grateful.
In my conversations, Yemenis without exception
stressed the need to end the war. They also highlighted
the urgency of addressing economic and humanitarian
concerns, including stabilizing the economy, improving
the delivery of basic services and facilitating freedom
of movement within as well as in and out of the country.
Yemenis of all perspectives also acknowledged that
their country cannot be effectively ruled by one group
alone and that a durable peace will require pluralism.
The Yemeni men and women whom I met
shared with me their concerns about the long-term
consequences of the conflict. They see a systematic
erosion of their fundamental rights as well as of State
institutions. They are worried about a whole generation
2/21

14/10/2021

of children traumatized by war and lacking in basic
education. Since the onset of the conflict, civilian
infrastructure has been damaged, and repair is likely
to take decades. Ending the war is therefore only a first
but an essential step in a long recovery that includes
healing the societal wounds that are deepening with
each day the conflict continues.
There is nevertheless hope, which must continue
to build on. Youth representatives from across Yemen
emphasized to me the role of the new generation as a
driver of positive political change. In my meetings with
Yemeni women, their determination to have a say in
shaping the future of their country is unwavering and
must have our full support. From inclusion in political
talks to the lifting of roadblocks that impede their full
participation in civic, political and economic life, the
rightful demands of Yemeni women and youth should
be met by all parties to the conflict.
It is no secret that there are differences among the
Yemenis I have been engaging with. The gap in trust
between warring parties is wide and growing. I met with
the Government of Yemen in Riyadh and Aden, and with
Ansar Allah in Muscat. The issue of the sequencing of
possible interim steps remains a preoccupation that
overshadows the need to start discussing the parameters
for an overall political settlement of the conflict.
My view, which I have shared with them, is that
while interim progress should be made on urgent
humanitarian and economic matters, a durable solution
can be achieved only through a comprehensive
negotiated political settlement. I have been clear in all
my engagements that there should be no preconditions
for those urgent political talks and that humanitarian
measures should not be used as political leverage.
Dialogue and compromise represent the only sustainable
way forward. On my end, I remain at the disposal of
those who wish to engage in it.
I have also been clear in my conversations that
measures to mitigate the immediate impact of the
conflict on civilians are of paramount importance.
Salaries need to be paid, roads in Taiz, Ma’rib and
elsewhere need to be opened. Restrictions on the
import of fuel and goods through Al-Hudaydah port
must end, and fuel needs to be available for civilian
use without restrictions. Sana’a airport needs to open
for civilian traffic. Those steps can tangibly improve
the lives of Yemenis in the immediate term. The
responsibility for addressing those urgent matters lies
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

with the parties. I hope that they will receive firm
encouragement from the international community,
particularly Member States of the region, in that regard.
The United Nations is ready to do its part.
Since my previous briefing, the military escalation
on the ground has taken an alarming turn. Ma’rib and
its surroundings, including Shabwa and Al-Bayda,
remain the epicentre of the war. As we will hear
from my colleague Acting Assistant SecretaryGeneral Rajasingham, the situation is getting worse
for civilians every day, with thousands forced to
flee in search of safety in recent weeks. I remind all
parties to the conflict of their obligations to abide by
international humanitarian law and to protect civilians
and civilian infrastructure.
The encirclement of Abdiyah district, in southern
Ma’rib, has persisted for almost a month, leaving
thousands of people in a desperate situation. As
repeatedly stated in the Security Council, Ansar
Allah’s military escalation in Ma’rib must stop. The
Secretary-General himself is closely following the
developments in Abdiyah. I reiterate the United Nations
call on all parties to facilitate safe, timely and sustained
humanitarian access to the affected areas. I am also
deeply concerned about the military developments
and incidents elsewhere in Yemen. Continued fighting
increases the likelihood of civilian injury and death
from indirect fire, missiles and air strikes. I call on all
parties to de-escalate.
The conflict continues to leave a tragic and
widespread legacy of human rights violations. In
recent weeks, we have seen public executions, enforced
disappearances, killings and the use of live ammunition
against protesters in several areas of the country. The
lack of accountability and impunity has diminished
Yemenis’ faith in the possibility of peaceful co-existence
and a future in which the rights of all Yemenis will be
respected. In that context, it is unfortunate that the
mandate of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen
was not renewed. Nevertheless, the United Nations will
continue to press for accountability in Yemen.
Last week I visited Aden, where I met with Prime
Minister Maeen Abdulmalek Saeed, local officials and
representatives of various political components, as well
as civil society members and women’s rights advocates.
I welcomed the Prime Minister’s return to Aden as an
important step towards enhancing the functioning of
State institutions and their ability to address the urgent

S/PV. 8878

need for economic recovery and the delivery of basic
services. However, sustainable improvements will not
be possible unless political actors work together across
political divides. In Aden, I also took the time to listen
to the many views that Yemenis in the south presented
to me. As I stated in my first briefing, those cannot be
ignored, and such discussions will have to continue.
Similarly, I therefore stressed to the Government
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council the
importance of implementing the Riyadh agreement to
regain stability in the southern governorates. Recent
serious security incidents across the south, including
an assassination attempt on Government officials, are
illustrations of an untenable situation.
In Al-Hudaydah, the United Nations Mission to
Support the Hodeidah Agreement (UNMHA) continues
its tireless efforts to engage the parties in order to
reactivate the work of the Redeployment Coordination
Committee. The United Nations urges the parties
to recommit to the Committee without delay, as it
remains the only viable framework to ensure sustained
de-escalation, mitigate the impact of violence on civilians
and alleviate the humanitarian situation. I would like to
take this opportunity to recognize the contributions of
Lieutenant General Guha, who completed his tenure as
Head of UNMHA at the beginning of this month. He
worked to support the parties in their implementation
of the Hodeidah Agreement under challenging political
and logistical circumstances, and he deserves our
gratitude and appreciation.
Looking forward, a comprehensive negotiated
political settlement is needed to end the violence once
and for all. Critical political, security and economic
priorities will need to be addressed. A comprehensive
political settlement should aim to restore and reunite
State institutions and pave the way for economic
recovery and development. In order to sustain peace
in the long term, the need for accountable governance,
justice, accountability and the rule of law cannot be
ignored, and neither can the promotion and protection
of Yemenis’ full range of human rights.
I will continue my consultations with Yemenis and
others on the way forward towards an inclusive political
settlement. Let us not fool ourselves — this will be a
labourious and complicated task that will take time, but
it must take place. The past weeks have illustrated the
tension between the pace of the war and the economic

21-288393/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

14/10/2021

collapse, on the one hand, and the time needed to devise
and consult on a feasible way forward, on the other.

country. That is almost eight people every day — the
second-highest figure in two years.

My aim is to forge agreement on a way forward.
Such an agreement will require support from members
of the Security Council, States of the region and the
broader international community. I also count on the
Council’s support in reinforcing to the warring parties
that it is their responsibility to meet, and seriously
engage, with each other under the auspices of the
United Nations.

The fighting in Ma’rib is taking a particularly
heavy civilian toll. Last month, almost 10,000 people
were displaced in Ma’rib — the single-highest figure so
far this year. Since late September, Houthi forces have
encircled Al-Abdiyah district, in south-west Ma’rib,
which is home to nearly 35,000 civilians, many of whom
previously fled there to escape fighting in other areas.

The President: I thank Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Rajasingham.
Mr. Rajasingham: As we sit here today, the
humanitarian crisis in Yemen continues to deepen.
More than 20 million people — two thirds of the
population — need assistance from aid agencies. The
most immediate cause of that suffering is the war. In
recent weeks, conflict has intensified. Yet a ceasefire
and all the benefits that it would bring remain elusive.
In parallel, Yemen’s economy is collapsing, leaving
millions destitute. That collapse is a direct result of
the war and, more indirectly, a result of the perverse
incentives the war has created. Hemmed in by violence
and with fewer chances to take care of themselves,
millions of Yemenis are looking to humanitarian
organizations for help. But aid work is about to become
much harder in Yemen, mostly because agencies are
once again starting to run out of money.
I will focus my remarks today on these three issues:
growing conflict and instability, economic collapse and
the aid operation, and what they mean for civilians.
Yemen is growing more violent, not less. Over the
past few weeks, Houthi forces have intensified their
brutal offensive in Ma’rib, taking more territory there
and in neighbouring parts of Shabwa governorate.
In Aden, clashes between rival armed groups also
erupted earlier this month, leading to several days of
violence, which shut down parts of the city and raise
grave concerns for the future.
Fighting, shelling and air strikes have also continued
in Sa’ada, Hajjah and Al-Hudaydah and along nearly 50
other front lines.
The impact on civilians is grim. Hostilities in
September killed or injured 235 civilians across the
4/21

Several recent mass-casualty incidents have also
shocked the world, including a missile attack in Ma’rib
on 3 October, attributed to Houthi forces, which killed
three children and injured 21 other civilians.
All parties to the conflict must uphold their
obligations under international humanitarian law,
including taking constant care to spare civilians and
civilian objects throughout military operations.
Likewise, the parties are required to facilitate
humanitarian access. Aid agencies need safe, timely
and sustained access to all affected communities in
Ma’rib and elsewhere.
We also urge all parties to ensure the freedom of
movement of civilians, including safe passage for those
fleeing conflict areas.
Like the Special Envoy, we are also gravely
concerned by the pervasive human rights violations
that the conflict is fuelling — including the shocking
execution of nine individuals by Houthi authorities in
Sana’a last month following proceedings that do not
appear to have met the standards of a fair trial or due
process under international law.
International law requires effective accountability
for serious violations. In that context, it is unfortunate
that the mandate of the Group of Eminent Experts, the
only independent international entity investigating and
issuing public reports on human rights in Yemen, was
not renewed last week.
While conflict and instability are endangering
civilians’ lives, livelihoods are also under attack.
As Under-Secretary-General Martin Griffiths said
in August (see S/PV.8840), it is Yemen’s economic
collapse that is driving most needs in the country,
including the risk of famine. Because nearly everything
must be imported, people and businesses are extremely
vulnerable to changes in global prices, and to especially
exchange rates and import taxes. The Yemeni rial
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

is now trading around 1,270 rial to the United States
dollar in Aden; that is nearly six times higher than
before the war.
At the same time, fewer essential goods are
reaching key ports in the first place. In Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef, commercial food imports in September
were 8 per cent below last year’s average. Fuel imports
were an alarming 64 per cent lower.
There are several immediate steps that could curb
Yemen’s economic collapse and so help reduce the
pressure on the people of Yemen and the aid agencies
trying to help them. Foreign exchange injections
through the Central Bank would quickly bring down
prices, just as they did in the past. The Government
is ready to work with everyone to devise an effective
programme for that.
It is also time to loosen constraints on economic life.
That means ensuring all Yemen’s ports are fully open,
including by lifting import restrictions on Al-Hudaydah
and Saleef. It also means paying civil servants’ salaries.
A quarter of the population depends on those salaries.
They are also essential to keeping afloat basic services,
such as water, sanitation, health care and education.
And it means taking steps to remove other barriers to
business. Those include measures such as issuing bonds
to lower insurance premiums, which drive up the prices
of imports, as well as expanding programmes to clean
up mines and other explosives that have been strewn
across the country.
There are workable proposals on the table to
achieve all of that. The impact would be both quick and
transformative. The United Nations is eager to help.
In the meantime, we remain focused on the
humanitarian operation. Aid agencies are now helping
nearly 13 million people across the country. That is
about 3 million more people than just a few months
before. Our best assessment is that this expansion
has considerably pushed back the immediate risk
of large-scale famine. That is a major success and
a direct result of more donor funds coming in over
the past few months. That generosity is making an
enormous difference.
But that success may prove short-lived, as aid
agencies do not have enough money to keep going at
the scale required. In the coming weeks and months,
up to 4 million people could see their food aid reduced.

S/PV. 8878

By the end of the year, that number could rise to
5 million people.
Funding for water delivery and hospitals will also
run out by the end of November. Water, sanitation and
hygiene programmes have received only 12 per cent of
the funds they need this year; health programmes have
received just 15 per cent. Similar gaps persist in shelter
and other sectors.
We are calling on everyone to do everything
possible to sustain the momentum we have built over
the past several months and keep famine at bay. That
means increasing support for all humanitarian sectors
in Yemen right away and — crucially — working hard
to ensure the level of support does not drop next year.
Agencies are committed to doing their part to
help donors maintain their support. In the coming
months, we will publish an impartial, nationwide needs
assessment and evidence-based response plan for 2022.
Council members’ continued support will be crucial for
that work, and we will certainly keep them updated as
we progress.
Perhaps more than everything else I have just
described, Yemen needs a political solution to end
the war. We can support everything that the Special
Envoy has just briefed the Council on. A nationwide
ceasefire — with no pre-conditions — would be an
excellent place to start.
The President: I thank Mr. Rajasingham for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Al-Deen.
Ms. Al-Deen (spoke in Arabic): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me this opportunity to speak
to the Security Council about the political and economic
developments in my country, Yemen, which has
been torn by a multilateral internal and regional war,
sparked by a coup, carried out by the armed Houthis
in September 2014, and exacerbated by an external
military intervention, led by the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the United Arab Emirates in March 2015.
At the outset, I would like to draw the Council’s
attention to the unprecedented escalation of military
operations, due to the attack launched by armed
Houthis on Ma’rib governorate in the east of Yemen,
where almost 2 million people live, most of whom are
displaced. A large part of those displaced persons have
been displaced several times since the beginning of the

21-288395/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

war. Today armed clashes are moving closer, and some
displaced persons have no other place to seek refuge.
In addition, the city of Ma’rib supplies the entire
Republic of Yemen with energy and cooking gas. As
the battles move closer to the oil and gas fields, they
threaten the humanitarian situation throughout the
county, not only within the city. Those continued
battles have disastrous humanitarian consequences as
well as military and political consequences. They may
cause the war to expand to other areas in Yemen and
undermine the already limited opportunities for peace.
That calls for urgent attention and pressure from the
international community to stop the fighting.
Since the beginning of the war in Yemen seven
years ago, it has become common to describe the
situation there as the largest humanitarian crisis in the
world. As the war continues, the human suffering is
being fuelled by the collapse of the monetary system
and the deterioration of economic conditions.
Let me focus on those two points — the humanitarian
and the economic situations — because there is still
much to do to alleviate the suffering in Yemen.
Yemen is not only one of the worst humanitarian
crisis in the world; it is also one of the worst international
response to a humanitarian crisis. Our research at the
Sana’a Center for Strategic Studies points to a set of
massive imbalances in the relief process, as a large part
of Yemen’s population are under the control of armed
Houthis who systematically seize assistance and use it
to their advantage.
As for the areas under the control of the
internationally
recognized
Government,
other
problems arise including the weakness of Government
institutions, bureaucratic obstruction and field
impediments imposed by the various militias, which
hinder the travel and movement of relief personnel.
That is in addition to the failure of international relief
organizations to make adequate and transparent efforts
to ensure that the minimum assistance reaches Yemenis
in need. There are also impediments caused by United
Nations rules and mechanisms. Therefore, the relief
operation in Yemen needs urgent reassessment and
accountability to reduce the chances of wasting and
misusing humanitarian aid funds.
Months ago authorities of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia issued a decision to dismiss Yemeni workers in
the south of the country without a clear or convincing
6/21

14/10/2021

explanation for that collective targeting. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia partially rescinded that decision, but
it is, unfortunately, part of successive Saudi policies
adopted over the past years against Yemeni workers.
It is worth noting that, in the light of the current war,
expatriates have become the first, and almost the only,
source of hard currency after the almost total cessation
of oil and gas exports. Most of those expatriates are
in the Gulf, especially the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
where more than 1 million Yemenis work. The decline
in the number of Yemenis residing in the Saudi Arabia
and the harassment of those remaining negatively
affected the conditions of millions of Yemenis at home,
and thereby exacerbated the current humanitarian crisis
in Yemen.
Allow me to note that all Gulf States have directly
or indirectly been involved in the war in Yemen.
They therefore have a double ethical and political
responsibility towards their neighbour, Yemen, in
mitigating the effects of the war. Those countries
should at least open their doors to Yemeni workers,
especially since they still rely heavily on millions of
foreign workers.
An economic war erupted during the conflict.
There is a vast network of people benefiting from the
continuation of this war. Not focusing on this aspect
of the Yemeni war led to further deterioration of the
economic and living conditions. It is important to note
that the most recent round of economic negotiations
held by the Office of the Special Envoy of the SecretaryGeneral for Yemen took place in May 2019, in Amman.
There is still much that can be done to find sustainable
economic solutions that meet the needs of a segment
of the population and enable them to live in dignity.
The Council can push forward effective economic steps
to significantly alleviate the suffering of the Yemeni
people. These are urgent issues that cannot wait for the
war to end.
I would therefore like to present some practical
recommendations to the Security Council that
could stop the deterioration of the humanitarian and
economic situation.
First, the Council should adopt an international
resolution calling for economic de-escalation and
calling upon the Special Envoy to resume economic
negotiations immediately in order to ensure the
reunification of the Central Bank of Yemen. The
resolution must also impose smart sanctions on any
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV. 8878

party obstructing such action or taking measures that
reinforce the financial divisions in the country.

airport, and to lift restrictions on the entry and exit of
basic commodities.

Secondly, the Council should evaluate and
establish coordination and oversight mechanisms
for relief operations and ensure their funding. So
far, only 55 per cent of related pledges have been
honoured. The international community must compel
international organizations to implement the outcomes
of the World Humanitarian Summit that relate to
humanitarian assistance.

The third action is to design and implement a
strategy, in partnership with the United Arab Emirates,
in order to rebuild the areas under the control of the
allied Yemeni forces and to build vital projects in
various sectors, particularly the energy sector. In
addition, a deposit must be made to the Yemeni Central
Bank in order to help stabilize the Yemeni currency.

Thirdly, the Council should alleviate the financial
isolation of Yemeni banks so that they can connect to
the global financial system and facilitate the import of
basic materials. That would help in stopping informal
financial transfers.
Fourthly, the Council should adopt a comprehensive
approach in order to support the fragile health-care
system in Yemen and ensure the delivery of coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) vaccines to all parts of the country.
It is worth noting that only 1 per cent of the Yemeni
people have received the COVID-19 vaccine, which
reflects the weak commitment of the international
community to Yemen.
Fifthly, supplying the parties involved in the war
with weapons should be ceased, and the Council should
relaunch the international framework for accountability
and oversight, especially in the wake of the recent and
unfortunate decision by the Human Rights Council not
to renew the mandate of the Group of Eminent Experts
on Yemen. The Council, through its resolutions and
other tools, must bring pressure to bear on the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia and its allies to take certain actions.
The first action is to immediately stop expelling
and tightening their grip on Yemeni workers in the
Gulf labour market, generally, and in the Saudi labour
market, in particular, and to stop excluding them from
the policies of Saudization and dual-residency fines.
Furthermore, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia must
rectify the conditions of Yemeni irregular workers,
taking into account the historical agreement between
the two countries. All that should take place within
a comprehensive framework of preferential policies
for Yemeni workers in the Saudi Arabia and all other
Gulf countries.
The second action is to immediately open all
Yemeni land, sea and air ports, including Sana’a

Concurrently, the Council, through international
efforts, must also compel the Yemeni Government to
take certain actions.
The first is to fully pay the salaries of all civil
servants in Yemen, including those of residents under
Houthi control. Ever since the transfer of the Central
Bank to Aden in 2016, the Government has not
fulfilled its promise to continue paying the salaries of
Government employees.
The second is to implement real reforms in the
structure and leadership of the Central Bank, as well as
in revenue-generating institutions, and to take measures
to promote transparency and accountability in order to
curb the massive corruption in the Government.
The Council must also compel the necessary
measures on the Houthis, especially through their allies
in Tehran and their friends in Muscat — first, to ensure
the immediate cessation of their military operations
in Ma’rib and lift the siege on cities and residential
areas in Taiz, Ma’rib and Al-Bayda; secondly, to lift
restrictions against humanitarian and relief works,
particularly those related to the COVID-19 pandemic,
and accept the vaccine doses provided by the COVID-19
Global Access Facility and distribute them fairly to
all Yemenis; and, thirdly, to immediately dissolve
economic war institutions such as the Supreme Council
for the Management and Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs, the Zakat Authority and others established by
Houthi leaders.
I thank the Council once again for inviting me and
for the opportunity to brief it today. I would be happy to
discuss with the representatives in the upcoming days
the political and military developments, in general, and
the prospects for establishing a presidential council, in
particular, as an entry point for a political solution in
Yemen. At the end of the day, we must not forget that
the best relief for the Yemeni people would be an end to

21-288397/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

this war and not to get involved in it. The Council must
not forget this at all.
The President: I thank Ms. Al-Deen for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom):
At the outset, I would like to commend Special
Envoy Hans Grundberg for his efforts during his first
month. His engagement with a broad range of actors
has laid an important foundation for a revived peace
process. We are committed to helping him and to
mobilizing international support behind the United
Nations-led approach.
I would also like to welcome the return of the
Prime Minister and wider Cabinet to Yemen. The
parties must now work together to secure the sustained
presence of the Government of Yemen in the country.
As the Special Envoy has previously stressed, we
need to see implementation of the Riyadh agreement
in order to support stability, services and functional
State institutions.
The sobering words of Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham
today remind us that, after six years of war, the people of
Yemen are still suffering from the world’s worst humanmade humanitarian crisis. The humanitarian relief
can only do so much for so long. As Mr. Rajasingham
emphasized, we need a political solution to end the war,
and we need initiatives to support the economy in order
to reduce humanitarian need.
The picture painted by Ms. Al-Deen today of the
situation in Ma’rib is bleak, and her recommendations
are far-reaching. It is galling to see the Houthi offensive
on Ma’rib continue, including their siege of Ma’rib’s
Al-Abdiyah district. Ma’rib’s citizens witnessed an
atrocity on 3 October when a Houthi missile attack on
the densely populated Al-Rawdah neighbourhood in
Ma’rib killed two children and injured 33 civilians. As
the Security Council, we must now place greater pressure
on the Houthis to end such appalling, indiscriminate
attacks. Respect for international humanitarian law,
including protecting civilians and assisting them to
move out of conflict zones, is imperative.
We also condemn in the strongest possible terms
the incessant and unjustifiable Houthi cross-border
attacks into Saudi Arabia, including the drone attack on
8 October, which left 10 people wounded at a civilian
airport in Jizan.
8/21

14/10/2021

Finally, we wish to express our deep disappointment
that the Human Rights Council failed to renew the
mandate of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen.
Monitoring and accountability are essential in all
conflict situations. We call on all parties to the conflict
to respect human rights and to investigate allegations of
violations where they arise.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Mr. Hans Grundberg and
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham for their overview of the
political and humanitarian situation in Yemen. We
also listened closely to Ms. Maysaa Abdulrahman
Shujaa Al-Deen.
We are continuing to monitor the acute military
and political crisis in Yemen. Of particular concern
is the situation on the borders of Ma’rib and Shabwa
governorates, where recently there has been an uptick
in violent clashes between the Houthis and groups that
are loyal to the country’s President.
We listened closely to Hans Grundberg’s assessment
following his initial plunge into his work as Special
Envoy. It was particularly important to hear his opinion
of the contacts that he had with the Yemeni parties.
We also welcomed the Special Envoy’s perspective
on Yemeni cooperation with the representatives of the
permanent five members of the Security Council. We
trust that after these range-finding contacts, he will
actively get down to work on establishing a dialogue
between the parties to the conflict.
For our part, we will continue to support the
efforts by the United Nations. We intend to continue to
actively encourage the official Yemeni authorities and
the leadership of the Ansar Allah Houthi movement
to take a constructive approach and show a readiness
to compromise.
We are in favour of launching into Yemeni
negotiations under United Nations auspices on the
subject of the future political makeup of the country,
the result of which would be a comprehensive and longterm settlement to the conflict, which would take into
account the interests of all leading Yemeni political
forces. We see our shared end goal as a comprehensive
and long-term solution to the many problems that
Yemen is facing and which are, in large part, being felt
by neighbouring States as well.
We remain particularly alarmed by the dire
socioeconomic situation in the country. The
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

dispiriting data from the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs speak for themselves. We
confirm the need to lift restrictions on the delivery of
food, medicines and other vital goods to all parts of
the country.
We are seriously concerned by the ongoing attacks
on civilian objects, including on the territory of Saudi
Arabia. We urge the parties to the conflict to comply
in a straight-forward manner with the provisions of
international humanitarian law and to immediately
and in full refrain from hostilities that lead to the
destruction of non-military infrastructure and victimize
the civilian population.
We hope that the problem of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker will soon be settled by resolving the remaining
technical disagreements. We call on the parties involved
in this matter to follow a constructive approach.
In conclusion, I would also like to note the efforts of
States in the region that are ready to provide mediation
in the Yemeni peace process. We also recall resolution
598 (1987) and other initiatives aimed at stabilizing the
subregion, including the updated Russian concept for
collective security in the region.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
attentively listened to the briefings.
Recently, hostilities have escalated between the
parties to the conflict in Yemen. China is deeply
concerned about this and urges all parties to immediately
commit to a ceasefire, stop the violence, and especially
bring an early end to the fighting in Ma’rib.
Lately, the Permanent Representative of Saudi
Arabia contacted the President of the Council on
two occasions to inform him of the attacks, first, on
Abha airport, on 6 October, and, secondly, on King
Abdul Aziz airport, on 8 October. China condemns
all attacks on civilians and civilian installations and
urges all parties to abide by international humanitarian
law and protect vulnerable groups, especially women
and children.
On 28 September, the Yemeni Prime Minister and
other senior officials returned to Aden, which China
welcomes. China supports the Yemeni Government’s
active administration in Aden. All parties concerned
should fully implement the Riyadh Agreement, uphold
security and stability in Aden and create favourable
conditions for the Government to take measures to
improve the economy and people’s livelihoods. I hope

S/PV. 8878

that the Government of Yemen will make full use of
the special drawing rights from the International
Monetary Fund and the humanitarian assistance from
the international community to stabilize the value of
Yemen rial, reduce the cost of living for the population
and ensure basic services.
Mitigating the humanitarian crisis in Yemen is a
shared task facing the international community. China
welcomes the holding of the humanitarian pledging
conference for Yemen that took place during the
high-level week of the General Assembly last month
and hopes that the donor countries will disburse
their pledging as soon as possible to keep alive the
United Nations humanitarian relief projects in Yemen.
The international community has provided massive
amounts of humanitarian supplies to Yemen, and all
parties in Yemen should ensure humanitarian access
and the delivery of humanitarian supplies to the people
in need. All parties should also maintain the operation
of ports to ensure that the import channels for food, oil
and other commodities are open to meet the basic needs
of the people.
Since taking office, Special Envoy Grundberg has
been actively engaging all parties in Yemen, visiting
various countries of the region and exemplifying an
approach of positive pragmatism that China appreciates.
We encourage the Special Envoy to continue his
in-depth discussions with the parties, promote dialogue
between the Government of Yemen and the Houthis and
draft a road map for the peace process in due course, so
as to give impetus to the settlement of the Yemeni issue.
We call on all parties to receive the Special Envoy’s
visit unconditionally, exchange views with him in a
frank and constructive manner and work together to
find a political solution that takes into account the
concerns of all parties. The Special Envoy may wish
to start with the solution to such specific issues as
humanitarian flights at Sana’a Airport and the FSO
SAFER oil tanker and promote the gradual restoration
of mutual trust between the parties.
The solution to the Yemeni issue cannot be reached
without the coordination and cooperation of the
countries of the region. It is in the common interests
of those countries to restore peace and order in Yemen.
China calls on all parties with influence in Yemen to
scale up their efforts to promote talks for peace and
play a more active role.

21-288399/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Ben Lagha (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Grundberg,
Mr. Rajasingham and Ms. Al-Deen for their briefings.
The long Yemeni conflict has taken lives and
caused injuries. It has also caused destruction and
the deterioration of the humanitarian situation in the
country. The international community is looking for
a new phase in which there is greater commitment to
peace and calm from all parties to the conflict, leading
to end of clashes, ensuring a ceasefire and paving the
way towards relaunching talks for a peaceful political
settlement that brings an end to the Yemeni crisis.
In this regard, we once again underscore that there
is no alternative to the inclusive consensus solution
that fulfils the aspirations of the Yemeni people and
prevents any further suffering or tragedy for them.
The past years have demonstrated that the military
option aiming to impose a status quo can only further
complicate the situation, cause more victims, jeopardize
the lives of millions of people and exacerbate the
dangerous deterioration of the humanitarian situation.
We therefore call upon the Houthis to make the choice
of peace, stop the fighting and participate positively in
negotiations without any preconditions.
Tunisia expresses its support for the Special Envoy
of the Secretary-General for Yemen and encourages
him to continue his efforts with all of the parties aimed
at working to resolve the conflict in Yemen. We urge
all parties to the conflict to participate actively in the
pursuit of a political settlement and the declaration of
a comprehensive ceasefire, thereby reaching a solution
that, with the return of security and stability, brings an
end to the suffering of the Yemeni people and preserves
the sovereignty, independence and unity of Yemen.
Given the current conditions on the ground, Tunisia
condemns the continued Houthi offensives against
Ma’rib and the siege on civilians that could bring about
an imminent humanitarian disaster and undermine
chances for peace. We therefore call on the parties to
the conflict to respect the provisions of international
humanitarian law and international human rights law
and also to spare civilians and civilian installations.
Tunisia strongly condemns the continued Houthi
offensives against the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and the
targeting of its civilian installations, including recent
attacks against Abha and Jazan airports as well as other
civilian sites and targets. Such attacks are unacceptable
as they jeopardize the security and stability of the
10/21

14/10/2021

region and hinder efforts and initiatives aimed at easing
tensions and halting the escalation.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen is continuing
to deteriorate and represents a source of grave concern,
particularly since the crisis is accompanied by a
degradation of economic conditions and livelihoods
owing to the continued fighting and the disruption of
relief and humanitarian operations. The latest indicators
reflect increasing difficulties in obtaining basic
foodstuffs, which increases the risk of food insecurity,
a phenomenon that would threaten 16 million people.
In
parallel,
public-health
conditions
are
deteriorating, and coronavirus disease pandemic
infection rates are rising. Millions of people are thus
being exposed to the risk of contracting other diseases
as well. International efforts must be mobilized for
rapid intervention and to meet medical needs. Vaccines
must be provided, and humanitarian and medical
assistance must reach recipients without any hindrance.
Adequate financing must be ensured to continue
the implementation of the humanitarian assistance
programme and to support efforts to meet the pressing
needs of the Yemeni people, particularly since relief
agencies are reporting that nearly 11.6 million people
are in urgent need of medical assistance.
In conclusion, there is an urgent need to address
the issue of the SAFER oil tanker, which represents
a serious threat that could cause an unprecedented
environmental, economic and humanitarian crisis in the
region. We call for the facilitation of special measures
to allow United Nations experts to visit the site and
conduct a technical inspection as soon as possible.
Mrs. Nguyen (Viet Nam): I would like to thank the
briefers for their insightful statements, and I welcome
the participation of the Permanent Representative of
Yemen in our meeting today.
On the peace and security process, we welcome the
first visit to the region by Mr. Hans Grundberg as the
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General. Just like the
meetings with the Governments of Arab Saudi, Oman
and Yemen, his recent conversations with Yemeni youth
and women show his strong commitment to striving
for an inclusive political process in the country. We
encourage regional partners and the parties concerned
to continue to support his efforts to achieve peace.
In the meantime, however, we remain worried
about the deteriorating security situation in Yemen and
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

across its borders, as military fighting has intensified
since the beginning of the year, claiming the lives of
many people, including women and children from both
sides.
We join other Member States in condemning the
attacks on convoys of Yemeni Government officials,
which left six people dead and seven wounded in Aden
last Sunday. We also condemn the recent attacks against
two civilian airports and other civilian objects in Saudi
Arabia. We are concerned that such attacks, along with
military escalation, continue to exacerbate the situation
in Yemen and undermine stability in the region.
In that context, we urge all concerned parties to
immediately cease the violence, heed the SecretaryGeneral’s call for a nationwide ceasefire, resume
dialogue and engage with the Special Envoy and
his team on a comprehensive political settlement
to the conflict in Yemen in good faith. Meanwhile,
the international community and regional partners
should create favourable conditions and provide an
environment conducive to United Nations-led mediation
and negotiations among parties.
At the same time, all parties are required to
implement fully the Stockholm Agreement and the
Riyadh agreement.
On the humanitarian issue, thanks to the
information provided by the United Nations Resident
and Humanitarian Coordinator for Yemen, we have
learned more about the realities on the ground regarding
how dire the humanitarian situation in the country is.
Apart from prolonged fighting and the coronavirus
disease pandemic, the collapse of the economy and
infrastructure, including the failure to provide essential
services and ensuring food insecurity, have exacerbated
the crisis in Yemen.
Moreover, it is distressing to learn about the grave
violence being committed against children, as set out in
the recent report of the Secretary-General on children
and armed conflict (S/2021/761).
Against that backdrop, we call for the sustainability
of humanitarian aid and other adequate support for
Yemen. Humanitarian aid and workers must have
unimpeded access in Yemen. All parties must respect
international humanitarian law; protect civilians,
including women and children; and implement
resolution 2573 (2021), including protecting civilian

S/PV. 8878

infrastructure. We must stop the killing of and violence
against children, who are the future of Yemen.
Lastly, on the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue, the
risk of an oil spill and its consequences for the region,
especially the Red Sea, cannot be ignored. We need to
act to avert an environmental and humanitarian disaster.
We must act quickly and with urgency. In doing so, we
would urge the Houthis to work in a committed manner
with the United Nations and allow the United Nations
team to carry out an immediate assessment of and
repairs on the tanker without delay.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): Mexico welcomes the participation of Special
Envoy Hans Grundberg and extends our support to
him. We also thank Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham and
Ms. Maysaa Al-Deen for their comments.
For almost seven years now the people of Yemen
have suffered from the consequences of this conflict.
The current situation is disturbing: almost two thirds
of the population require humanitarian assistance,
and more than 400,000 children suffer from severe
malnutrition. Violence is ongoing and increasing.
Ansar Allah is continuing its offensive against Ma’rib,
with frequent attacks against civilian infrastructure.
For days there have been tactical sieges against the
Al-Abdiyah district, where more than 35,000 people are
cut off and have no access to basic goods and services.
Ongoing attacks against Saudi Arabia continue,
such as the attack on Abha and Jazan airports at the
beginning of this month. Similarly, on 10 October an
attack was carried out against the Governor of Aden that
took the lives of six people. Mexico strongly condemns
those attacks and calls on Ansar Allah to end the
violence. All parties to the conflict must exercise the
greatest restraint, because without a national ceasefire
it will be impossible to meet the rapidly increasing
humanitarian needs.
There is no military solution to the conflict in
Yemen. The armed conflict undermines any possibility
of progress towards political understanding and a
much-needed economic recovery. That is why we
urge the parties to observe a national ceasefire, and
we call on all States to respect the arms embargo, in
keeping with the relevant resolutions of the Council.
Moreover, my delegation deplores the numerous
human rights violations that have occurred throughout
Yemeni territory. Indeed, on 18 September Ansar Allah
executed nine people. Mexico rejects the use of the

21-2883911/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

death penalty under any circumstances, as it is one of
the most serious human rights violations.
Similarly, Mexico supports initiatives to establish
impartial and independent procedures to thoroughly
investigate violations of international humanitarian
law, as well as human rights, in order to identify the
perpetrators and bring them to justice. In that regard,
it is regrettable that the mandate of the Human Rights
Council’s Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen was not
renewed. After seven years of conflict, it is imperative
to combat impunity and establish accountability
mechanisms. Only in that way will it be possible to
promote genuine social reconciliation.
We welcome the return of the Prime Minister of
Yemen to Aden and hope that the rest of the Cabinet
will soon do the same. In that regard, we urge the
parties to continue to implement the Riyadh agreement.
We also welcome the Special Envoy’s recent
meetings with key actors in Saudi Arabia, Oman and
Yemen, which we trust will be fruitful.
We reiterate the call for constructive and
committed engagement by the parties in the United
Nations-facilitated peace process and encourage broad
participation in the political process and in civilsociety initiatives, such as the Jeel Albena Association
for Humanitarian Development, an organization that
was recently awarded the 2021 Nansen Refugee Award.
I conclude by reiterating our urgent call for the
inspection of the FSO SAFER oil tanker. That is a
looming threat that could have serious environmental,
humanitarian and commercial consequences for
the region.

14/10/2021

is urgently needed to avoid further deterioration of
what is already a fragile and clearly volatile situation.
We welcome the return of several members of the
Government, including the Prime Minister, to Aden.
We deplore the continuation of hostilities and call
once again for a nationwide ceasefire and, in particular,
for an end to the Houthi offensive on Ma’rib, including
its civilian neighbourhoods.
The ongoing violence across the country continues
to cause deaths and threaten lives all across Yemen.
It is driving the displacement of thousands of people,
especially women and children. The violence is also
curtailing the crucial work of local and international
peacebuilders, who must be supported in their continued
efforts to pursue peace.
We are deeply disturbed by countless accounts
of grave violations against children in the country in
the most recent report on children in armed conflict
in Yemen (S/2021/761). As Henrietta Fore recently told
the Security Council (see S/PV.8840), being a child in
Yemen is the stuff of nightmares.
The recent Houthi execution of nine Yemenis,
reportedly including one who was a minor at the time
of his detention, is deplorable. It is in stark violation
of Yemeni legislation and human rights norms. Ireland
unequivocally opposes the use of the death penalty in
all cases and in all circumstances. We once again stress
the need for all parties to fulfil their obligations under
international law.
We also unreservedly condemn the most recent
attacks by the Houthis on the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Such attacks must cease.

Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): My thanks go to our
briefers — Special Envoy Grundberg, Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Rajasingham and Ms, Al-Deen,
whom I especially thank for her briefing.

Humanitarian assistance remains a desperately
needed lifeline for millions of Yemenis. Ireland calls
for full, unfettered and safe access for humanitarian
workers to all parts of Yemen.

Today I want to begin by strongly condemning
the heinous attack carried out in Aden last Sunday,
allegedly targeting a Government Minister and the
Governor of Aden. I express my deepest condolences to
all those affected by that cowardly act.

The dire humanitarian situation has also been
greatly exacerbated by the economic realities, which
we heard about earlier from Ms. Al-Deen. We know
that unblocking restrictions on fuel and food imports
and the payment of civil-servant salaries would greatly
increase the purchasing power and well-being of many
in Yemen. We fully support action on such measures.

The political and security situation in the south of
Yemen remains a cause for growing concern. A full
resumption of dialogue between the internationally
recognized Government and the Southern Transitional
Council, within the framework of the Riyadh agreement,
12/21

We all know that the FSO SAFER oil tanker
continues to pose an immediate humanitarian and
environmental threat to the people of Yemen and the
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

region. Ireland renews its calls for all parties to engage
constructively in discussions so that the United Nations
teams can access the tanker as soon as possible to carry
out the necessary repairs.
Finally, I want to express our profound
disappointment at the outcome at the Human Rights
Council last week, whereby the mandate of the Group
of Eminent Experts on Yemen was not renewed. That
Group was the only independent, international and
impartial mechanism monitoring the dire human rights
situation in Yemen. In our view, in failing to renew
its mandate, we have collectively failed the Yemeni
people. Ireland has always emphatically supported
the Group, and we thank it for its exemplary work in
challenging circumstances.
To the people of Yemen, who have suffered
immensely, I assure them that Ireland will not cease
in its efforts to ensure accountability and justice for
victims. They deserve nothing less.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg, Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Ramesh Rajasingham and Ms. Al-Deen, of the Sana’a
Center for Strategic Studies, for their briefings. I
welcome the presence of the Permanent Representative
of Yemen in our midst.
We are deeply concerned by the mounting death toll
due to the prolonged fighting between the Government
forces and Ansar Allah in Ma’rib and other parts of
Yemen. The ongoing hostilities and the cycle of violence
further jeopardize the chances of a ceasefire.
Putting an end to the current hostilities in Ma’rib, as
well as other places in Yemen, through a comprehensive
ceasefire should be the immediate priority of the
international community. In that regard, we appreciate
the efforts of Special Envoy Grundberg in engaging
with all the parties to the conflict towards a nationwide
ceasefire and in order to resume negotiations to achieve
an inclusive political solution that meets the aspirations
of all Yemenis.
Millions of Yemenis are bearing the brunt of the
protracted conflict. The unprecedented humanitarian
crisis has been compounded by the precarious economic
situation. The declining currency exchange rate has
further exacerbated the situation by inflating the prices
of food, fuel and other commodities. I underscore the
urgent need to address the economic consequences of

S/PV. 8878

the conflict, since that could exacerbate the misery of
the people.
We are also concerned by the restrictions on, and
impediments to, the movement of humanitarian aid and
other essential commodities into and within Yemen. I
call on all parties to lift such restrictions to ensure that
humanitarian aid reaches all Yemenis. Otherwise, the
suffering of the people of Yemen, especially women
and children, will worsen.
Financing for humanitarian operations is another
area that needs the attention of the international
community. We hope that the additional pledges made
during the recent high-level humanitarian conference
held on the sidelines of the General Assembly will
help to bridge the funding gap in the 2021 Yemen
humanitarian response plan.
I welcome the return of the Prime Minister of Yemen
to Aden. We hope that will pave the way for the return
of the full Cabinet to Aden and the implementation of
the Riyadh agreement. We encourage the Government
of Yemen and the Southern Transitional Council to
continue the dialogue on resolving the issues related to
the implementation of the Riyadh agreement.
I also reiterate India’s call for the full implementation
of the Stockholm Agreement. The continuing ceasefire
violations in Al-Hudaydah are a matter of concern.
Restrictions on the freedom of movement of the
United Nations Mission to Support the Hodeidah
Agreement (UNMHA) hamper the monitoring of those
ceasefire violations. We therefore urge the parties
concerned to immediately remove those restrictions.
We recognize the efforts of UNMHA to resume the
Redeployment Coordination Committee and its joint
mechanisms to implement the Hodeidah Agreement. It
is important that a new head of UNMHA be appointed
at the earliest possible time to ensure that those efforts
continue unhindered.
The agreement on a prisoner exchange is also
an integral part of the Stockholm Agreement. This
month marks one year since the successful mass
exchange of prisoners and detainees by the parties
to the conflict. Apart from being a humanitarian
imperative, such exchanges also constitute an important
confidence-building measure. While we welcome the
exchange of prisoners with local mediation, we also
believe that there is a need for the establishment of a
proper mechanism for such exchanges, as envisaged in
the Stockholm Agreement.

21-2883913/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

India condemns the sustained cross-border missile
and drone attacks into Saudi Arabia. There can be no
justification for the deliberate targeting of civilians
and civilian infrastructure in Saudi Arabia, which is
a flagrant violation of international law. Indians were
among the civilians who were injured in the recent
attacks on Abha airport. The arms embargo envisaged
in resolution 2216 (2015) should be strictly implemented
to avert similar attacks in future.
We also condemn the recent car bombing in Aden
targeting prominent political figures. Such targeted
assassination attempts and other recent attacks in
Aden risk further destabilizing the security situation in
southern Yemen.
An urgent solution to the FSO SAFER oil tanker issue
is also required to avoid an imminent environmental
catastrophe and to ensure uninterrupted international
maritime passage through the Red Sea.
Continued violence, the threat of terrorism, the
unstable security situation and growing civilian
casualties will only deny peace to the people of Yemen.
Such a situation will delay the resumption of a Yemeniled and Yemeni-owned peace process. We strongly urge
all parties to reverse those trends on the ground and
come together for the peace, security and prosperity of
the people of Yemen.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg,
Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham and Ms. Shujaa Al-Deen for
their remarks and continued efforts. And I welcome
the presence of the Yemeni Government in the
Chamber today.
Today I will focus on four aspects of the situation in
Yemen: the Houthi offensive, the situation in Aden, the
economic and humanitarian situation and the challenge
of accountability in this conflict.
First, the United States remains deeply concerned
by the Houthi offensive against Ma’rib, home to over
1 million internally displaced people. The dramatic
escalation has led to hundreds of casualties. In
particular, the United States strongly condemns the
3 October Houthi missile attack on Ma’rib, which killed
two children and injured an estimated 33 more civilians.
Furthermore, the Houthi siege of Al-Abdiyah is putting
tens of thousands of civilians at grave risk. We also
condemn recent Houthi cross-border attacks against
Saudi Arabia at King Abdullah and Abha airports, which
14/21

14/10/2021

wounded more than a dozen innocent people. Those
heinous acts, targeting civilian airport employees and
travellers, undermine peace efforts. Those actions defy
the international and regional consensus on ending the
war, and they are the single-biggest obstacle to peace.
During this challenging time, the United States
believes it is all the more important that the Security
Council demonstrate unwavering support for Special
Envoy Grundberg’s work and does not shy away
from calling out Houthi obstruction. The Houthis
have consistently refused to commit to a ceasefire,
discuss a political resolution to the conflict or engage
constructively with the United Nations. It is up to us, as
the Security Council, to individually and collectively
press the Houthis to engage meaningfully.
Secondly, the situation in Aden and beyond
remains precarious. The United States condemns the
attack against the Government of Yemen officials over
the past week. And we extend our condolences to the
families of those who were killed. Yemenis deserve
peace, and we support the Government of Yemen’s
efforts to restore stability and improve the lives of all
Yemenis. In that vein, we welcome the Prime Minister’s
return to Aden. The United States asks members to
consider providing targeted financial support to bolster
the Prime Minister’s efforts to improve the provision of
services for the Yemeni people.
That me to my third point: the humanitarian and
economic situation in Yemen is dire, and the Yemeni
people need our help. Right now, Yemenis cannot obtain
basic services, and they are trapped in a downward
spiral. To that end, we must press the Houthis, the
Yemeni Government and Saudi Arabia to ensure fuel
is brought into and distributed throughout Yemen at
prices Yemenis can afford.
The rest of the international community must do what
it can. We are grateful to the European Union, Sweden
and Switzerland for co-hosting last month’s pledging
event. For our part, as Secretary Blinken announced
during high-level week, the United States is providing
more than $290 million in additional humanitarian
assistance for the people of Yemen, bringing our total
for fiscal year 2021 to over $800 million. We must all
urge donor nations to contribute to the humanitarian
response plan.
Fourthly and finally, we need to hold all parties
accountable for their actions. The reports of flagrant
violations of basic human rights and the rule of law in
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Houthi-controlled areas of Yemen are deeply worrisome,
particularly the 18 September public execution of nine
individuals, one of whom was a minor. The Houthis
must respect basic human rights, and all Yemenis
must have access to fair trials and due process under
international law.
On the FSO SAFER oil tanker, the Houthis must
stop negotiating in bad faith with the international
community and permit the United Nations to conduct
an assessment and urgent repairs without conditions or
further delays. The Houthis will bear full responsibility
when a leak, spill or explosion occurs. But worse, the
Yemeni people will bear the brunt of the suffering.
Given those kinds of acts, the United States, like
many members of the Security Council, is deeply
disappointed by what happened in the Human Rights
Council last week. It is appalling that the mandate
for the Group of Eminent Experts in Yemen was not
renewed. The people of Yemen deserve accountability.
Before I conclude, I want to acknowledge the third
report on the situation of children and armed conflict
in Yemen (S/2021/761) released by the Office of the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict. The report details the
ravages that conflict has inflicted on Yemen’s children.
It is truly sobering. The conflict is killing Yemen’s
children — Yemen’s own future. Those children deserve
peace — the kind of peace only a political solution can
grant them.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Hans Grundberg, Mr. Ramesh Rajasingham and
Ms. Shuja Al-Deen for their briefings.
The ongoing hostilities in Yemen — namely, the
intensification of the fighting in Ma’rib and Shabwah,
the attack against a convoy of Government officials
in Aden and the drone attacks that targeted the
Jazan airport in the south of the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia — remain a source of concern.
The Niger strongly condemns the repeated attacks
against Saudi territory. That trend, pursued by the
Houthis and aimed at expanding the spectre of violence
beyond Yemen’s borders, is unacceptable and must
stop. As long as the clashes in Yemen continue, the gap
between the parties will continue to widen, making
reconciliation between them even more difficult.
In order to give the peace process a chance to
resume, certain demands must be met. First, the

S/PV. 8878

parties must commit to a nationwide ceasefire and put
an end to their hostilities in the country. The parties
must then prioritize the interests of Yemen and all
of its people by making the necessary compromises
to advance the discussions for the relaunching of an
inclusive political process in the country. Finally, it
is essential that regional actors, as well as Council
members with influence on the parties, continue to
work towards bringing the parties to the negotiating
table. Only then can we hope for a return to peace in
Yemen and an improvement in the serious humanitarian
crisis that has been raging there for several years.
As we heard just this morning, the humanitarian
situation in Yemen continues to deteriorate. We
therefore once again call on donor countries, and
particularly those in the region, to be more generous
and compassionate towards the suffering people of
Yemen. Improving the humanitarian crisis in Yemen
also requires the lifting of blockades on the delivery of
humanitarian assistance to the country.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I too would
like to thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Acting
Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham for their
briefings, as well as Ms. Al-Deen for her testimony
and proposals.
The security situation in Yemen continues to
deteriorate. In Ma’rib and Shabwa, deadly clashes
persist and are even intensifying in some areas, leading
to further displacement.
The Houthis must renounce the military option,
which only adds to the suffering of the Yemeni people.
They must also stop their attacks on Saudi territory.
Such attacks, such as the assault against the airports
of Abha and Jizan, on 7 and 8 October, respectively,
are unacceptable because they threaten the security of
Saudi territory and undermine the stability of the region.
We also condemn the attack on an official convoy in
Aden, which resulted in several casualties. We call for
the implementation of the Riyadh agreement in order to
ease tensions in the south.
Every day, the people of Yemen continue to pay
a high price for this conflict. The figures presented
by Mr. Rajasingham speak for themselves. Sadly,
September marked a new record for civilian casualties.
We cannot stress enough that the protection
of civilians, including humanitarian and medical
personnel, as well as civilian infrastructure, must

21-2883915/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

remain an absolute imperative. Every effort must be
made to ensure safe and unhindered humanitarian
access to all those in need. We call for the removal of all
bureaucratic obstacles. It is also essential to accelerate
the coronavirus disease vaccination campaign in
order to provide equitable access to the vaccine and to
intensify awareness campaigns.
We also regret the lack of agreement in the Human
Rights Council with regard to renewing the mandate
of the Group of Eminent Experts on Yemen, even as
extrajudicial executions, arbitrary detentions, torture,
sexual and gender-based violence, child recruitment
and other violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law continue, as noted by the High
Commissioner for Human Rights. The perpetrators
of such violations must not go unpunished. France
condemns the execution of nine people by the Houthis
on 18 September and reiterates its firm and consistent
opposition to the death penalty, anywhere and under
any circumstance.
Only a comprehensive and inclusive political
solution will put an end to the war in Yemen. France
commends the Special Envoy for his engagement, and
in particular for his efforts to relaunch the political
process and propose a new framework for negotiations,
following his first round of consultations in Yemen
and the region. I reiterate France’s full support in that
regard and our readiness to fully support the Special
Envoy in his efforts.
The international parameters, including the
resolutions adopted by the Security Council, to resolve
the conflict in Yemen are well known. The political
process must be inclusive and allow for the participation
of women and the whole of Yemeni civil society.
We also call on the Houthis to give the United
Nations immediate and unconditional access to the
FSO SAFER oil tanker, which represents a major
environmental, economic and humanitarian risk for
the country and the entire region. The blackmail by the
Houthis in that regard is unacceptable.
The international community can count on
France’s full support, including for the humanitarian
response. We will remain fully mobilized to put an end
to this conflict.
Ms. Gonsalves (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
We begin by welcoming the comprehensive remarks
delivered by Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and Acting
16/21

14/10/2021

Assistant Secretary-General Ramesh Rajasingham.
We also welcome Ms. Maysaa Abdulrahman Shujaa
Al-Deen, whose research and assessment contributes
to our comprehensive knowledge of the situation in
Yemen, thereby buttressing efforts to address the
complexities on the ground.
As Saint Vincent and the Grenadines nears the
end of its tenure on the Security Council, I must say
that it is truly regrettable that hostilities in Yemen, as
well as cross-border attacks on the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, continue unabated and that the humanitarian
situation is still one of the world’s worst. We deplore the
continued fighting, the impact of which is felt deeply
by Yemen’s most vulnerable people, including women,
children and internally displaced persons. The recent
car bomb attack at Aden airport is one of the many
examples of the destruction that the conflict continues
to wreak on the civilian population.
In the face of these dire circumstances, however,
there is opportunity for hope, due in part to the fact
that we have a road map that facilitates an end to
the war. We have repeated that there must be an
immediate ceasefire that opens the doors to political
dialogue and that, through various confidence-building
measures, we can foster an environment conducive
to that dialogue. We have recognized that the success
of the dialogue necessitates a Yemeni-led, -owned
and -focused process. The additional prerequisite is a
genuine demonstration by the parties to the conflict of
collective responsibility and political will to prioritize
Yemen’s future and end the war. Until then, the dire
humanitarian and economic situation will persist.
A sustained humanitarian operation that can reach
those most in need is critical to the everyday survival
of people in Yemen. We welcome the high-level side
event that was co-hosed by Sweden, Switzerland
and the European Union last month, which gave the
international community an opportunity to reaffirm
its commitment to the people of Yemen by providing
additional funding for aid operations. In that regard,
we welcome the pledges made and urge the early
disbursement of the funds.
The humanitarian situation is compounded by the
state of the economy, which has been crippled by the
conflict. Between unpaid salaries, the depreciation of
the currency, significant inflation and the curtailment
of important economic sectors, many Yemenis lack the
resources to survive on a day-to-day basis. External
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

support is compulsory. The good-neighbourliness of
countries in the region and the opening of ports for
the entry of goods, including fuel, into Yemen are so
critical to ease the humanitarian suffering. All parties
in Yemen must act responsibility and fairly in the
distribution of critical goods and fuel.

S/PV. 8878

to a sustainable ceasefire, accompanied by an inclusive
political process, with the participation of women
and youth. We highly appreciate all international
and regional efforts in support of this achieving
these objectives.

As we emphasize the need for the resumption of
the political process, we also stress that there can be
no sustainable peace without accountability. As the
international community we must ensure that the
parties’ obligations are upheld under international
law and also build the capacity of local institutions to
guarantee accountability.

The situation in the southern governorates also
remains distressingly fragile, as the recent clashes near
Aden, which led to several civilian casualties, remind
us. We urge the Government of Yemen and the Southern
Transitional Council to resume the implementation of
the Riyadh Agreement, which is in the interest of the
Yemeni people and an essential element of the path
towards wider peace.

Before concluding, allow me to revisit the issue
of the FSO SAFER oil tanker, which has been raised
during every Security Council meeting on Yemen. It is
imperative that the relevant parties prioritize a solution
with a sense of urgency and that all stakeholders with
influence encourage the parties to find a swift resolution
to this issue. The catastrophic impact of an explosion or
leak must be prevented while we still have time.

Estonia was deeply disappointed at the vote at the
United Nations Human Rights Council on 7 October,
which failed to extend the mandate of the Group of
Eminent Experts. During the past four years, the Group
has done extremely important work in monitoring the
human rights situation in Yemen. It is in the interest
of the people of Yemen that accountability for human
rights violations and abuses is ensured.

In conclusion, we would like to reaffirm our support
for the Special Envoy and for all partners working to
end the war.

Estonia remains deeply concerned about the
continued reports of human rights violations and abuses
by all parties to the conflict, including sexual violence
and the recruitment and use of children. The most
recent report of the Secretary-General on children and
armed conflict in Yemen (S/2021/761) demonstrates the
harsh reality that the armed conflict continues to cause
atrocities and immense suffering to children in Yemen.
More than 8,500 grave violations against children were
recorded during the years 2019 and 2020.

Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Acting Assistant Secretary-General
Rajasingham for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Shujaa
Al-Deen for her insightful briefing.
Estonia remains deeply concerned about the
ongoing hostilities in Yemen that have once again
intensified in recent weeks, causing more and more
suffering for the people of Yemen. As reported by the
United Nations, another 10,000 people in Ma’rib have
been displaced in the past month, the highest monthly
number this year. Civilian casualties in September have
also reportedly once more reached high levels.
We call on all parties to immediately put an end
to hostilities, including the Houthi assault on Ma’rib.
We strongly condemn the repeated cross-border attacks
by Houthis against Saudi Arabia, including the recent
attacks on Abha and Jizan airports, where several
civilians were injured. All parties must refrain from
indiscriminate attacks against civilian objects, as they
are a violation of international humanitarian law.
The people of Yemen have suffered enough. It is
time for the Government of Yemen and the Houthis to
engage constructively with the Special Envoy and agree

Furthermore, the conflict continues to exacerbate
the humanitarian situation. We call upon the parties to
facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid and agree
on the import of fuel and commercial goods through
Al-Hudaydah port.
Finally, we repeat our call on the Houthis to allow
urgent action to be taken on the FSO SAFER oil tanker in
order to avoid an environmental and economic disaster.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank Acting
Assistant Secretary-General Rajasingham of the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
and particularly Ms. Shujaa Al-Deen for their timely
recommendations. The role of independent Yemeni
researchers and journalists is essential.
We also thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
for sharing frank updates from his visit to Yemen

21-2883917/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

and discussions with actors in the region and other
stakeholders. We are encouraged by his efforts in
promoting a more inclusive process, and we were
pleased to see his direct engagement with the Yemeni
Women’s Technical Advisory Group. Norway fully
supports him and his efforts as Special Envoy. We
stress the need for the parties to engage constructively
and responsibly going forward, without preconditions.
The return of Prime Minister Maeen Abdulmalek
Saeed to Aden last month was a welcome development.
However, the security situation, as exemplified by
the recent car bomb incident that followed clashes in
Aden, remains concerning. Such attacks undermine
security in Aden and impede the prospects for peace.
All parties must create a conducive environment for the
Government to fully function, and we urge the parties
to fully implement the Riyadh Agreement.
The daily life of the Yemeni people continues to
deteriorate. The humanitarian situation remains dire.
The economic situation is not improving. There has
been flooding in the south affecting many, and the
pandemic remains ongoing, with very few people
vaccinated. On top of all of this is the armed conflict.
These conditions are truly unsustainable.
We are alarmed by the continued cross-border
attacks into Saudi Arabia and by the fact that the Houthi
offensive in Ma’rib and Shabwa continues to intensify.
We again stress the urgent need for de-escalation and
a nationwide ceasefire. The humanitarian situation in
Al-Abdia is a particular cause for alarm.
We are also deeply concerned by UNICEF’s report
of an increased number of children killed and injured
in the Ma’rib area. The recent report of the SecretaryGeneral on children and armed conflict in Yemen
(S/2021/761) also details a significant increase in and
the prevalence of incidents of denial of humanitarian
access to children throughout Yemen. It is vital that all
Yemeni children have immediate access to humanitarian
assistance and protection. Norway calls on those
fighting in Ma’rib and across Yemen to respect their
international humanitarian law obligations, including
the protection of children.
Norway regrets the recent inability of the Human
Rights Council to renew the mandate of the Group of
Eminent Experts on Yemen. By ending this United
Nations mechanism, we are failing to acknowledge the
Yemeni victims or pursue accountability and justice.
18/21

14/10/2021

Finally, with regard to the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
we are concerned by the lack of progress as the risk
of disaster is growing day by day. We welcome the
appointment of David Gressly as the Humanitarian
Coordinator for Yemen, and we hope this will give
the impetus needed to move forward in the process of
finding a solution.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Kenya.
I thank Special Envoy Grundberg, Acting Assistant
Secretary-General Rajasingham and Ms. Maysaa
Abdulrahman Shujaa Al-Deen for their briefings.
I also welcome the participation of the representative
of Yemen in today’s meeting.
As has been the case throughout its time in the
Council, Kenya is deeply concerned at the recent
events in Yemen, including the renewed and sustained
violence in Ma’rib and in Sirwah, Rahabah, Mahilyah
and Al Abidia districts, which continues to claim the
lives of hundreds of Yemenis each week; the attack
on the convoy belonging to the Governorate of Aden
and the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, which
claimed six lives on 10 October; the increasing reach of
cross-border attacks by the Houthi on civilian facilities
and the resulting civilian injuries in Saudi Arabia;
the public execution on 18 September of nine men
convicted of their alleged involvement in the killing of a
senior Houthi official; and the escalations of hostilities
and offensives in the southern region, particularly in
Shabwa and Aden.
We condemn those acts of violence in the strongest
terms, which have led to the loss of life and injury of
innocent civilians and the destruction of civilian objects.
We maintain our position that there can be no
military solution to the conflict in Yemen. The fact that
some parties are capitalizing on the intensive diplomatic
engagements to scale up their military interventions
is quite disturbing, since they are seeking to shift the
trajectory of negotiations through violence.
We support the Special Envoy’s efforts to help the
parties to break the existing stalemate and facilitate a
political solution. However, his efforts will be futile
unless the Yemenis who are involved in this destructive
civil war make the necessary compromises, agree on
a working nationwide ceasefire and recommit to a
negotiated political solution.
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

The parties should remember that it is their own
vulnerable population who bear the brunt of the effects
of the war. We note that more than 10,000 people, 70 per
cent being women, were displaced following the recent
increase in fighting. Those numbers are adding to the
growing population in dire humanitarian straits. That
humanitarian crisis, as we heard, is being compounded
by the spread of the coronavirus disease pandemic. We
will continue to urge the international community to
provide more humanitarian support.
But I was particularly struck by the briefing that we
heard from our civil-society briefer today on proposing
very concrete economic and financial measures. As
much as the Security Council continues to discuss the
humanitarian, political and security situations, I think
that it is time to highlight that there are specific and
very practical steps that can, and need, to be taken. I
therefore want to add my voice to those of the briefers
to urge all parties within the United Nations and the
international community to start to take up some of
those proposals and better consider them.
Closer to home, here at the United Nations, the
humanitarian operation must function in this difficult
environment in a more effective way. I also call for the
consideration of how much better the United Nations can
do in its coordination and delivery of humanitarian aid.
I want to conclude with the FSO SAFER oil tanker.
It has been almost a year since the Houthis agreed to
allow the United Nations team to inspect that decaying
tanker. From where we sit in Kenya, off the Indian
Ocean coast, with so many of our goods flowing
through the waters of the Red Sea, if that catastrophe
were to happen, it would directly and negatively impact
the people of Kenya and, with them, the people of the
entire region. It is critical that the Houthis understand
that any legitimacy that they may ever wish to enjoy
would be destroyed by the FSO SAFER tanker sinking
and the effects that that would have.
I also want to shed a light on the workers on the
FSO SAFER tanker, who are working under extremely
dangerous and difficult conditions, with much less
support than they have ever had before. I want to
applaud them for the courage and professionalism that
they show every day to protect the entire region and
the world from catastrophe. We need to thank them for
what they are doing. We look forward to their being
substantially supported.

S/PV. 8878

I want to end by reaffirming Kenya’s solidarity
with the people of Yemen in their quest for peace
and security.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council for this month.
I wish you and your friendly delegation every success.
I would like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent
Representative of the Republic of Ireland, for her
successful presidency of the Council last month. I would
also like to thank Mr. Grundberg and Mr. Rajasingham
for their briefings.
Allow me to follow up on what my dear sister
Ms. Maysaa Al-Deen said. I hope that I can be given
a little more time. She mentioned that the Yemeni
Government has to pay the salaries of employees
in areas under the control of the Houthi militias.
However, she forgot to mention that the Houthi militias
must deposit all taxes and oil revenues in the Central
Bank of Yemen so that the Government can fulfil its
responsibilities, given that the Government of Yemen
is paying salaries in areas controlled by the Houthis,
whether in the health or the education sector, despite
the very limited resources.
It is therefore the Houthis who loot resources to fund
the futile war, perpetuate it and kill Yemenis. They stole
nearly $16 billion from the Al-Hudaydah branch of the
Central Bank of Yemen. Those oil revenues had been
deposited to pay the salaries of public sector employees,
in agreement with the Office of the Special Envoy. The
Houthis stole that money to fund their absurd war. In a
report last year (see S/2021/79), it is indicated that the
Houthis stole nearly $1.8 billion to wage a futile war
against the Yemeni people. The Houthis use starvation
as a weapon.
In addition, Ms. Al-Deen made some claims
regarding the situation of the Yemeni communities
in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. We in the
Government of Yemen value the solidarity of the Saudi
Arabia with the Yemeni people under these difficult
circumstances. The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has
hosted millions of Yemeni refugees who fled Yemen
as a result of the futile war being waged by the Houthi
militias and has been providing support to the Yemeni

21-2883919/21

S/PV.8878

The situation in the Middle East

people at all stages. We highly value such support in
the economic and humanitarian spheres. The Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia is one of the largest supporters and
donors to the Yemen humanitarian response plan,
which is known to all. Yemen values that support. We
also value the support and care given to millions of
Yemenis living in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. The
Kingdom provides facilities to all those residing on its
territories. What Ms. Al-Deen said is not true, and she
should review the sources on which she relied.
Today’s meeting coincides with the anniversary
of Yemen’s two glorious revolutions, on 26 September
1962 and 14 October 1963. We believe that the Yemeni
people who led those two revolutions are even more
resolved and determined today to secure a victory that
restores the glory of the two revolutions, preserve their
gains and resume their course to achieve the desired
goals and aspirations.
The return of the clerical theocratic system, in its
Houthi version, represents a threat to the present and
future of Yemen and to international and regional peace
and security. Those militias are a tool in the hands of
the regime in Iran, holding our nation hostage to Iranian
interventions. They export the Iranian experience to
Yemen, and the people of Yemen reject that experience.
They are an armed group that believes in the imposition
of its divine right by armed force, not through freedom,
democracy and the peaceful handover of power.
The Yemeni Government reiterates its commitment
to peace and ending the war, which has brought
about only suffering and destruction. We hope that
the efforts by Mr. Grundberg will contribute towards
reaching a just and sustainable peace based on the
agreed terms of reference for a political solution
in Yemen — that is, the Gulf Cooperation Council
Initiative and its Implementation Mechanism, the
outcomes of the National Dialogue Conference and
the relevant Security Council resolutions, in particular
resolution 2216 (2015).
Throughout the past period, we have positively
engaged with efforts towards peace. The Government
has made many concessions to end the conflict. However,
the Houthi militias have rejected all initiatives and
proposals aimed at ending the war. The Government
of Yemen was open and prepared to cooperate; in turn,
the Houthis continued their futile war and launched
ballistic missiles that destroyed civilian homes and
camps for displaced persons, including killing of
20/21

14/10/2021

women and children, in addition to their use of drones
and prohibited mines.
Last month (see S/PV.8854) we spoke about the grave
violations committed by the Houthi militias against
civilians and displaced persons, with the members of
the Security Council expressing their condemnation
of those crimes, which are flagrant violations of
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law, in addition to being in defiance of the
will of the Council and the international community.
However, that did not deter the Houthi militias
from continuing, and even stepping up their crimes.
What fault did they bear, the three children, the women
and the civilians who fell victim to the Houthi ballistic
missile attack on Al-Rawda district in Ma’rib? What
fault did the pregnant woman bear who lost both her legs
while tending her sheep, as a result of the explosion of
a mine planted by the Houthis in Al-Hudaydah? Or the
thousands of civilians and families, including children
and cancer and kidney patients who are besieged in the
Al-Abdiyah district of Ma’rib? What are they guilty
of? Terrorist attacks and genocide are being committed
against civilians and displaced persons in that district.
There is no access to food, medicine, baby formula,
potable water or oil products. Mines are being planted,
and civilians are now facing death from starvation.
All of that is taking place while the world shamefully
stands by in silence.
The city of Taiz has lived under siege and
indiscriminate daily sniping by the Houthi militias for
seven years. From this rostrum, I call on the Security
Council and the human conscience to assume their
responsibilities and take urgent measures to lift the
siege on Al-Abdiyah district, stop terrorist crimes and
save thousands of civilian lives — women, children,
sick and injured people.
The world was witness to the horrific crime
involving the execution of nine innocent Yemeni
citizens by the Houthis, including an adolescent, in
a brutal and barbaric manner similar to the crimes
of Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Sham. Before that, the civilian airport in Al-Makha
was targeted and destroyed. The Governor’s house in
Ma’rib, inhabited by innocent women and children,
was also hit with missiles. Civilian infrastructure and
objects in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi Arabia have
been repeatedly attacked by drones, most recently the
21-28839

14/10/2021

The situation in the Middle East

Abha International Airport, the city of Khamis Mushait
and King Abdullah Airport in Jazan.
All of that reveals the true intentions of the militias.
They are bent on war and the destruction of Yemen and
killing Yemenis in order to carry out Iran’s expansionist
agenda in the region, without realizing that arms and
violence will not bring about peace but instead generate
new cycles of conflict and war that will produce more
victims and reprisals.
The international community must speak up and
shoulder its responsibility to put an end to this Houthi
arrogance, stop the bloodshed and destruction and
allow for the delivery of humanitarian aid and an end
to the suffering of the Yemeni people. It must bring
pressure to bear on the Houthi coup militias and their
sponsors, as well as ensure the implementation of the
relevant Security Council resolutions. If the Council
does not exercise the necessary pressure on the Houthis
and their sponsor Iran to choose peace, then the world
and the Council will not be able to save millions of
Yemenis from the repercussions of the world’s worst
humanitarian crisis.
All those continuing crimes and violations by the
Houthi militias against Yemenis are messages to the
international community and to the Council confirming
that those militias do not believe in peace and that they
can only survive in the quagmire of war, destruction
and bloodshed.
We renew our call to the Council to protect civilians
and save them from the scourge of war and direct
targeting with ballistic missiles and heavy weapons,
as well as to condemn the Houthi militias’ violations
of international humanitarian law, international human
rights law and other humanitarian norms.
We have listened many times to Mr. Rajasingham
in the Council about the extent of the suffering Yemenis
are experiencing today and about the potential effects
should the Houthis not stop their war and accept the
ceasefire as the most important step towards alleviating
human suffering. I take this opportunity to commend
the role of the United Nations and the relief and
humanitarian workers in Yemen. We call on then to
further their partnership with the Government of Yemen
to achieve our common goal of mitigating the human
suffering. We also renew our call to the international
community to increase funding for the humanitarian
response plan and ensure direct support to the Yemeni

S/PV. 8878

Government in order to provide services and address
economic and development challenges. We also call on
the international community and international donor
institutions to support the efforts of the Government
to achieve stability and economic recovery, including
through the disbursement of humanitarian aid funds
through the Central Bank of Yemen — a measure
that does not require allocating more funding and
will directly enhance the value of the Yemeni riyal
and support the purchasing power of citizens, thereby
alleviating the human suffering that is taking millions
of Yemenis to the brink of starvation.
The return of the Prime Minister and several other
members of the Government to the temporary capital
in Aden is a clear expression of the Government’s
determination to work in even the most difficult
circumstances to enhance security and stability and
provide services to the Yemeni people, as well as an
explicit expression of its sincere intention to implement
the remaining provisions of the Riyadh agreement,
which constitutes a road map and guarantee for uniting
the ranks. Its implementation today, not tomorrow,
should support restoring State authority and addressing
the dangers facing everyone. We underscore that acts
of terrorism and sabotage, the latest of which was the
attempt to target the Governor of Aden and the Minister
of Agriculture last Sunday, will not dissuade the Yemeni
Government and its people from confronting the coup,
restoring State authority and proceeding to address and
confront economic challenges.
Finally, we have talked a great deal in the Council
about the FSO SAFER oil tanker and warned about a
potential oil spill or explosion. The Council held two
special meetings on the matter, but unfortunately
the Houthis did not change their using of the tanker
to blackmail the international community. While
reiterating the Government’s readiness to contribute to
all efforts that save Yemen, the region and the world
from the danger posed by the tanker, we warn against
falling into the Houthi’s trap by proposing new solutions
that will enable the militias to delay and blackmail for
years to come. We therefore call on the Council to take
decisive practical steps to put pressure on the Houthi
militias to stop their procrastination and allow the
United Nations technical team to access the tanker to
carry out the necessary assessment and repairs without
further delay.
The meeting rose at noon.

21-2883921/21
