Complaint by Zambia against South Africa

Resolution 393 (1976)

Decisions

ot' 30 July 1976

At its 1944th meeting, on 27 July 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Zambia, South
Africa and Mauritania to participate, without vote, in the
discussion of the item entitled "Complaint by Zambia
against South Africa: letter dated 19 July 1976 from the
Charge d'affaires a.i. of the Pennanent Mission of Zambia
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/12147)". 41

The Security Council,
Taking note of the letter of the representative of the
Republic of Zambia contained in document S/ 12147, 4 1
HaPing co11sidered the statement of the Minister for
foreign Affairs of the Republic of Zambia,4 3
Gravely concerned at the numerous hostile and unprovoked acts by South Africa violating the sovereignty, air
space and territorial integrity of the Republic of Zambia,
resulting in death and injury of innocent people as well as
in the destruction of property and culminating on 11 July
1976 in an armed attack which resulted in the regrettable
loss of 24 innocent lives and the injury of 45 other persons,
Gravely concerned at South Africa's use of the international Territory of Namibia as a base for attacking
neighbouring African countries,
Reaffirming the legitimacy of the struggle of the people
of Namibia to liberate their country from the illegal
occupation of the racist regime of South Africa,
Convinced that the continuance of the deteriorating
situation in southern Africa could constitute a threat to
international peace and security,
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
prevention and removal of threats to international peace
and security,
Recalling its resolution 300 ( 1971) of 12 October 197 J ,
which, inter alia, called upon South Africa to respect fully
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Zambia,
Bearing in mind that all Member States must refrain in
their international relations from the threat or use of force
against the territorial integrity or political independence of
any State, or in any other manner inconsistent with the
purposes of the United Nations,
I. Strongly co11demns the armed attack of South Africa
against the Republic of Zambia, which constitutes a
flagrant violation of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Zambia;
2. Demands that South Africa scrupulously respect the
independence, sovereignty, air space and territorial integrity
of the Republic of Zambia;
3. Demands that South Africa desist forthwith from the
use of the international Territory of Namibia as a base for
launching armed attacks against the Republic of Zambia
and other African countries;
4. Commends the Republic of Zambia and other "frontline" States for their steadfast support of the people of
Namibia in their legitimate struggle for the liberation of
their country from illegal occupation by the racist regime
of South Africa;
S. Declares that the liberation of Namibia and Zimbabwe and the elimination of apartheid in South Africa are
necessary for the attainment of justice and lasting peace in
the region;

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to a delegation of the United Nations Council
for Namibia, composed of the Acting President of that
body and the representatives of Botswana and Yugoslavia.

At its 1945th meeting, on 28 July 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Cuba, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Liberia, Madagascar, Uganda and Zaire to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At the same meeting, the Council also decided to extend
an invitation, under rule 39 of the provisional rules of
procedure, to a representative of the Special Committee
against Apartheid.

At the same meeting, the Council further decided, at the
,equest of the representative of Benin,4 2 to extend an
invitation to Mr. 0. T. Emvula under rule 39 of the provisional rules of procedure.

At its 1946th meeting, on 29 July 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Botswana, Mozambique, Qatar, Sierra Leone and Yugoslavia to participate,
without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 1947th meeting, on 30 July 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Guinea to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.

At its 1948th meeting, on 30 July 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representative of Mauritius to participate, without vote, in the discussion of the question.
41 Ibid., Supplement /or July, Au1n1st and September J 9 76.
42 Ibid., document S/12154.

43 Jhid., Thirty-J1rsr Year, 1944th llll'Ctini:.

12

6. Further declares that, in the, event of South Africa
committing further acts of violation of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Zambia, the Security Council will
meet again to consider the adoption of effective measures,

in accordance with the appropriat~ provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Adopted at tire 1948th meeting by
14 votes to none, with I abstention
(United States of America).

Complaint by Lesotho against South Africa
Co11sideri11g that the decision of Lesotho constitutes an
important contribution to the realization of United Nations
objectives in southern Africa in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations,
Taking note of the urgent and special economic needs of
Lesotho arising from the closure of the border posts,
l. Endorses General Assembly resolution 31 /6 A, which,
i11ter alia, calls upon all Governments to deny any form of
recognition to the so-called independent Transkei and to
refrain from having any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or other bantustans;
1. Commends the Government of Lesotho for its decision not to recognize the so-called independence of the
Transkei:
3. Condemns any action by South Africa intended to
coerce Lesotho into according recognition to the bantustan
Transkei;
4. Calls upon South Africa to take immediately all
necessary steps to reopen the border posts;
5. Appeals to all States to provide immediate financial,
technical and material assistance to Lesotho so that it can
carry out its economic development programmes and
enhance its capacity to implement fully the United Nations
resolutions on apartheid and bantustans;
6. Requests the United Nations and the organizations
and programmes concerned, in particular the United
Nations Development Programme, the World Food Programme and all the United Nations specialized agencies, to
assist Lesotho in the present situation and to consider
periodically the question of economic assistance to Lesotho
as envisaged in the present resolution;
7. Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with
the appropriate organizations of the United Nations system,
to organize, with immediate effect, all forms of financial,
technical and material assistance to the Kingdom of
Lesotho to enable it to overcome the economic difficulties
arising from the closure of the border posts by South Africa
owing to the refusal of Lesotho to recognize the so-called
independence of the Transkei;
8. Further requests the Secretary-General to keep the
situation under constant review, to maintain close liaison
with Member States, regional and other intergovernmental
organizations, the specialized agencies and international
financial institutions, and to report to the Security Council
at its subsequent meeting on the question;
9. Decides to remain seized of the question.

Decisions

At its 1981st meeting, on 21 December 1976, the Council
decided to invite the representatives of Lesotho and
Madagascar to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the item entitled "Complaint by Lesotho against South
Africa: letter dated 16 December 1976 from the Permanent Representative of Lesotho to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/ 12257)" .4 4

At its 1982nd meeting, on 11 December 1976. the
Council decided to invite the representatives of Botswana
and Mauritius to participate, without vote, in the discussion
of the question.

Resolution 402 ( 1976)
of 22 December 1976

17u: Security Council,
Having heard the statement of the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Kingdom of Lesotho on 21 December
1976,4 ~
Grave/v concerned at the serious situation created by
South Africa's closure of certain border posts between
South Africa and Lesotho aimed at coercing Lesotho into
accordir.g recognition to the bantustan Transkei,
Recalling relevant General Assembly resolutions, in particular resolution 341 l D (XXX) of 28 November 1975,
condemning the establishment of bantustans and calling on
all Governments to deny recognition to the bantustans,
Recalling further General Assembly resolution 31/6 A of
26 October 1976, on the so-called independent Transkei
and other bantustans, which, inter alia, calls upon all
Governments to deny any form of recognition to the
so-called independent Transkei and to refrain from having
any dealings with the so-called independent Transkei or
other bantustans,
Noting with appreciation the decision of the Government
of Lesotho aot to recognize the bantustan Transkei in
compliance with United Nations decisions,
44 Ibid., Thirty-first Year, Supplement for October, November
and December I 9 76.
45 /bid.. Thirty-first Year, 1981st meeting.

Adopted at the 1982nd meeting by consensus.

13
