-------------------~-----------------------Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee
(a) If he enters employment under a fixed-term contract for

at least one year but less than five years ;
(b) If he has completed one year of continuous employment,
provided that he is not eligible under article II.1 to become
a participant, provided that he is under sixty years of age,
and provided further that his associate participation is not
excluded by his contract of employment. For the purposes of
this article, intervals of not more than thirty calendar days in
the period of employment shall not be considered as breaking
the continuity of employment.
2. The participation of an associate participant shall cease
when he reaches the age of sixty.
3. An associate participant shall be eligible for a disability
benefit under article V and his survivors to a death benefit
under article VII.1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7, and to a child's benefit
under article VIII. He shall not be entitled to a retirement
benefit under article IV nor to a withdrawal benefit under
article X, and his survivors shall not be entitled to a death
benefit under article VII.5.
4. Each member 011ganization shall pay monthly into the
Pension Fund, in respect of each associate participant, a contribution equal to 4¼ per cent of his pensionable remuneration,
or such percentage contribution, not to exceed 6 .per cent, as
shall be -determined from time to time by the Joint Staff Pension Board on the basis of actuarial valuations of the Fund
5. Whenever an associate participant is entitled under article II to become a participant, he may elect during the first
year of his participation to brave the period performed as an
associate participant included in his contributory service to the
extent to which he pays into the Pension Fund a sum or sums
equal to the contributions he would have paid as a participant,
plus interest. at the rate designated in article XXIX. Payment
into the Pension Fund of amounts sufficient to meet the Fund's
obligations, resulting from the inclusion of such additional
contributory service, which are not met by payments made by
the participants shall be made by the member organization
designated for that purpose in accordance with arrangements
concluded by the member organizations, provided that payment
has not already been made by a member organization for the
period concerned.
6. All other provisions of these regulations consistent with
the present article shall be applicable to associate participants,
mutatis mutandis, in the same manner as to a participant. Such
administrative rules as shall be considered necessary for the
implementation of this article shall be established by the
Joint Staff Pension Board.

Supplementary article C (new text)
For the purposes of these regulations, the International
Atomic Energy Agency shall be treated as if it were a
specialized agency.

1202 (XII). Pattern of conferences

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 694 (VII) of 20 December
1952,
Recognizing the need to establish further clear procedures for the planning and financing of meetings and
conferences of the United Nations in order that the
most rational and economical use may be made of the
resources of the Organization,
1. Decides that a fixed pattern of conferences to
govern the places and dates of the meetings of United
Nations bodies shall come into force on 1 January 1958
for a period of five years;
2. Decides further that, as a general principle,
meetings of United Nations bodies shall be held
at the established headquarters of the bodies concerned,
with the following exceptions :

39

(a) The regular summer session of the Economic
and Social Council may be held each year at Geneva,
during which period no other United Nations body
shall meet there ;
( b) Not more than one functional commission of
the Economic and Social Council, to be determined
by that Council, in addition to the Commission on
Narcotic Drugs, may meet annually in Geneva; a session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs may, in
exceptional circumstances, and by decision of the Economic and Social Council in consultation with the
Secretary-General, be held in New York; in such
years one other functional commission may meet in
Geneva in its place without overlap;
( c) The regular sessions of the Economic Commission for Asia and the Far East and of the Economic
Commission for Latin America as well as meetings of
their subsidiary bodies may be held away from their
headquarters when the commission concerned so decides, subject, in the case of regular sessions of the
commissions, to the approval of the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly ;
( d) The annual session of the International Law
Commission would be held in Geneva without overlapping with the summer session of the Economic and
Social Council ;
( e) Meetings may be held away from the established headquarters of any body in other cases where
a Government issuing an invitation for a meeting to
be held within its territory has agreed to defray, after
consultation with the Secretary-General as to their
nature and possible extent, the additional costs involved;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly every year a basic programme of conferences for the following year established in conformity with the present pattern and after consultation,
as appropriate, with the organs concerned;
4. Decides that as a general rule any meeting, other
than an emergency meeting, not covered by the basic
programme for a given year shall not be held during
that year; the General Assembly nevertheless authorizes the Secretary-General, within a financial limit to
be set annually in the resolution relating to unforeseen and extraordinary expenses, to decide when and
where any body or ad hoe conference not covered by
the basic annual programme shall meet ; in the event
that the decision of the Secretary-General is not accepted, the final decision in the matter shall be taken
by the Assembly at its next regular session;

5. Invites all organs of the United Nations as well
as the specialized agencies to review their working
methods and the frequency and length of sessions in
the light of the present resolution and of the growing
volume of meetings, the resulting strain on available
resources, and the difficulty of effective participation
of members.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.

1203 (XII). Control and limitation
of documentation

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind the present very considerable output of United Nations documents,

40

General Assembly-Twelfth Session

Noting paragraph 57 of the Secretary-General's foreword to the budget estimates for 1958,22
Commending the Secretary-General for his efforts
to present Secretariat documents as concisely as possible, and in setting, as a target figure, a reduction in
length of 25 per cent,
1. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
efforts, in co-operation with Member States, to reduce
the length and amount of documentation produced
during 1958;
2. Suggests for this purpose the target figure of
25 per cent below the 1957 level for the over-all output of such documentation;
3. Decides to establish a Committee composed of
representatives-serving at Headquarters, New York
-of the following Member States: Argentina, Canada,
China, France, Iraq, Mexico, Pakistan, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; the function
of the Committee shall be to consult with and advise
the Secretary-General on the most effective means of
implementing the present resolution, and to report and
make recommendations to the General Assembly at its
thirteenth session concerning methods of achieving
reductions in the over-all output of documentation;
4. Invites the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly before the opening of its thirteenth
session on the steps taken and on the nature and extent
of the reductions achieved.
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
1204 (XII). Cost estimates for maintaining the
United Nations Emergency Force

The General Assembly
Takes note with approval of the observations and
recommendations contained in the twenty-sixth report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions to the twelfth session of the General Assembly. 23
729th plenary meeting,
13 December 1957.
18

lbid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 5 (A/3600).
Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 65, document
A/3761.
11

1220 (XII). Report of the Economic and Social
Council ( chapter X)
The General Assembly
Takes note of chapter X of the report of the Economic and Social Council.24
730th plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
1221 (XII). Schedule of post adjustments: classification for the United Nations Office at
Geneva
The General Asse-mbly,
Recalling its resolution 1095 (XI) of 27 February
1957 relating to the United Nations salary, allowance
and benefits system,
Having considered the reports of the Secretary-General25 and of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions 26 on the question of_ the
classification of Geneva in the schedule of post ad1ustments established under that resolution,
Noting the action taken by the World Health Assembly and the Governing Body of the International
Labour Office in approving class 2 in the schedule of
post adjustments to be applied to the staff of those
agencies serving at Geneva,
1. Decides to apply, as of 1 August 1957, class 2 in
the schedule of post adjustments to United Nations
staff members at Geneva;
2. Decides to maintain 1 January 1956 as the date
from which changes in the cost of living at Geneva
should be measured in determining the post adjustment for United Nations staff members;
3. Expresses the hope that the appropriate legislative
authorities of the International Labour Organisation
and the World Health Organization will reconsider,
in the light of paragraph 2 above, the date from which
changes in the cost of living at Geneva should be
measured in determining the post adjustment for the
staff members of those agencies.
731st plenary meeting,
14 December 1957.
.. Ibid., Twelfth Session, Supplement No. 3 (A/3613).
""Ibid., Twelfth Session, Annexes, agenda item 41, document
A/C.5/711.
.. Ibid., document A/3721.

1222 (XII), Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1957
The General Assembly,
Having examined the supplementary estimates for the financial year 1957,
1. Requests the Secretary-General, by means of savings where possible and by deferring expenditure where
saving cannot be realized, to achieve a reduction of $107,200 in the supplementary estimates;
2. Approves the general recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions as set out in its twenty-fourth report to the General Assembly at its twelfth session, 27 concerning the
supplementary estimates for the financial year 1957;
3. Resolves that for the financial year 1957 the amount of $50,815,700 appropriated by its resolutions
1083 (XI) of 21 December 1956 and 1100 (XI) of 27 February 1957 be increased by $2,359,000 to a total of
$53,174,700;
4. Considers that the estimate for miscellaneous income for 1957 previously set at $2,531,010 by General
Assembly resolutions 1083 (XI) should be increased by $625,000 to $3,156,010;
5. Resolves that, subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 above, the revised appropriation for the
financial year 1957 shall be as follows:
-n

Ibid., agenda item 40, documents A/3750 and Add.I.
