A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/53/182
2 February 1999

Fifty-third session
Agenda item 93 (e)
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Second Committee (A/53/608/Add.5)]
53/182. Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least Developed
Countries for the 1990s
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 52/187 of 18 December 1997, in which it decided to convene the Third
United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries at a high level in the year 2001,
1. Welcomes and accepts the generous offer of the European Union to host the Third United
Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in the first semester of the year 2001;
2. Designates the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
as the Secretary-General of the Conference, and requests him to make all necessary preparations for the
Conference;
3. Decides to convene the Third United Nations Conference on the Least Developed Countries in
the first semester of the year 2001 for a duration of seven days, at a venue and time to be determined by
the Secretary-General of the Conference in consultation with the European Union;
4. Requests the Secretary-General of the Conference to organize the intergovernmental preparatory
committee (in two parts) and the three expert-level preparatory meetings referred to in paragraph 1 (b) of
resolution 52/187;
5. Also requests the Secretary-General of the Conference, in consultation with Member States and
in cooperation with relevant organizations and agencies, to organize well-focused sectoral and thematic
99-76519

/...

A/RES/53/182
Page 2

or, where appropriate, country-specific round-table meetings during the Conference to contribute to the
work of the Conference;
6. Calls upon the United Nations Development Programme and the World Bank to link the
forthcoming round-table and consultative group meetings to the preparatory process of the Conference,
and to ensure that they make substantive contributions to the Conference;
7. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme, in his capacity as
Convenor of the United Nations Development Group, to ensure the full involvement in the preparations
for the Conference of United Nations resident coordinators and country teams in the least developed
countries;
8. Calls upon the Secretary-General of the United Nations, in consultation with the SecretaryGeneral of the Conference, to convene an inter-agency meeting to ensure the full mobilization and
coordination of all relevant organs, organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, as well as other
relevant institutions, for the purpose of preparations for and follow-up to the Conference;
9. Invites the Secretary-General of the Conference to make arrangements, on the basis of
consultations with Member States, to facilitate the involvement of civil society, including nongovernmental organizations and the private sector, in the preparatory process and the Conference;
10. Decides to defray the cost of participation of two government representatives from each least
developed country in the intergovernmental preparatory committee meetings and the Conference itself
through the use of extrabudgetary resources and, should those resources prove to be insufficient, to
consider all other options;
11. Requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations, with the assistance of concerned
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, including the Department of Public Information
of the Secretariat, to take necessary measures to intensify their public information efforts and other
relevant initiatives to enhance public awareness in favour of the Conference, its objectives and its
significance;
12. Also requests the Secretary-General of the United Nations to submit a report to the General
Assembly at its fifty-fourth session on the state of preparations for the Third United Nations Conference
on the Least Developed Countries.
91st plenary meeting
15 December 1998
