S/2002/355

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
5 April 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 3 April 2002 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to convey the attached communication, dated 26 March
2002, which I have received from the Deputy Secretary-General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-31886 (E)

080402

*0231886*

S/2002/355

Annex
Letter dated 26 March 2002 from the Deputy Secretary-General
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization addressed to the
Secretary-General
In accordance with United Nations Security Council resolution 1088 (1996), I
attach the monthly report on the operations of the Stabilization Force (SFOR) (see
enclosure). I would appreciate your making the report available to the Security
Council.
(Signed) Alessandro Minuto Rizzo

2

S/2002/355

Enclosure
Monthly report to the United Nations on the operations of the
Stabilization Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 28 February 2002) there were just over 17,800
troops deployed in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Croatia, with contributions from all
the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) allies and from 15 non-NATO
countries.
2.
The Stabilization Force (SFOR) continues to contribute to the maintenance of
a safe and secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to monitor compliance by
the Entity Armed Forces, to conduct inspections and the consolidation of weapons
storage sites, to provide support to the international organizations working in
theatre, to provide support to the Federation authorities in collecting weapons and
ammunition in the framework of Operation HARVEST and to monitor possible
terrorist-related threats throughout the country.
3.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina remained stable during the period
under review, although the incidence of inter-ethnic tension and violence continues
to be a matter of concern.
4.
Incidents reported in February involving inter-ethnic violence included: the
shooting of a Bosniac by a Bosnian Croat in Mostar; threats by a crowd of Bosniacs
to kill a group of Bosnian Serbs visiting a graveyard near Zenica should they return;
the beating of the Sarajevo Mufti and four Muslims by five unidentified youths; a
grenade attack carried out by a Montenegrin on an Albanian barracks in the
Gorancani refugee camp at Bos Petrovac; the assault of two Bosniac women by
Bosnian Serb students at Bratunac high school; and the shooting and severely
wounding of a Bosniac by three Croats in Vitez.
5.
At the end of February, SFOR conducted a large-scale search for Radovan
Karadzic near Celibici, south-east of Foca. 1 Although the operation was
unsuccessful, a significant amount of weapons and munitions were found in the
area. A second significant find of ammunition, land mines, grenades and mortar
rounds was uncovered near Pelagicevo, west of Brcko.
Cooperation and compliance by the Parties
6.
The Armed Forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina carried out normal training
activities during the reporting period in substantial compliance with the military
provisions of the Peace Agreement. On 21 February, SFOR representatives met the
Vojska Republika Srpska (VRS) Air Force Chief to discuss, inter alia, the intentions
of the VRS air force to resume air defence training in the near term, to include antiaircraft artillery, man-portable surface-to-air missiles, radar and search and rescue
(SAR).
7.
The Stabilization Force Commander (COMSFOR) has suspended a second
Bosniac General suspected of involvement in weapons smuggling activities in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and in Kosovo. Seven members of the Federation Army
and police force, including the two generals, are to appear in court to face charges of
arms smuggling.
__________________
1 The Russian Federation confirms its special position on this matter.

3

S/2002/355

8.
During the period under review, SFOR troops conducted 71 weapons storage
site inspections: 31 Bosnian Serb; 14 Bosniac; 20 Bosnian Croat; and 6 Federation.
9.
SFOR troops monitored 276 training and movement activities during the
reporting period: 118 Bosnian Serb; 104 Bosniac; 20 Bosnian Croat; and 34
Federation.
10. Eight mine-clearing activities were monitored over this period: 2 Bosnian
Serb; and 6 Bosnian Croat.
Cooperation with international organizations
11. Within capabilities and in accordance with its mandate, SFOR continues to
provide assistance to the international organizations in theatre, including the United
Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH), the International Police
Task Force (IPTF), the Office of the High Representative (OHR), the International
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, the Organization for Security and Cooperation
in Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR).
12. SFOR continues to support the follow-up to the OHR’s arbitration decision on
the Dobrinja suburbs of Sarajevo. The eviction of Bosnian Serb families from the
area is continuing. No incidents have been reported.
13. SFOR assisted local police and IPTF following an incident in Multi-National
Division (North) when a person armed with an automatic weapon intervened and
stopped a court officer from escorting a prisoner from Zenica to Banovici. The
assailant and the prisoner both fled but were apprehended later in the day.
14. SFOR provided support for the visit of the Chief Prosecutor of the
International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to Banja Luka on 15 February
when she urged the authorities of the Republika Srpska and the Yugoslav leadership
to find and extradite Karadzic and Mladic to The Hague.
15. SFOR representatives held discussions at the civil airports in Mostar, Banja
Luka and Sarajevo with a view to making progress on normalizing civil aviation
activities throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 1 February, SFOR representatives
attended the ceremony in Zagreb to mark the had-over of air traffic services in the
medium level of airspace of the Sarajevo flight information region (FIR) to the civil
authorities.
Outlook
16. The overall security situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is expected to remain
stable.

4
