S/PV.9215

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9215th meeting

Friday, 9 December 2022, 10.40 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Kamboj/Mr. Ravindran. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Gilroy
Ms. Kinyungu
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Heimerback
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2022/892)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-73442 (E)
*2273442*

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Ms. Keita (spoke in French): I thank the Security
Council for giving me the opportunity today to present
the report the Secretary-General on the situation in the
Democratic Republic of Congo (S/2022/892).

The meeting was called to order at 10.40 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2022/892)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Burundi, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who is joining
today’s meeting via video-teleconference.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Bintou Keita,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
Head of the United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
Mr. Peter Mutuku Mathuki, Secretary General of the
East African Community; and Ms. Rebecca Kabuo,
activist and member of Lutte pour le changement.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/892, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Ms. Keita, Mr. Mutuku Mathuki,
Ms. Kabuo and by Ambassador Lilly Stella Ngyema
Ndong, Deputy Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations, on behalf of the Chair of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
I now give the floor to Ms. Keita.
2/30

09/12/2022

I welcome the presence of His Excellency
Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; Mr. Peter Mutuku
Mathuki, Secretary General of the East African
Community; and Ms. Rebecca Kabuo, of Lutte pour
le changement.
The Democratic Republic of the Congo continues
to show resilience despite the immense challenges
the country faces; its encouraging macroeconomic
performance attests to that. On 3 December, the
National Assembly adopted the 2023 finance bill, which
amounts to $15.8 billion, a sharp increase from the
$10.7 billion in 2022. That budgetary increase brings
hope. It is essential to finance the reforms necessary
for the gradual improvement of the well-being of the
Congolese people, such as to the security sector.
With that ambitious budget, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is also giving itself the necessary
means to prepare for the 2023 electoral deadlines. In
the same way, we must welcome the publication of
the electoral calendar, which sets the presidential and
legislative elections for 20 December 2023 and details
the provisions and measures taken by the Independent
National Electoral Commission to start voter registration
on 24 December. While it was well received as a whole,
the publication of the electoral calendar was challenged
by some opposition and civil society actors, in a
context of tension and growing political polarization,
sometimes leading to very violent speeches.
I would therefore like to reiterate the readiness of
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO),
through its good offices, to promote a constructive
dialogue among stakeholders in order to strengthen
a political environment conducive to a transparent,
inclusive and peaceful electoral process, which would
see the active but non-violent participation of all political
actors, as well as that of women and young people.
(spoke in English)
While the 2023 elections could make a significant
contribution to the strengthening of democracy and
stability in the Democratic Republic of Congo, one
of the most significant challenges they face today is
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

insecurity. Over the past weeks, the security situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has deteriorated dramatically. Since 20 October,
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has resumed
hostilities and extended its control over Rutshuru
territory, in North Kivu. MONUSCO has continued to
provide operational, logistical and tactical support both
to the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo (FARDC) and the Congolese National
Police in their efforts to confront armed groups in
eastern Congo, most notably the M-23. Robust patrols,
including jointly with the FARDC and the Congolese
National Police, have been conducted in and around
Goma to ensure the protection of civilians and deter
the M-23 from advancing further towards the city. In
addition, the Mission has set up additional communityalert networks in areas vulnerable to M-23 attacks in
Rutshuru and Masisi territories.
The reports of atrocities and other crimes committed
by the M-23 and other armed groups are gravely
concerning. The preliminary findings of the United
Nations fact-finding team established in response to
allegations of human rights abuses and violations of
international humanitarian law by M-23 combatants in
Kishishe and Bambo, Rutshuru territory, North Kivu,
has confirmed that at least 131 civilians — 102 men,
17 women and 12 children — were either shot dead or
killed by bladed weapons by M-23 fighters. During
the same period, M-23 combatants raped at least 22
women, one of whom was killed after the rape. The
team also confirmed the destruction of four schools and
the occupation of two others by M-23 combatants.
I call on the Council to condemn those crimes with
the utmost severity. The Council must also demand the
immediate release of the survivors who were prevented
from leaving the area by the M-23. Those responsible for
those and other atrocities against the civilian population
must be prosecuted, nationally or internationally.
The M-23’s offensives have further exacerbated the
ongoing humanitarian crisis. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo already plays host to the highest number of
internally displaced persons anywhere on the African
continent, owing, in large part, to the activities of the
Allied Democratic Forces (ADF), the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo and the Zaire, Twirwaneho
and Mayi-Mayi groups. An estimated additional 370,000
people have been uprooted and forced from their homes
in the latest round of hostilities involving the M-23.
The outbreak of intercommunal violence in the western

S/PV.9215

provinces of Mai-Ndombe and Kwilu has also led to
the displacement of more than 50,000 people, mostly
women and children. In that dangerous environment,
and despite persistent access constraints, particularly
in areas under the control of the M-23 and the ADF,
humanitarian actors continue to deliver indispensable
aid and life-saving services. I therefore urge partners to
actively continue supporting the humanitarian response
plan, as well as the specific North Kivu response plan.
Encouragingly, regional initiatives have intensified
in response to the increasing insecurity and regional
tensions. I welcome the vigorous diplomatic efforts
undertaken by the African Union mediator and
Chair of the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, President João Lourenço, to support
the implementation of the Luanda road map. I also
commend the East African Community Facilitator,
former President Kenyatta of Kenya, for the progress
made in the context of the Nairobi process, with the
support of the Chair of the East African Community,
President Ndayishimiye of Burundi.
Since April, the Mission has provided political,
technical, and logistical support to the joint Democratic
Republic of the Congo-Kenya secretariat for the
holding of consultations between the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Congolese
armed groups, including the third round of consultations,
which resumed on 28 November in Nairobi and ended
on 6 December. The Mission facilitated the transport of
more than 180 delegates from remote locations in North
Kivu, South Kivu, Ituri, Maniema and Tanganyika to
enable them to participate in the talks and deployed 14
staff members to Nairobi to help manage deliberations.
Regional leaders and national stakeholders,
including representatives of 50 armed groups and civil
society delegations, worked day and night to craft
durable solutions to the cycle of conflict that has caused
much suffering in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I am particularly encouraged by the
central role in those consultations played by Congolese
women, who constituted more than 40 per cent of the
civil society delegations, including 10 survivors of
sexual violence. It is also noteworthy that the three
provincial coordinators of the National Programme
for Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reinsertion and Stabilization and the programme’s
deputy national coordinator also actively participated
in the deliberations.

22-734423/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The 23 November mini-summit held in Luanda
agreed on measures to address the situation in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, including
a timetable for the implementation of priority actions
to achieve the cessation of hostilities, the immediate
withdrawal of the M-23 from occupied areas and
the coordination of efforts under the Luanda and
Nairobi processes. The communiqué also envisions an
operational role for MONUSCO, in coordination with
the East African Community regional force and the ad
hoc verification mechanism.
It is imperative that the outcomes of those initiatives
be faithfully implemented by all parties. First and
foremost, the M-23 must cease all hostilities and
withdraw from occupied areas in accordance with the
road map set out in the final communiqué of the Luanda
mini-summit. I echo former President Kenyatta’s call on
all other armed groups to lay down their weapons and
adhere to the National Programme for Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community
Reinsertion
and
Stabilization. I call on all partners to support the efforts
of the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to operationalize the programme.
Meanwhile, the East African Community regional
force has continued to deploy in support of the political
processes. I welcome the recent meeting among the
leadership of the FARDC, the East African regional
force and the MONUSCO force from 29 to 30 November,
held in Goma, which was a major step forward towards
the establishment of an effective framework for
coordination and information-sharing, including with
the Burundian and Ugandan forces already deployed in
South Kivu, North Kivu and Ituri
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has formally requested MONUSCO’s active
involvement in the implementation of the Luanda minisummit communiqué. The East African Community
regional force is also counting on the Mission’s
assistance to enable its full and timely deployment.
I reiterate the Mission’s readiness to leverage the
capabilities at its disposal in support of the regional
peace initiatives under way, in line with its mandate and
in compliance with the Human Rights Due Diligence
Policy on United Nations support to non-United Nations
security forces. I look forward to engaging further with
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and regional partners to define the Mission’s
role in efforts to translate the decisions taken in the
4/30

09/12/2022

framework of the Luanda and Nairobi processes into
reality on the ground.
(spoke in French)
The deteriorating security situation in the country
is also increasingly putting MONUSCO’s operations at
risk. The attack on our operational base in Minembwe,
South Kivu, by members of the Twirwaneho armed group
on 30 September, resulting in the death of a Blue Helmet,
attests to that. I condemn that attack, the perpetrators
of which must be prosecuted to the full extent of the
law, and I once again express my condolences to the
decedent’s family and the Government.
MONUSCO remains fully committed to helping
the Congolese Government and people create
the conditions for its responsible and sustainable
withdrawal from South Kivu, North Kivu and Ituri
provinces where it remains deployed. The example
of Tanganyika province provides valuable lessons for
such a responsible departure. Since the withdrawal
of MONUSCO, United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes have developed a transition plan for the
provinces with the Congolese authorities in defining
the gains to be preserved. The plan includes the gradual
deployment of Congolese National Police officers to
ensure the continuity of security work, particularly in
the context of the upcoming closure of the MONUSCO
base in Bendera, in Tanganyika province. The transition
in Tanganyika therefore demonstrates the benefits of
good coordination between the Congolese authorities
and MONUSCO.
In that regard, I welcome the Government’s
initiative of contacting the Mission on 15 November
to begin a reassessment of the transition plan. During
my meetings on 7 December with the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs, who is among
us today, I reiterated the United Nations readiness to
step up our cooperation in a spirit of partnership on the
revision of the joint transition plan in order to define
concrete actions for the effective implementation
of priority benchmarks related to the creation of
minimum security conditions for the responsible and
sustainable withdrawal of MONUSCO. We also agreed
that sustained cooperation with State institutions and
mutual trust are critical to ensuring that the Congolese
authorities and United Nations agencies, funds and
programmes can do what is necessary to build peace
after the Mission’s departure.
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Regrettably, the Mission continues to operate in
the east of the country in a hostile environment fuelled
by feelings of disappointment, frustration and despair
among the people, owing to the deteriorating security
situation. We have made numerous efforts to rebuild
trust with them, especially young people, and with the
Congolese authorities, and we will continue to do so.
We will also continue to work with the authorities to
put in place the conditions needed to implement the
mandate in the spirit and letter of the status of forces
agreement and ensure the safety of the Mission’s
personnel and facilities.
In conclusion, I would again like to thank all troopand police-contributing countries and their personnel,
as well as national and international civilian personnel,
for their invaluable support at this difficult time for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We remain fully
mobilized through our assistance to the authorities
and the defence and security forces and through our
support to the peace and electoral processes and to the
Government for a responsible and sustainable transition.
The President: I thank Ms. Keita for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Ngyema Ndong.
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong (Gabon) (spoke in French): I
have the honour to deliver this statement in my capacity
as Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
As my last briefing on the work of the Committee
was on 30 September (see S/PV. 9142), I would like to
take this opportunity to provide a brief overview of my
visit, with some Committee members, to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and Uganda, from 7 to
18 November, the sixth visit by a Chair of the Committee
since 2015. My predecessors last visited Rwanda in
2016, Uganda in 2019 and the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in 2021. Last month’s visit took place in a
challenging political and security context marked by
increasing tensions between the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Rwanda, specifically in connection
to the actions of two sanctioned armed groups, the
Mouvement du 23 mars and the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda. In that charged environment, the
sanctions regime and the notification requirement have
been invoked against the United Nations as a whole and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in particular.

S/PV.9215

Overall, in the discussions that took place during
the delegation’s visit to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I mainly emphasized that since March 2008 the
arms embargo has applied only to armed groups, not
the Government of the country, and that the notification
requirement is binding only on supplier States and
not the Democratic Republic of the Congo itself. Our
discussions in Kinshasa also focused on the security
situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo, the activities of armed groups, the alleged
links between the Allied Democratic Forces sanctioned
armed group and Da’esh, the illegal exploitation
of natural resources and human rights violations,
including conflict-related sexual violence.
The Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo has several times reiterated its call for the
notification requirement to be waived for the transfer
of military equipment and the provision of military
training to the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC), a demand echoed
by some civil-society organizations. I clarified that the
arms embargo applied only to armed groups, not the
Government, but that the notification requirement for
supplier States remained, although there has been a
reduction in the kinds of weapons for which notifications
are required — the remaining categories are listed
in the annex to resolution 2641 (2022). However, the
Congolese authorities noted that banks and shippers,
concerned about reducing risks, were reluctant to be
involved in the financing and transport of weapons and
ammunition about which the Committee had previously
been notified.
With regard to the sanctions list, I asked my
interlocutors during my visits to Kinshasa, Kigali and
Kampala if it would be useful to add new names to the
list, particularly since no new names have been added
since February 2020. Several interlocutors underscored
the importance of sanctions of individual people as a tool
for stigmatization and of listing individuals and entities
involved in human rights violations, including for acts
of sexual violence and the illegal exploitation of natural
resources. No names were provided to my delegation
for possible sanctions designations. Besides that, with
regard to the exploitation of natural resources, concerns
remained about the trafficking of gold and other natural
resources through neighbouring countries as a way to
enable armed groups to continue controlling territory
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.

22-734425/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

With respect to the monitoring mechanism
concerning the March 2017 murders of Michael Sharp
and Zaida Catalán, two members of the Group of Experts,
and the four Congolese citizens who accompanied
them, we received a detailed briefing from the Auditor
General of the FARDC in Kinshasa on the investigation
into the whereabouts of the four Congolese, as well
as on the appeal proceedings that began at the end of
October in Kinshasa regarding the people found guilty
in January of murdering the Experts.
In conclusion, I would like to note that I intend
to submit the report of my visit to the members of
the Committee in due course. I hope that delegations
will soon be able to discuss the report and
its recommendations.
The President: I thank Ambassador Ngyema
Ndong for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Mutuku Mathuki.
Mr. Mutuku Mathuki: I thank you, Madam
President, for the opportunity to brief the Council.
At the outset, I want to confirm that the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is a full member of the East
African Community (EAC), which it joined in July
after the Heads of State of the Community met and
confirmed that position, and subsequently committed
to contributing to reconciliation and lasting peace.
Determined to find a swift and lasting solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, they
held a number of consultative meetings, known as
conclaves. So far, three of them have been held, first
based on the fact that the Heads of State agree there
should be a continuing political dialogue between local
armed groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and its Government to address the sources of grievances
that have led to the proliferation of armed groups and
the resulting current level of insecurity. That is what
they call the political track.
The second track formed within the conclaves is
a military one, aimed at ensuring that a military and
security enforcement approach is deployed to guarantee
the disarmament of armed groups, either voluntarily
or forcefully, and the repatriation of non-Congolese
armed groups to their States of origin upon their
disarmament. The two processes were designed to be
undertaken simultaneously, under the leadership of the
East African Community, with the full ownership of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. The time frame
given for those processes was 24 months.
6/30

09/12/2022

The EAC-led Nairobi process was designed as
follows: first, to urgently address issues of trust and
confidence-building; second, to ensure the cessation of
hostilities and promote voluntary disarmament; third, to
enhance the participation of all citizens in the country’s
political processes; fourth, to prioritize the participation
of all citizens in the country’s development; fifth, to
find a lasting solution to the issue of citizenship for
certain categories of residents in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo; sixth, to enable the Government
to repatriate foreign armed groups; seventh, to ensure
the reintegration of combatants into society; and eighth,
to ensure the repatriation and settlement of Congolese
refugees and internally displaced persons.
At the twenty-second summit of the East African
Community Heads of State, held in Arusha, on 22 July,
it was decided to mainstream the Nairobi process into
the East African Community by invoking the provisions
of article 4 of the East African Community Protocol
on Peace and Security. Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, former
President of Kenya, was appointed as a facilitator to
oversee the implementation of the Nairobi process,
as provided for in the modality for the establishment
and functioning of the East African Community Panel
of Eminent Persons and the deployment of special
envoys and representatives. Terms of reference for the
facilitator were approved, and it was directed that a
special fund be created to support the implementation
of the process on both the political and military tracks.
It was also decided to expeditiously deploy a joint
regional force in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. I can confirm that the Republic of Burundi,
the Republic of Kenya and Uganda are already on the
ground, with South Sudan expected to follow suit.
The East African Community Heads of State met
again recently on the sidelines of the twenty-seventh
Conference of the Parties to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change. They
decided to hold the third inter-Congolese dialogue
on 6 December, at which a number of developments
occurred. There were 60 armed groups present, as
well as 20 civil society groups, including women’s
organizations and community leaders. The event was
facilitated by President Kenyatta. In attendance were
the Chair of the East African Community, President
Evariste Ndayishimiye of Burundi; President William
Ruto of the host country, Kenya; President Paul
Kagame of Rwanda; President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo of the Democratic Republic of the Congo;
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and President Museveni of Uganda — demonstrating
the political commitment prevalent in the process.
I therefore urge the Council to take note of
the following.
As the Secretary General of the East African
Community, I communicated the decisions taken at
the summit to the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission and sent a copy to the Secretary-General
of the United Nations, followed by another letter
to them both in which I requested that they join and
support the process, as it will require a great deal
of resources. I want to thank the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the President of
Senegal for contributing $1 million, as did both the
President of Angola and the President of the Republic
of Kenya. That is what has largely been used to take
care of the meetings that are being held, in particular
the meeting just held in Nairobi on 6 December.
I addressed a letter to the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission and the Secretary-General of the
United Nations to request support, including financial
support, for both the political and military tracks, as
the estimated cost of the East African Communityled Nairobi process is expected to be approximately
$350 million. It is proposed that the political process
will require approximately $150 million, while the
military track will require close to $200 million.
Once again, we request the Security Council to
support the implementation of the National Programme
for Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reinsertion and Stabilization. I would like to see
whether we can create a form of operational synergy
between the East African Community regional force
and MONUSCO, which would be very helpful. It is
important for the Security Council to look into that
possibility and review MONUSCO’s mandate in that
context to see how such a synergy can be created between
the East African Community regional force, the East
African Community-led Nairobi process as a whole and
the activities of MONUSCO on the ground. The total
amount I mentioned of approximately $350 million is
the estimated the cost of the two processes over the next
24 months. Without further ado, I have made available
copies of the letters that I wrote to the Chairperson
of the African Union Commission and sent to the
Secretary-General of the United Nations.
I would like to once again briefly reaffirm that the
EAC Heads of State are firmly committed to ensuring

S/PV.9215

that peace and security prevail in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. I call upon the Council, as a very
important organ of the United Nations, to get involved
and support the East African Community in securing a
permanent solution in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is our collective responsibility, not only
as the East African Community but also as members
of the Security Council, to work together to seek
ways to secure a permanent solution to the challenges
facing citizens in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. In that connection, I want to commend
the Heads of State of the East African Community for
the efforts they have undertaken, as well as Council
members for making the time to listen to how the
prevailing situation is developing. I think that what is
now actually required is to see how MONUSCO and
the East African Community Nairobi-led process, as
well as the East African Community regional force, can
work together to ensure that we reach a solution in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The President: I thank Mr. Mutuku Mathuki for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Kabuo.
Ms. Kabuo (spoke in French): I thank you, Madam
President, for giving me the opportunity to share today
some concerns and recommendations with regard to
my country, the Democratic Republic of Congo. My
name is Rebecca Kabuo and I am a member of the Lutte
pour le changement (LUCHA), which is a non-partisan,
non-violent, citizen-led movement that was launched
in 2012 in Goma to call for respect for democracy
and basic human rights in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
My statement today will focus on three main points:
first, the current situation in the country, particularly
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo;
secondly, the impact of this conflict on women and the
crucial importance of women’s political participation;
and thirdly, the role of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO).
The resumption of fighting between the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and the
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) has aggravated tensions
in the region, as well as the humanitarian crisis and
the incidence of human rights violations in the country.
As the region strives to find peaceful solutions to
the conflict, Rwanda — through its President, Paul

22-734427/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Kagame — has continued to provide military support
to the M-23. On 29 and 30 November, in the villages
of Kishishe and Bambo, in Rutshuru territory, North
Kivu province, M-23 rebels engaged in retaliatory
attacks on civilians, killing 102 men, 17 women and
12 children — 131 civilians in total. They also raped at
least 20 women and five girls. Moreover, the presence
of East African Community troops has created great
anxiety among a population already under a constant
threat of violence and abuse of its basic rights. Civilians
are being forced to pay taxes to armed groups to
guarantee their safety in their own homes, and those
who cannot pay have no choice but to flee or risk being
subjected to violence. The situation has also increased
the economic vulnerability of the women living in the
context of conflict.
It is well known that this conflict has had a
profoundly negative impact on women and girls. While
gender-based violence increased by 80 per cent in
2021, justice remains elusive, as the perpetrators are
rarely punished. Even the Security Council, which
has the ability to set an example for the rest of the
world through its sanctions regime, has listed no new
individuals or groups since 2020. The conflict has
displaced more than a million people, a significant
proportion of them women and girls. Women are not
only at increased risk of sexual and gender-based
violence, but also of diseases such as cholera. Women
human rights defenders continue to be targeted by
combatants and subjected to death threats, arbitrary
arrests, abductions, sexual and gender-based violence,
office raids and stigmatization — all in the context
of a culture of impunity for human rights violations.
It is essential to monitor and report attacks on women
human rights defenders and peacemakers, especially
since the existing protection mechanisms have proved
to be ineffective and gender-blind.
Unfortunately, there are no consultations with
civil society on the electoral calendar. With elections
now scheduled for December 2023, it will be crucial
to consider the current context of women and young
people’s political participation in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the civic space they
are afforded to express themselves. Women continue to
face fundamental barriers to accessing polling stations,
particularly in remote rural areas. When they do have
access to voting booths, women must contend not only
with the reluctance derived from gender stereotypes but
also practical obstacles, such as the lack of information
about voting procedures. And women candidates have
8/30

09/12/2022

to contend with a lack of information and of funding
in addition to gender-based violence. The Independent
National Electoral Commission recently announced
an electoral timetable giving voters only 30 days to
register. Such a short time frame is an additional
obstacle to the full participation of internally displaced
persons and people with disabilities as well as women,
particularly in conflict areas.
The third round of peace talks on the Democratic
Republic of the Congo was held in Nairobi last week.
In the round of Nairobi peace talks held in April, there
were no women among the 30 delegates from the armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. And
while the most recent talks held in November included
women and civil-society representatives and women
leaders, those leaders continue to reiterate how vital
it is for the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and MONUSCO to ensure that they are
fully and meaningfully included in all current and
future negotiations, given the active and essential role
that women have played and continue to play in local
peace efforts.
Anti-MONUSCO sentiment is growing among
the population. Our people are frustrated by the fact
that although MONUSCO has been present in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo for more than
20 years, it has still not been able to end the cycle of
violence or provide adequate protection and security
for civilians in accordance with its mandate. Moreover,
after at least 12 people were shot to death during the
anti-MONUSCO protests in July, the population is even
less accepting of the Mission.
A clear and well-communicated transition plan from
MONUSCO with significant gender-related elements is
crucial to finding a sustainable solution to the conflict.
We expect that such a plan, in addition to meeting
the current standards for gender inclusion, will go a
step further by clearly articulating the ways in which
women’s civil-society perspectives will inform how we
evaluate progress. In that regard, we urge the Security
Council, first, to ensure that MONUSCO provides full
protection to the civilians, especially women and girls,
who continue to live in the conflict-affected areas.
MONUSCO must also monitor and report on all human
rights violations, including violations against women.
Secondly, the Security Council must ensure that
all the parties, including the Congolese armed forces,
the East African Community regional force and
MONUSCO, act within a framework of strict respect
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

for human rights and international humanitarian law.
We also ask that the Council ensure that all three of
their mandates are clear and complementary, and that
no human rights violations are committed in the course
of their operations.
Thirdly, the Security Council must ensure that
women participate fully and equally at all stages of the
electoral process, beginning with voter registration.
We also ask MONUSCO to ensure the protection not
only of citizens exercising their right to vote but also
of women candidates, observers and administrators,
especially in conflict areas.
Fourthly, the Security Council should remind the
stakeholders in the peace process, including in the
Nairobi and Luanda processes, that the full and active
participation and involvement of women is essential
to achieving sustainable peace, as set out in resolution
1325 (2000).
Fifthly, we call on the Security Council to ensure
that MONUSCO’s withdrawal is gradual, accountable
and conditioned on respect for human rights and the
protection of civilians. Another specific condition
for the withdrawal should be the establishment of a
mechanism for security-sector reform.
Sixthly, we call on the Member States of the
Security Council to urge the Congolese authorities to
begin reforming the security sector, particularly the
army, as soon as possible in order to enable it to protect
the Congolese people and their property throughout the
country’s territory.
The ever-growing challenges facing the Congolese
people may seem insurmountable, but in times like
these we must not despair. As representatives of civil
society, we have not lost hope that peace will one day
come to our country. However, we will only succeed
if the international community, including the Security
Council, supports us in our efforts.
The President: I thank Ms. Kabuo for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Ms. Keita for her briefing and especially
for her work as Head of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO). I welcome the participation in
this meeting of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister

S/PV.9215

for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Let me express my horror at the reports of violence
committed by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
against civilians in Kishishe and Bambo. These acts
must not go unpunished. We welcome the willingness of
the authorities of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to bring the perpetrators to justice. France condemns
these abuses in the strongest possible terms.
I would like to emphasize three points. First, the
M-23 offensive must end, and the fighting must stop.
France condemns in the strongest possible terms the
actions of the M-23, an armed group sanctioned by the
Security Council and the European Union. Yesterday,
the European Union took restrictive measures against
one of the leaders of the M-23. Despite the ceasefire
called for in the Luanda agreement of 23 November, the
continued violence undermines peace efforts. We call
on the M-23 to cease hostilities, withdraw immediately
and unconditionally from the territories it is occupying,
and end this violation of international law.
France is concerned by reports of Rwandan support
for the M-23 in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We recall the Security Council’s demand that all
external support to the M-23 and other armed groups
active on the territory of the Democratic Republic
cease immediately. We also call on all armed groups to
immediately cease fighting and engage without delay in
the disarmament process.
To enable de-escalation, France supports regional
efforts through the Nairobi and Luanda processes.
France welcomes the conclusion of the third round of
inter-Congolese consultations in the framework of the
Nairobi process. The commitments made must lead to
concrete results. To this end, it is urgent that international
partners provide financial support for the new National
Programme for Disarmament, Demobilization,
Community Reinsertion and Stabilization.
In order to fight against armed groups that refuse
to give up their weapons, a professional, trained and
equipped Congolese army and police force must be
strengthened. France will continue its support in
terms of training, through the war college in Kinshasa
and by training the Forces Armées de la République
Démocratique du Congo in jungle combat.
Secondly, humanitarian and development support
efforts must be strengthened. The humanitarian
response plan remains underfunded. Increased support

22-734429/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

from the international community is urgently needed.
The European Union will provide half a million euros
for the humanitarian response for displaced people in
Mai-Ndombe and Kwilu provinces, which have recently
experienced violent confrontations.
The protection of human rights, the fight against
hate speech and against impunity are the keys to lasting
peace. This is why the European Union yesterday
sanctioned Justin Bitakwira, member of the National
Assembly of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
for his calls for hatred and discrimination against the
Banyamulenge community.
The protection of children and the promotion of
women and youth are levers for development. France
will continue to support these objectives. The French
Development Agency has just mobilized €37 million
to continue to reduce gender inequalities and create
access to quality education in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
France welcomes the publication of the electoral
calendar and the announcement of the date of the
elections scheduled for 20 December 2023. We reaffirm
our support for the Democratic Republic’s Government
in organizing transparent, free and inclusive elections
within the timeframe set out in the Constitution.
The conditions must be created for them to be held
throughout the territory of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Thirdly, the partnership between the Government
and the United Nations must continue. The Security
Council is preparing to renew MONUSCO’s mandate.
For over 20 years, this operation has been saving lives
and supporting the stabilization of the country. It has
adapted its presence in the country by withdrawing
from the Kasais and Tanganyika. France supports a
reassessment of the transition plan in a spirit of trust and
partnership between the Mission and the Government.
MONUSCO must continue to robustly protect
civilians in conflict-affected provinces. To do so,
its personnel must be protected from attacks and
misinformation. I pay tribute to all of the Mission’s
personnel who have fallen this year in the service of
peace. Those responsible for their deaths must not
go unpunished.
Finally, as the East African Community
regional force begins to deploy, coordination and
information-sharing with MONUSCO will be key.
Both forces must pursue a common objective:
10/30

09/12/2022

protecting civilians in compliance with international
humanitarian law.
France will continue to support the Democratic
Republic of the Congo on the path to peace. Our compass
clearly shows the way: the promotion of stability
and dialogue, and the defence of the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the countries of the Great Lakes region.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): First and foremost, I would like to extend my
gratitude to Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita for her briefing today. I would also like
to thank Ms. Kabuo and Mr. Mutuku Mathuki, for their
briefings. I welcome the participation of the Foreign
Minister of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, who
is in the Chamber with us today.
We also appreciate the recent report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) (S/2022/892), which outlines the
persistent security challenges facing the Mission and
the people of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The report documents 845 human rights violations and
abuses, but let us be clear: documentation is only the
first step. We urge the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to hold all those who violate
human rights accountable.
The United States would also like to thank
Presidents Lourenço and Ruto, as well as former
President Kenyatta, the facilitators of the East African
Community-led Nairobi process, for their leadership in
trying to broker a solution to the ongoing crisis in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
We reiterate our call for armed groups to lay down their
weapons, stop terrorizing the people of the country and
join the Nairobi process as a means of seeking political
solutions to their grievances.
We also urge all parties to adhere to the agreement
reached in Luanda on 23 November. The armed group
Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) must withdraw its forces
in preparation for disarmament. Make no mistake:
M-23 presents a serious threat to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and to the broader region.
Moreover, its forces are dangerously close to Goma, the
base of operations for the international community’s
humanitarian assistance in the eastern part of the
Democratic Republic. We must protect this population
centre and the indispensable services it provides, and
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

we call on the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
MONUSCO to work together to proactively protect
Goma from attack, invasion or from being surrounded
by the M-23. We also call for the cessation of all State
support for armed groups, including but not limited
to Rwanda’s assistance to M-23. We urge Council
members to consider how this kind of support runs
afoul of existing sanctions regimes.
With regard to sanctions relating to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the United States acknowledges
requests from the region and from the Democratic
Republic to relax certain measures, in particular the
requirement that arms transfers to the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo be notified in
advance to the Security Council. Let me stress that
the current sanctions measures do not prevent the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
from obtaining military equipment for defensive needs
or from undertaking critical security sector reforms.
To the contrary, the measures are carefully tailored to
ensure that the Government can provide security for its
citizens. We therefore urge Member States conducting
military operations in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo to formally notify the Council of their
actions, in line with existing sanctions resolutions. We
encourage such military forces to closely coordinate
with MONUSCO and humanitarian actors.
Finally, as negotiations on the MONUSCO mandate
get under way, the United States would like to urge the
Security Council to deliver a strong and unified signal
to support MONUSCO. The Government, civil society
and the international community all have important
roles to play in addressing the challenges in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, but MONUSCO in
particular is doing essential work protecting civilians
and supporting Government institutions, even as it
implements a gradual transition. The United States
will work to ensure that the mandate clearly supports
a conditions-based withdrawal, not an arbitrary end
date. We will do everything in our power to make clear
that we stand behind Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Keita and MONUSCO.
Ms. Heimerback (Norway): I thank the briefers for
their insights.
Let me start by once again reiterating our deep
concern for the security and humanitarian situation
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
its regional implications. Violations of international
humanitarian law and violations and abuses of human

S/PV.9215

rights, involving brutal attacks against the civilian
population, including children, continue to be reported.
We are appalled by the killing of civilians in the
massacre in Kishishe village in North Kivu last week.
I would like to convey my sincere condolences to the
Government and the people of the Democratic Republic
of Congo. The violence must end. Norway condemns
the actions of all armed groups. We appeal to all groups
and countries to respect the territorial integrity of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Norway welcomes and supports the regional
political and diplomatic processes led by former
President Kenyatta and President Lourenço, aimed at
stabilizing the eastern Democratic Republic of Congo
and easing tensions in the Great Lakes region. We are
encouraged to hear about the progress made.
We stress the importance of coordination
between the regional processes and the efforts of
the United Nations, including between the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and
the East African Community regional force. We also
welcome the ongoing efforts to establish a coordination
mechanism between those forces.
The Democratic Republic of Congo has made
progress regarding women’s participation. Yet there
is potential for increased direct and meaningful
participation. Women must be heard and included in
important political processes, including the ongoing
regional peace processes. It is the Government’s
responsibility to ensure that women be included and
that they not be exposed to reprisals for their work.
Sanctions alone cannot resolve the conflict, but
they are an important tool to be used to improve the
stability of the region and the security of the population.
Sanctions are only as good as we make them, and we
encourage all parties to respect the sanctions regime
and to continuously strive to improve it. We recall
that designated individuals and entities should include
those involved in acts that undermine the peace,
stability or security of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, particularly those that constitute human
rights violations or abuses or violations of international
humanitarian law.
MONUSCO will exit the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, but the exit must be responsible and sustainable.
The protection of civilians, including children, must
remain a priority task. To that end, it is essential that

22-7344211/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the transition process be guided by the situation on the
ground, not by timelines or political considerations.
The return to peace and stability will require the
commitment of all. Norway looks forward to working
with all the relevant stakeholders for an inclusive and
peaceful transition and for sustainable peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative Bintou
Keita and Deputy Permanent Representative of Gabon
Lilly Ngyema Ndong for their briefings. We listened
carefully to the Secretary General of the East African
Community (EAC), Mr. Peter Mathuki, and the
representative of Congolese civil society, Ms. Rebecca
Kabuo. We welcome the participation of the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Mr. Christophe
Lutundula Apala Pen’apala, in this meeting. We believe
that the participation of the Permanent Representatives
of Burundi and Rwanda to the United Nations
is important.
The Security Council was compelled to meet more
frequently than usual this year to discuss the situation
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. That is proof
of the seriousness of the events unfolding in the country,
which the Security Council cannot ignore. That is
particularly true in the country’s eastern provinces,
where, due to the activities of numerous illegal armed
groups, violence and lawlessness have become a daily
norm for the local population. The increased activities
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) have significantly
exacerbated the situation. The latest offensive by the
M-23 against the city of Goma resulted in a worsening
humanitarian crisis, an increasing number of internally
displaced persons and refugees and the suffering of
ordinary people.
At the same time, other illegal armed groups, such
as the Allied Democratic Forces, the Coopérative pour
le développement du Congo, the Mayi-Mayi, the Forces
démocratiques de libération du Rwanda, the Résistance
pour un État de droit au Burundi and so on, continue
their atrocities. The list is so long that a statement
would not suffice to name them all.
We are deeply concerned about the tragic events in
Kishishe on 29 November. We hope that the Security
Council will learn all the details of what happened,
and that the perpetrators of the crime will be found and
held accountable.
12/30

09/12/2022

We see that Kinshasa and countries of the region
remain committed to overcoming the instability in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome
their efforts undertaken in the context of the Nairobi
process and through the Luanda mediation process.
We deem it important to link and coordinate those
efforts in order to normalize the situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes
region as a whole. We believe that it is important that the
deployment of the EAC regional force be supported by
the international community, in close coordination with
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and under Kinshasa’s leadership. That is significant.
The commitment to national unity and the unification
of all political forces in the interests of achieving the
common goal of sovereignty over the country’s entire
territory represent the logical continuation of the daily,
persistent and difficult struggle for independence to
which Patrice Lumumba referred and for which the
Congolese people underwent great sacrifices, suffering
and hardship. That remains as relevant today, and the
international community should provide assistance in
support of such goals.
We believe that it is necessary to keep working to
find political and non-violent solutions for the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Such solutions will
make it possible to achieve a comprehensive cessation
of hostilities and create genuine conditions for lasting
stability. Consistent with such an approach, we welcome
the commitment of the Congolese Government to
negotiating with armed groups as part of the political
track of the Nairobi process, another round of which
concluded just a few days ago.
We also believe that it is important to continue
efforts to implement of the basic fundamental
agreements, such as the 2013 Peace, Security and
Cooperation Framework Agreement for the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the Great Lakes Region.
The countries of the region should reach an
understanding that their well-being and prosperity
ultimately depend primarily on how well they get
along with each other. We call on our African friends
to display will and commitment to a constructive,
good-neighbourly dialogue in order to find solutions to
African challenges. Without that, it will be impossible
to cope with the humanitarian crisis, satisfy mutual
concerns in the military-political field, guarantee
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

sustainable socioeconomic development and deepen
integration processes.
We would like to once again reaffirm our
principled support for the efforts of MONUSCO, its
leadership and its peacekeepers, as well as the activities
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General for the
Great Lakes Region, Mr. Huang Xia. With regard to
the implementation of the joint transition plan for the
gradual drawdown of the Mission and its withdrawal
from the country, we believe it is necessary to first
take into account the evolution of the situation on
the ground in order to proceed step by step and in a
responsible manner.
We hope that, together with the peacebuilding
Mission and partners in the region, the people of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo will be able
to regain control over the situation and advance
towards the implementation of long-overdue
measures in order to address the root causes of what
is happening in the east of the country, the reasons
for which are well known. We are all aware that the
country’s great wealth of natural resources attracts
a lot of attention and brings out the worst in some
people. We have faith that the people of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo will find a way to transform the
riches of their subsoil not into a source of problems
but rather into a tool for ensuring national well-being.
Provided that the international community is supportive
and not indifferent, that will be feasible.
In conclusion, I welcome the publication of the
electoral timetable and the continued efforts of the
Government of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to prepare for the elections to be held in December
2023. That is an important milestone for the country,
demonstrating both the commitment of the Congolese
people to achieving peaceful development and their
desire to participate in political processes and to lead
a normal and sane life as citizens of their country.
We also advocate an expeditious adjustment of the
sanctions regime imposed on the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo so as to provide
its security sector with all the necessary means for
achieving its objectives.
Mr. Gilroy (Ireland): I thank Special
Representative Keita, Secretary General Mutuku
Mathuki and Ms. Rebecca Kabuo for their briefings.
We also welcome the participation in today’s meeting
of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV.9215

After nearly two years as a member of the Security
Council, Ireland is more worried than ever about the
situation in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
across the Great Lakes region. Ireland is appalled by the
recent massacre of civilians in Kishishe and Bambo. We
condemn those heinous acts in the strongest terms. The
persistent and growing violence and insecurity in the
eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo perpetrated
by the Mouvement du 23 mars, the Allied Democratic
Forces, the Coopérative pour le développement du
Congo and many other armed groups is alarming. That
insecurity is creating a complex crisis and exacerbating
the already dire humanitarian needs, with widespread
displacement contributing to food insecurity and
malnutrition. We reiterate the importance of protecting
civilians and humanitarians and delivering assistance
to the millions of people affected.
Human rights violations and abuses continue to
be perpetrated by armed groups and State forces.
It is deeply disappointing that the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004) is unlikely to receive a briefing from Special
Representative Patten on the appalling situation in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo in relation to
sexual violence in conflict. The persistently high rates
of gender-based violence and conflict-related sexual
violence cannot continue to be ignored. We must
end impunity and hold those responsible to account.
We fully support the role of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) in the protection
of civilians. The rise in hate speech, misinformation
and anti-United Nations rhetoric is worrisome. It is
imperative that all citizens be protected and that the
Mission continue to deliver on its mandate. In that
regard, we recognize the importance of community
engagement and communication with partners.
Ireland has consistently highlighted that regional
cooperation is paramount for peace, yet tensions
continue to increase, with the deteriorating relationship
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Rwanda being of particular concern. We reiterate the
importance of the Peace, Security and Cooperation
Framework and commend the Member States of the
region, the International Conference on the Great
Lakes Region, the African Union, the East African
Community (EAC), the United Nations Regional
Office for Central Africa and the Southern African
Development Community for their efforts to ease
tensions and build trust. The Nairobi and Luanda

22-7344213/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

processes are important platforms for peace, and we
urge all parties to engage fully in that regard. The
deployment of the EAC regional force must have clear
objectives. Close cooperation and coordination with
MONUSCO and other actors is essential. The regional
force must comply with international law, including
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law.
The disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
process is fundamental for lasting peace in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We welcome the
expansion of the National Programme for Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community
Reinsertion
and
Stabilization, including the elaboration of the provincial
operational plans. There is a need to scale up their
implementation if they are to make the needed impact
on building sustainable peace. Effective transitions
are also essential for sustaining peace. The review of
the joint transition plan must recognize the need for
continued engagement, cooperation and inclusion, and
must set clear and realistic transition benchmarks and
indicators that are aligned with realistic timelines. We
urge the full inclusion of civil society in the transition
process, as well as the provision of space for women’s
full, equal and meaningful participation across all
efforts towards peace.
As the 2023 elections draw closer, we welcome
the continued efforts of the Independent National
Electoral Commission and reiterate the importance of
respecting and protecting human rights. We condemn
all dangerous rhetoric, hate speech and incitement to
violence, whatever the medium. The United Nations
can and should play an important role in supporting
the timely holding of transparent, credible, inclusive
and peaceful elections. It is vitally important to ensure
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women
in that process, as well as to ensure that young people
are fully engaged. We hope that, unlike the past two
years, the next 24 months will bring progress on the
path to peace for the people of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Ms. Keita for her efforts
and detailed briefing today. I also thank Ambassador
Biang for leading the recent visit of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004) to
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Rwanda and
Uganda. I thank Ambassador Ngyema Ndong for
briefing the Security Council on the details of that visit,
14/30

09/12/2022

in which the delegation of my country participated. The
briefing gave us a clearer picture of the status of the
implementation of sanctions on the ground. I welcome
the participation in today’s meeting of the Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, as well as the
representatives of Rwanda and Burundi. I also wish to
express my appreciation for the briefing by Mr. Mathuki
and the efforts of the East African Community to
support peace and stability in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region.
I would like to express the deep concern of the
United Arab Emirates at the escalation of insecurity in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo following
the attacks by armed groups, which target civilians and
threaten to undermine peace efforts and the progress
achieved by the international community in its
decades-long presence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo. There are also growing concerns about the
rise of hateful rhetoric, in addition to the increasingly
severe humanitarian crisis due to the exacerbation
of the conflict and the continuing rampant spread
of the Ebola virus. As civilians continue to flee, the
numbers illustrate the gravity of the situation. So far,
there are 5.7 million internally displaced persons in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo — the highest rate
of displacement ever recorded in Africa.
As such, the current situation requires the
prioritization of dialogue and a focus on reducing
escalation and tensions, while giving the utmost
importance to the protection of civilians. It is also
imperative to redouble political efforts at the regional
level and make them as inclusive and action-oriented
as possible. In that context, we welcome the continued
efforts of the leaders of the region to harmonize the
Luanda road map with the Nairobi process, as well
as their high-level engagement with actors in Luanda
and Kinshasa.
Given the dire living conditions of the population,
we stress the need to ensure that humanitarian aid
reaches all those in need and affected in the country
in a safe and unimpeded manner. The protection of
civilians and humanitarian workers, as well as the
safety and security of United Nations personnel and
facilities, must remain a priority for the Government of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and MONUSCO.
The situation calls for intensifying efforts to address
the growing spread of hate speech, disinformation
and misinformation, including incitement against the
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

United Nations. We underscore the importance of all
actors contributing to United Nations efforts to refute
misinformation, including by making it clear, for
example, that the Security Council’s arms embargo
is imposed on armed groups, not the Government.
MONUSCO could also consider adopting a new strategy
to address hate speech and disinformation and work to
involve local communities in such efforts.
With regard to the situation of women and girls in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, they require
special attention from the international community,
as we all know they are the primary targets of sexual
and gender-based violence. That requires holding
the perpetrators of such crimes accountable, while
providing adequate protection and support to women
and girls. We reaffirm that ensuring the long-term
protection of civilians requires increased efforts to
create the conditions necessary for the implementation
of the Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Recovery and Stabilization Programme, together
with other projects for reforming the security sector
so that reintegration becomes the sole option for all
armed groups.
In the context of the Council’s readiness to renew
MONUSCO’s mandate in the next few weeks, we
emphasize the Mission’s important role in deterring
the actions of armed groups, on the one hand, and
its engagement with political actors, on the other, in
order to create an environment conducive to holding
the upcoming elections. We acknowledge the Mission’s
important work in facilitating dialogue with and within
local communities to ensure social cohesion in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates will
continue to support the path of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the region towards achieving peace
and stability.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Keita for her very informative briefing, and
above all for her work on the ground. I thank the
Deputy Permanent Representative of Gabon for her
comprehensive briefing in her capacity as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 1533
(2004), concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. I also thank our other briefers, Mr. Mutuku
Mathuki and Ms. Kabuo, for their contributions, and
I welcome Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for
Foreign Affairs Lutundula Apala Pen’apala of the

S/PV.9215

Democratic Republic of the Congo and the delegations
of Rwanda and Burundi to this meeting.
Brazil is a proud contributor to the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
through its peacekeepers, including the Mission’s
Force Commander, General Affonso da Costa, and
a jungle-warfare training team. We have therefore
followed with concern the resurgence of the Mouvement
du 23 mars and the consequent deterioration of the
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo. We are particularly worried by the incidents
of violence against MONUSCO personnel and facilities
that have resulted in the destruction and looting of
equipment and the tragic deaths of peacekeepers and
civilians alike.
Although those acts of violence peaked during
the riots in July, the hostility to the United Nations
presence continues to this day. In late November, for
instance, military and police advisers from missions in
New York were travelling in a MONUSCO convoy in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo when an
angry crowd attacked it by throwing stones. As a result,
the group had to continue their visit in an armoured
vehicle. Such actions are lamentable, and all the more
so because MONUSCO is present on the ground with
the consent of the host country in order to fulfil a
mandate whose number-one priority is the protection
of civilians.
According to a number of reports, the violence
against peacekeepers in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has been fuelled by a deliberate misinformation
campaign by actors who believe that they stand to benefit
in one way or another from the increased tension, either
because they want to scapegoat MONUSCO or because
they could benefit from the Mission’s early departure.
We should bear in mind that the host country has the
responsibility to provide a safe operating environment
for Blue Helmets and Blue Berets. We also want to
point to the cooperation that has been agreed on
between the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and MONUSCO in order to tackle such
campaigns. That is not to say that United Nations
missions should be immune from criticism. Like other
missions, MONUSCO has been actively reaching out to
the local authorities, civil society and the general public
to provide information and listen to local demands.
What is unacceptable is violence that prevents it from
fulfilling its mandate.

22-7344215/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

We believe that MONUSCO’s emphasis on
strategic communications is an important tool for
dispelling misinformation and creating trust among
the local population. We understand that the Mission
has been doing its utmost in that area and that efforts
to reinforce its communications capabilities are under
way. Brazil will work actively to emphasize the
issue in the current renewal talks on MONUSCO’s
mandate. Brazil believes that a streamlined and clearer
mandate would help prevent misunderstandings and
unrealistic expectations.
The situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo presents a disheartening picture
of a long-running conflict whose impact on the
lives of millions of civilians cannot be overstated.
However, there are reasons to be encouraged. I have
in mind in particular the tireless efforts of regional
actors — both neighbouring countries and regional
organizations — dedicated to the cause of bringing
peace to the Democratic Republic of the Congo. In that
context, Brazil commends the diplomatic negotiations
in the framework of the Luanda process, facilitated
by President João Gonçalves Lourenço of Angola, and
the Nairobi process, facilitated by former President
Kenyatta. We take note of the deployment of troops of
the regional force of the East Africa Community. We
emphasize the need for close and constant coordination
and information-sharing between the regional force,
MONUSCO and the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo.
Peace missions do not and should not last
indefinitely. However, their withdrawal should be done
in a responsible and orderly way in order to prevent
reversals of hard-won gains. We take note of the work
of the joint working group on the transition plan. We
hope that the presence of the regional force, continued
diplomatic efforts and the general elections to be held
next year will bring about progress in achieving the
benchmarks set out in the plan.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin
by thanking all our briefers for their remarks today
and welcoming Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs Lutundula Apala Pen’apala to
our meeting.
I will focus on the situation in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, regional efforts,
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and sanctions.
16/30

09/12/2022

The United Kingdom remains deeply concerned
about the security situation in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo, particularly the increased
armed-group violence. We strongly condemn the attack
by the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in Kishishe that
killed 131 civilians, as confirmed by the United Nations
Joint Human Rights Office and MONUSCO. We take
note of the M-23’s statement indicating its members’
willingness to withdraw from their current positions.
We call on them to do so immediately and to uphold
the Luanda ceasefire. We also urge the Government,
with the support of MONUSCO, to use all necessary
measures to prevent further M-23 advances, including
towards Goma.
The humanitarian toll of the violence has been
devastating. We urge all actors to ensure that assistance
reaches the people who are affected, including the
1.29 million newly displaced this year. The United
Kingdom reiterates its full support for the Nairobi
and Luanda political processes. We are delighted to
announce funding provided by the United Kingdom
to support the East African Community (EAC)-led
Nairobi process. We encourage continued dialogue
through the Nairobi process and encourage Congolese
armed groups to participate in it. We welcome the
recently agreed ceasefire in Luanda and urge all parties
to uphold their commitments to ensure that peace
prevails. All support for armed groups must stop,
including external support for the M-23. We call on
the countries of the region to use all means available
to urge an immediate cessation of hostilities and the
immediate resumption of consultations on concrete
steps to de-escalate current tensions.
We welcome the information shared by EAC
Secretary General Mutuku Mathuki today. Both the
EAC force and the armed forces of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must substantively engage with
MONUSCO on the de-confliction of operations in
order to ensure the protection of civilians, as well as
the safety and security of peacekeepers and an effective
implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate. The United
Kingdom fully supports the work of MONUSCO and
commends the Mission and Special Representative of
the Secretary-General Keita for their continued efforts
in increasingly challenging circumstances. We remain
deeply concerned about the widespread anti-MONUSCO
sentiment in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
which undermines the Mission’s ability to implement its
mandate. We encourage the Government of the country
to engage in a structured dialogue with MONUSCO
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

in order to clarify its roles and responsibilities for a
responsible, conditions-based drawdown.
Let me conclude by welcoming the cooperation that
was extended by the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Rwanda and Uganda to the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, during its recent
visit to the region. It is regrettable that Russia has
blocked the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral on Sexual Violence in Conflict from briefing
the Sanctions Committee, particularly since that issue
is a significant problem in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and one that the Government is committed
to working with the international community to tackle.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
welcomes His Excellency Mr. Christophe Lutundula
Apala Pen’Apala, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, and the Permanent Representatives of Rwanda
and Burundi to today’s meeting. We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita and the
other briefers for their briefings.
For some time now, the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo has continued
to advance reforms in key areas and improve its
governance, making progress in stimulating economic
growth, balancing the 2023 elections process,
promoting local development and demobilizing armed
forces, which are all encouraging and deserving of
recognition. Meanwhile, the security situation in the
eastern part of the country has not yet improved, as
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) continues to mount
attacks against the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo, resulting in many casualties
and displacement, exacerbating the humanitarian
crisis and casting a shadow over regional security and
development. It is crucial to de-escalate the situation
and restore stability as soon as possible. All armed
groups, including the M-23, should immediately cease
hostilities, unconditionally lay down their weapons,
withdraw from occupied areas and engage in political
dialogue and the disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration process.
The countries of the region are a security
community, and the parties concerned should resolve
their differences as soon as possible based on respect
for each other’s interests and concerns, through
dialogue and consultations, and should eliminate the
security threat with a range of measures. The leaders

S/PV.9215

of Kenya, Angola and Burundi, among others, through
their good offices and mediation efforts, have promoted
dialogue and engagement among the countries of
the region, thereby making a major contribution to
easing tensions in the area. The recent mini-summit
on peace and security in the eastern region of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo set a timetable for
the withdrawal of the M-23 from occupied areas. A
third inter-Congolese dialogue, held under the Nairobi
process, provided a platform for armed groups to
engage in political dialogue. Those regional efforts
have played an important role in de-escalating the
situation and deserve full recognition. We look forward
to the prompt implementation and effectiveness of the
consensus and outcomes of those meetings.
The international community should continue to
support Africans in their quest for African solutions
to African problems, step up political, humanitarian,
technical and financial support and form synergies with
the countries of the region to promote the restoration
of security and stability in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo as soon as possible. According
to multiple reports, armed groups such as the M-23
possess weapons that are more sophisticated than those
of the security forces of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. That shows the negative impact of the Security
Council’s arms embargo on the security capabilities of
the country’s Government, which defeats the purpose
of establishing the sanctions regime. During the recent
visit by members of the sanctions Committee to the
region, headed by Ambassador Biang, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo again demanded that the Council
lift its arms embargo on the country. China will support
the next draft resolution on renewing the mandate of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and it
also supports the lifting of the notification requirement
for arms imports by the country’s Government.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
Keita, MONUSCO has overcome a series of daunting
challenges and plays an important role in maintaining
regional peace and security. China commends
those efforts. We support the one-year renewal of
MONUSCO’s mandate and hope that the Mission will
streamline and optimize its mandate and devote more
of its resources to its core tasks, such as supporting the
peace process, protecting civilians and maintaining
security and stability. We hope that it will refer mandates
that are beyond its capabilities to the Government of the
country concerned and the United Nations country team

22-7344217/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and, in the light of the actual needs of the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, provide
the necessary technical and logistical support for the
2023 elections.
China encourages MONUSCO to continue
strengthening its communication with the Congolese
Government and all social sectors through various
channels in order to enhance understanding and trust so
as to create the right environment in which MONUSCO
can perform its duties. We also hope that the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will take
effective measures to ensure the safety of peacekeepers.
MONUSCO has now successfully withdrawn from
the Kasaï and Tanganyika provinces. We hope that
MONUSCO will take stock of its successful experience,
continue to communicate with the Government of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, respect its views
and, in the light of the situation on the ground and the
benchmarks for withdrawal, advance the drawdown
plan in an orderly and responsible manner.
Ms. Kinyungu (Kenya): I have the pleasure of
delivering this statement on behalf of the three African
members of the Security Council — Gabon, Ghana and
Kenya (A3).
We thank Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo; Mr. Peter Mutuku
Mathuki, Secretary General of the East African
Community; and Rebecca Kabuo for their briefings.
We also thank the representative of Gabon, as Chair
of the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for the briefing. We welcome His Excellency
Mr. Christophe Lutundula Apala Pen’Apala, Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recognize
the presence of Mr. Claver Gatete, Permanent
Representative of Rwanda to the United Nations, and
Mr. Zéphyrin Maniratanga, Permanent Representative
of Burundi to the United Nations.
Our statement will focus on the political, security
and humanitarian situations.
On the political front, we commend the
Government’s commitment to holding elections in
2023, in accordance with the Constitution. We welcome
the commitment by President Félix-Antoine Tshilombo
Tshisekedi to rebuilding trust and confidence between
18/30

09/12/2022

the Democratic Republic of the Congo and neighbouring
countries. We also welcome regional efforts to
de-escalate tensions and pave the way for lasting peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
We note with concern the heightened tensions
between the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and Rwanda, as well as the use of hate speech,
disinformation and misinformation. We implore both
countries to use the available regional mechanisms to
normalize relations. Both countries need each other for
peace, security and prosperity. We strongly condemn all
forms of social, cultural and political manipulation that
can contribute to mistrust, tension and animosity and
even incite violence. We reiterate that people engaging
in hate speech, disinformation and misinformation
campaigns must be held accountable. We urge for the
various communities’ continued participation and
dialogue in order to contribute to building a climate
of trust and promoting a culture of tolerance, respect
and harmonious relations. That remains the primary
objective of the inter-Congolese peace dialogue.
With regard to the security situation, the A3
strongly condemns terror activities by armed groups,
especially the Mouvement du 23 mars, as well as
the recent massacre of civilians that took place in
Kishishe. We reiterate the need for concerted efforts to
bring an end to all violence and hold the perpetrators
accountable. All of the parties to the conflict must put
a definitive end to the armed conflict and the historical
cycles of violence. Only collectively can they herald a
new chapter in the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo to lay the foundations for peace and the rule of
law. The process of laying the foundation for a stable
and lasting peace requires the effective reintegration of
ex-combatants into the country’s social, economic and
political life. Emphasis should be placed on ensuring that
ex-combatants recognize that reintegration constitutes
a commitment to closing the chapter of armed conflict
as a means for addressing political grievances, making
a resolute contribution to consolidating peaceful
coexistence, preventing a relapse into conflict and
dismantling the conditions that have facilitated the
persistent violence in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
We welcome the support of the United Nations
and the international community for the deployment
of an East African Community regional force aimed
at the demobilization and disarmament of all armed
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

groups, including complementing ongoing political
and diplomatic efforts, as well as the operations of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in support of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo. There is a need to improve
the effectiveness, safety and security of all the forces
deployed on Congolese territory. That calls for setting
up a joint coordination framework under the aegis of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo that supports liaison
in every area of operation, including the protection of
civilians, communications and information-sharing,
operational support, the implementation of the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme and training.
The A3 reiterates its call for all armed groups
to agree on an immediate ceasefire, withdraw from
positions recently taken and utilize the inter-Congolese
peace dialogue. The only sustainable path to peace
and security in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains a political one. We call on the
United Nations and the African Union to enhance
their support for those regional processes in order to
sustain the peace and security efforts. We also call on
the international community to redouble its efforts to
support the Government of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in restoring its State presence and authority
throughout its territory. It is unacceptable that the
Congolese populations are constantly under the threat
of armed groups who loot, terrorize and perpetrate
unspeakable atrocities with impunity.
The A3 underscores the importance of truth,
justice and reconciliation in all peacebuilding efforts.
We encourage the Democratic Republic of the Congo to
continue strengthening the rule of law and ensuring that
social and cultural conflicts can be resolved through
institutional channels, with justice for those taking
part in the process. We urge all international partners
to support the Government’s efforts to establish a
transitional justice system. That commitment will
represent a critical step towards ending the enormous
suffering that the conflict has caused millions of
Congolese men, women and children. The quest for truth,
justice and reconciliation for the victims will ensure
the centrality of the needs of communities affected
by violence. That is essential to the ability of future
generations to understand their origins and identity and
the truth about events that occurred before they were
born, as well as ensuring that they are exempt from any
responsibility for the actions of previous generations. It

S/PV.9215

will contribute to greater social and cultural integration
and inclusion, promote equality and ensure the people’s
full enjoyment of citizenship rights.
The A3 remains concerned about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation, which has left many civilians,
especially women and children, disproportionately
affected. We call on the Secretary-General to enhance
humanitarian assistance to refugees and internally
displaced persons. We underscore the importance
of socioeconomic development in sustaining peace
and alleviating human suffering through poverty
eradication, the promotion of entrepreneurship and the
lawful and sustainable use of natural resources. We
urge for comprehensive social and economic reforms
aimed at fostering structural change, particularly in
conflict-prone areas, overcoming the disparities that
exist between communities and creating the conditions
for a better quality of life and well-being among the
Congolese population.
In conclusion, the A3 commends the efforts of
MONUSCO in promoting peace and security in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We reiterate our
solidarity with its Government and people and reaffirm
our respect for its territorial integrity, sovereignty and
political independence.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Keita,
Secretary General of the East African Community
Mutuku Mathuki and Ms. Kabuo for their briefings
and updates. We welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, as well as the representatives
of the countries of the region, to today’s meeting.
We also thank the Deputy Permanent Representative
of Gabon for her statement on behalf of the Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution
1533 (2004) concerning the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
Since we last met to discuss the developments in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (see S/PV.9142),
the violence and uncertainty have continued despite the
ceasefire announced during the latest mini-summit in
Luanda and the talks held in Nairobi between armed
groups and the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Albania commends the diplomatic efforts
of Angola, Kenya and other regional stakeholders to
defuse the growing tensions in the region and restore
security on the ground. Echoing those mediation efforts,
we reiterate their urgent call for an effective cessation

22-7344219/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of hostilities and for the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23)
to withdraw from all the occupied areas and refrain
from advancing further. It is important for the actors
in the region to refrain from allowing or providing any
support to armed groups, especially external support to
the M-23.
Credible solutions for sustainable peace should be
based on political and diplomatic tools. The inclusive
participation of all Congolese armed groups in the
Disarmament, Demobilization, Community Recovery
and Stabilization Programme is one of those tools. At
the same time, foreign armed groups must immediately
disarm and return to their countries of origin. In that
vein, we welcome the statements issued by the President
and the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo condemning the dangerous rhetoric and hate
speech against ethnic communities and other actors.
We welcome the deployment of Kenyan troops in
Goma. The East African Community regional force is
an important addition to the diplomatic efforts, adding
pressure to armed groups and assisting the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo and
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
in their mandates to protect civilians. It is vital for the
regional force to closely coordinate with MONUSCO
and conduct its operations against armed groups in strict
compliance with international human rights law and
international humanitarian law. We are convinced that
MONUSCO still plays a critical role in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. With the current security,
political and humanitarian situation, the proposed
review of the transition plan should be gradual,
responsible and conditions-based. At the same time,
the safety of peacekeepers must not be in question, and
we look forward to seeing enhanced cooperation with
national authorities in further tackling the campaigns
against and misperceptions about MONUSCO.
In conclusion, in preparation for the 2023 elections,
further measures for improving the democratic space
and freedom of expression are needed, along with the
meaningful participation of women.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, Mexico thanks Special
Representative Bintou Keita, as well as the Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1533 (2004), concerning the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the representative of the East
African Community and Ms. Rebecca Kabuo for their
20/30

09/12/2022

briefings. We also welcome the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the delegations of Burundi
and Rwanda.
Mexico condemns in the strongest terms the attack
of the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) in North Kivu,
which has seriously affected the civilian population and
regional stability. Recent reports of massacres in the
villages of Kishishe and Bambo are clear evidence of
the brutality of that new wave of violence, which must
be fought with all means available. Given that critical
situation and the tensions in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda, we commend regional efforts
in the framework of the Nairobi and Luanda processes.
We urge participants to ensure that those processes
advance in a coordinated and harmonious manner in
order to maximize their positive results. We are firmly
convinced that there are no purely military solutions
and that those regional initiatives should open up spaces
for dialogue in order to address the root causes of the
violence. In that regard, we welcome the conclusion of
the third inter-Congolese dialogue held in Nairobi. We
also support the ceasefire agreement announced at the
most recent mini-summit held in Luanda. In accordance
with the call of the leaders of the region, the M-23 must
lay down its arms and withdraw from the areas under
its control.
Similarly, Mexico continues to be attentive to the
deployment of regional forces within the framework
of cooperation with the East African Community. We
stress that the success of that mission depends, to a large
extent, on its communication and coordination with the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
and the Forces armées de la République démocratique
du Congo. Those operations must comply with
international law, including international humanitarian
law and international human rights law.
With regard to MONUSCO’s exit strategy, we
take note of the steps that have been taken to review
the Mission’s transition plan. Mexico believes that
any possible adjustments to the plan must be guided,
first and foremost, by the protection of the civilian
population, while considering the humanitarian and
security situation. It is also essential that the transition
be conducted in accordance with conditions on the
ground and that it be gradual and not rushed. We also
stress the importance of the prompt implementation
of the Demobilization, Disarmament, Community
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Recovery and Stabilization Programme, as well as the
security sector reforms. Both are key to dismantling
the armed groups and creating professional State
institutions that assume their responsibility to protect
the population and guarantee peace. By the same logic,
it is crucial to continue to combat the illicit trafficking
in arms that end up in the hands of groups that defy
State authority. We welcome the adoption of a timetable
for the 2023 presidential and parliamentary elections,
which should be a step towards a more robust and
inclusive governance.
In conclusion, Mexico reiterates its full support for
the work of MONUSCO, which has faced extraordinary
challenges this year. We believe that the work of the
Mission continues to be fundamental to the stability of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region.
That is why we will participate constructively in the
renewal of its mandate.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of India.
I thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Ms. Bintou Keita, and the Secretary General
of the East African Community, Mr. Peter Mutuku
Mathuki, for their briefings. I also thank Ms. Rebecca
Kabuo for presenting civil society’s perspective to the
Council. Similarly, I also welcome the presence of
the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo at our
meeting today.
India remains concerned about the volatile
security situation in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The activities of armed groups have
continued unabated, resulting in the killing of
civilians, the displacement of the population and a dire
humanitarian situation. The Mouvement du 23 mars
(M-23) is expanding its territorial control in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo, and its movement
towards Goma is indeed a matter of deep concern. In
the past, we have seen how Goma’s capture by armed
groups led to large-scale devastation and casualties.
The long-drawn cycle of violence in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot continue in
perpetuity. Support for armed groups — external and
internal — must cease immediately. We also note with
concern the increase in the scale of the attacks carried
out by the Allied Democratic Forces, including the use
of improvised explosive devices. The threat of terrorism
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and the region

S/PV.9215

cannot be ignored either, given the established terrorist
links within armed groups.
Lasting solutions to conflict hinge on enduring
diplomatic efforts. We welcome the role played by
the wider region in opening up the political space for
dialogue. The decisions taken at the Luanda minisummit held last month must be honoured by all armed
groups, including the M-23. The Luanda road map and
the Nairobi process provide a promising framework
for dialogue and talks. We expect the countries of the
region, in particular the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda, to take full advantage of those
constructive efforts. We also welcome the allocation of
$6 million to begin the pilot phase of the Disarmament,
Demobilization, Community Recovery and Stabilization
Programme (PDDRCS) projects in eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We underscore the importance
of a long-term commitment to outcomes, deeper
community participation and transparent processes
while implementing those projects. In that context,
the development by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) of a communications strategy
to sensitize stakeholders about the PDDRCS will
be critical.
MONUSCO peacekeepers have been working in an
extremely challenging environment, both operationally
and politically. The lack of clarity in the Mission’s
mandate and its creative interpretation have added to
the existing complexities. That has also widened the
gap between people’s expectations and MONUSCO’s
delivery. As a result, peacekeepers have borne the
brunt of anti-United Nations sentiments among the
people and the authorities of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. It is clear that the Mission’s credibility
has been dented. We also reiterate the importance of
implementing resolution 2589 (2021) in order to deter the
culture of impunity by providing greater accountability
for crimes against peacekeepers. As one of the largest
troop-contributing countries, we are cognizant of the
challenges of peacekeeping in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and are fully committed to the
implementation of MONUSCO’s mandate.
As we discuss the upcoming renewal of
MONUSCO’s mandate, we acknowledge the efforts
made to date towards a steady transition and the
joint transition plan agreed between MONUSCO and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo authorities.
However, the assessment of progress should be

22-7344221/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

realistic. The situation on the ground should guide the
eventual drawdown, while ensuring that gains made in
the violence-prone provinces are secured on a firmer
footing first, so as to avoid any reversal. Strengthening
State authority, security organs and justice institutions
is equally important. The transition and eventual
exit of MONUSCO needs to be gradual, responsible
and orderly.
In conclusion, we commend the initiatives of the
leadership of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to address the existing challenges, including the
security situation in the eastern region. We welcome
the preparations for the next general elections and
note the efforts made towards an inclusive democratic
framework. India has long-standing relations with the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. We recall with
immense satisfaction our contribution to protect its
territorial integrity in March 1961 during the Katanga
province crisis. Going forward, we remain committed
to playing our part in supporting the people of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo on their path towards
securing lasting peace, stability and prosperity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Before I give the floor to other speakers, I would like
to draw their attention to paragraph 22 of presidential
note S/2017/507, which encourages all participants in
Council meetings to deliver their statements in five
minutes or less, in line with the Security Council’s
commitment to making more effective use of
open meetings.
I give the floor to the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala (Democratic
Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I would first
like to say that I would have preferred to be the last
speaker so that I could address the concerns of all the
other speakers on a debate that concerns my country
and my country alone, for the large part. That was not
an option for me as you have sequenced the briefers,
Madam President. However, I would like to be able to
clarify certain points and contribute to the discussion,
if need be.
At the outset, on behalf of the Head of State and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I would like to thank the Security Council for
its warm welcome expressed through the statements I
22/30

09/12/2022

heard today. That attests to the importance the Council
attaches to the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the interest States place on resolving the crisis that has
been ravaging my country for some 23 years. This is a
unique situation.
I also wish to thank the Council for once again
giving me the opportunity to take stock today of the
almost-chronic security crisis that has continued to
ravage the east of my country, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, and to kill its people for 23 years.
On 31 May of this year, which is now drawing to a
close, I had the privilege of addressing this organ, the
highest decision-making organ of the United Nations
for matters of global peace and security, on this painful
situation, its harmful consequences on the stability
and development of both the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the Great Lakes region, as well as on
possible solutions (see S/PV.9051).
At the end of the Council’s deliberations, on 3 June,
the presidency of the Council issued on an important
statement expressing the Council’s position and
recommendations to put an end to crisis (S/PRST/2022/4).
Previously, the East African Community had taken up
the issue and had launched a peace-restoration process
called the Nairobi peace process, supported not only
by the African Union, particularly through its Peace
and Security Council, but also by the Southern African
Development Community and bilateral and multilateral
international partners. In the positions taken by all
those international actors, there is, if not unanimity, at
least a very broad consensus on the approach and the
elements of a sustainable solution to the security crisis
in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and
the Great Lakes region.
The elements of such a solution are, first,
respect for the territorial integrity, sovereignty and
independence of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo; second, condemnation of the activities of
armed groups, in general, and of the Movement du 23
mars (M-23), in particular, operating in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo; third, the demand
for the immediate and unconditional cessation of those
activities, and especially of the M-23’s attacks against
the positions of the Forces armées de la République
démocratique du Congo (FARDC) and the troops of the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO);
fourth, the withdrawal of the M-23 from the occupied
areas without delay or conditions; fifth, the return
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

of war-displaced persons to their homes; sixth, the
cessation of all support to armed groups operating in
the eastern the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
including the M-23; seventh, support for the Nairobi
and Luanda processes; eighth, the organization of
internal political dialogues by the Heads of State of
the region with the armed groups in their respective
countries with a view to their return to the fold;
ninth, the implementation of the National Programme
for Disarmament, Demobilization, Community
Reinsertion and Stabilization with a view to ensuring
the social reintegration of former combatants of armed
groups; and tenth, the settlement of disputes among
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Uganda and
Rwanda through dialogue, with a view to normalizing
their relations and creating a climate favourable to
regional cooperation.
Those elements together can be considered
as a plan for the return of peace to Congo and
the region — a plan reached consensually by the
international community. The elements of the solution
must now all be implemented.
In order to materialize this peace plan, which enjoys
international consensus, the Head of State of Angola, His
Excellency Mr. João Manuel Gonçalves Lourenço, the
facilitator appointed by the African Union to maintain
the dialogue between the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and Rwanda; the Head of State of Burundi,
His Excellency Mr. Evariste Ndayishimiye, current
President of the East African Community (EAC); and
the Head of State of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, His Excellency Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi
Tshilombo, met in Luanda on 23 November for a minisummit, with the participation of the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Rwanda, representing its Head of
State, Mr. Paul Kagame, and of the former President
of Kenya, His Excellency Mr. Uhuru Muigai Kenyatta,
EAC mediator.
At the end of the mini-summit, those Heads of
State signed, on behalf of the African Union (AU) and
the EAC, a final communiqué containing the timetable
for the implementation of the various actions agreed
upon by the stakeholders of the Nairobi and Luanda
processes, together with guarantees for their successful
completion. That is very important. Those guarantees
consist of the political and diplomatic involvement of
the United Nations, the AU and the EAC and, on the
military and security front, of the intervention of the
East African regional force, alongside the FARDC,

S/PV.9215

with the support of MONUSCO, in order to force the
M-23 and the other armed groups that refuse to comply
with the demands of the international community to lay
down their arms and take up the offer of peace made
by their respective Heads of State. However, despite
these guarantees, which are not yet operational, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo remains sceptical
that Rwanda and its protégé, the M-23, which has always
arrogantly and contemptuously rejected the decisions
and recommendations of international bodies, will
respect them this time.
Moreover, as if to defy these international
bodies — every member of the Council has expressed
regret about this — the M-23 did not tarry in violating
the final communiqué of the Luanda summit only five
days after it was issued by committing a serious crime
on November 28 and 29, in the form of a massacre
of approximately 200 people, including children, in
Kishishe and Bambo, in the territory under its control
in Rutshuru. In the face of a tragedy that is a crime
against humanity, the Security Council should not
remain indifferent. It is not enough to denounce it.
There must be sanctions, which is why the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is requesting
the Council not only to strongly condemn this heinous
crime, of course, but also to order an independent
international investigation to establish responsibility
and severely punish its perpetrators and masterminds.
That said, for its part, under circumstances such as
these, the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo always assumes its responsibilities.
Moreover, I wish to hereby inform the Council that the
Congolese justice system has already been seized to
coldly and objectively uphold the victims’ rights.
Furthermore, the M-23’s unmanageable and
criminal behaviour, sustained single-handedly by the
Rwandan authorities, clearly demonstrates that the
challenge to be met today is to execute the actions
on the ground recommended by the international
community to solve the crisis and impose peace on the
armed groups in the east of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. I emphasize that peace must be imposed.
To that end, it is an imperative for the Government
of my country that MONUSCO be reformed and that
all obstacles to strengthening the capacities of the
FARDC be removed. The major challenge at today’s
meeting of the Security Council lies therefore in its
ability to provide adequate and effective responses to
these two fundamental requirements if it really wants
to put an end to the activities of terrorist groups in the

22-7344223/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Democratic Republic of the Congo and restore lasting
peace in the Great Lakes Region.
Let me state to its members today with regard to
MONUSCO that the Security Council would do well
to take t the following into account in its deliberations:
first, the Congolese people strongly believe, rightly and
in view of the results on the ground, that, overall, in the
26 years of United Nations involvement in the country,
initially by the United Nations Organization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which later
became MONUSCO, the United Nations has not met
the expectations of the Congolese people or even of the
international community, and the continuation of its
mode of operations is no longer justified and does not
promise any results.
In this regard, on behalf of the President of the
Republic and the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, I would like to reiterate that
there is and can be no crisis in our relationship with
the United Nations, nor is there any desire for a
break between my country and the Organization. On
the contrary, our shared concern is to improve our
collaboration and the credibility of the United Nations
in the region in the delicate management of this complex
crisis. Moreover, it would not be appropriate for the
Council’s attitude at this meeting to be misinterpreted
as contempt or defiance of the Congolese people, which
would do no one any good. In any case, in order to
succeed in its mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, MONUSCO or any other United Nations
or even African Union institution needs the support
of the Congolese people themselves, and we have been
working in this direction.
Secondly, we must also take into account the
courageous and sincere admission of the SecretaryGeneral, the highest political and administrative
authority of the United Nations, as to MONUSCO’s
inability to neutralize the M-23 terrorist movement,
which is more armed than the Mission itself. We must
also take his call for strengthening MONUSCO’s
resources into account.
Whatever the modality, utility — if not
necessity — or importance of MONUSCO’s role, it
must be recognized that the Mission has weaknesses
that must be addressed so as to make it more effective
and useful. Doing anything else would condemn this
important United Nations peace operation to failure.
It is clear that either way what we have experienced
is serious and has shaken us. However, as I have
24/30

09/12/2022

said to Ms. Keita, and as the Head of State and the
Prime Minister have also told her, we must calmly,
responsibly and dispassionately think about, find
appropriate solutions to and straighten out the situation
of MONUSCO and the image of the United Nations in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, so that we can
all work together.
In sum, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
expects today’s meeting to clarify the Security Council’s
mandate for MONUSCO in the current context. There
is a kind of unspoken ambiguity in the MONUSCO
mandate that creates confusion and might in fact
aggravate frustrations. Is MONUSCO a peacekeeping
force, or is it a peacemaking force, or is it both? This
clarification will allow expectations of MONUSCO to
be reconfigured, permitting its scope of action to be
better circumscribed and avoiding misunderstandings
and intentions in relation to a shift in MONUSCO’s
mandate towards a sort of special political mission,
which could be perceived as a desire to set the Mission
up as a pole of governance parallel to the Government
of the Republic. That would be counterproductive.
It is clear that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo’s preference is to see MONUSCO, alongside the
FARDC and the East African Community regional force,
imposing peace, because peacekeeping presupposes
that peace has been restored, which is not yet the case
in the eastern part of the country. In addition, when it
is said that MONUSCO’s mission is to provide security
for the civilian population, further confusion is sown.
Ensuring the security of the civilian population means
countering a danger, be it a bodily threat to people or
a threat to property; but how can the security of the
civilian population be ensured if a mission cannot
respond to an attack against that population? That is
the fundamental question.
Incidentally, it is in terms of strengthening
the MONUSCO mandate to which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo barely meets the expectations of
the Heads of State signatories of the final communiqué
of the Luanda summit, which called on MONUSCO to
support the regional force and the FARDC to ensure
the implementation of the planned timetable. Council
members will see from the timeline that, if MONUSCO
had become significant in the Congo, the Heads of State
would not have called for its support.
However, contrary to what can be said, strengthening
MONUSCO can in no way hinder or slow down the
gradual and responsible withdrawal programme
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

established by resolution 2556 (2020), which is already
under way in Katanga and Kasai, as Ms. Keita said, and
which, in the opinion of the Government of my country,
can realistically be brought back to another time frame
that is a little closer than 2024 — we thought about
the end of 2023. I stress that it is a time frame and a
continuation. We must not give the impression that we
are stopping with the withdrawal. It has begun, and it
has been agreed with target areas — areas of withdrawal
and continuity areas — and, once again, under what
mandate. As the President of the Republic, Mr. FélixAntoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, and Ms. Bintou Keita
also said, that withdrawal cannot take place before
holding the upcoming general elections in the Congo.
With regard to the elections, I do not have any more
details. Ms. Keita fully briefed us. The process is under
way. There is nothing that will stop the process. We
will proceed.
I am happy to hear Council members say that they
support the evaluation, but it is important to end up with
a positive review. On behalf of President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo and the Government, I reaffirm and reiterate
that we will not carry out the review alone. We will do
it with MONUSCO and the United Nations, and we will
draw conclusions together to meet the expectations of
the Congolese people.
It goes without saying that such strengthening
of MONUSCO’s mandate, for which the Democratic
Republic of the Congo calls, will involve an increase in
its resources and combat equipment and the entry of the
Intervention Brigade into joint military operations with
the FARDC and the regional force, as in 2013 — this
is not the first time — of course in consultation with
the troop-contributing countries, as well as a better
coordination of actions with the FARDC and the East
African regional force. In that regard, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo is already pleased to note that the
commanders of the FARDC, MONUSCO — I reiterate,
MONUSCO — and the regional force already met in
Goma from 28 to 30 November to coordinate and see
how they will work together to establish peace. That
must be encouraged.
With regard to the obligation to notify the
Sanctions Committee of the acquisition and supply
of certain types of arms and ammunition to the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, following the
address by our Head of State at the rostrum of the
General Assembly at its seventy-seventh session (see
A/77/PV.5), the Government reiterates its request to the

S/PV.9215

Security Council, through the Chair of the Sanctions
Committee, to lift that unjustified obligation, which is
humiliating for the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
and which is unfortunately perceived by the Congolese
people and their leaders as a strategy to weaken their
country and expose it to the mercy of its enemies for
the following reasons.
First, the sanctions regime was established in 2004,
when the Democratic Republic of the Congo was still
divided into three entities led by three Governments,
two of which were insurgent. That regime has not been
justified since the 2006 elections, as the country was
unified and resumed the life of a normal State, led by
a single national Government, elected by the entire
Congolese people and recognized by the international
community. It is no longer understandable that the
Security Council continues to treat the Congolese
Government as that of a rebel and terrorist group.
Contrary to what the Council thinks, that restriction
impeded the worthiness and credibility of my
Government internationally, and that is not a figment of
the imagination. Not long ago, as Minister for Foreign
Affairs, I was informed of claims that there were
carriers and bankers who did not want to deal with us
because of the mess that the United Nations had thrown
at our country.
Second, the Democratic Republic of the Congo
is a post-conflict country, which must reorganize its
army, police and security services. What is happening
in the Kivus will end only once we have completed the
reorganization of our army. Moreover, as the Council
knows, the Democratic Republic of the Congo faces
negative forces of Islamist terrorism. It cannot succeed
in that reorganization or eradicate terrorism without
having the freedom and the ability to provide its
defence and security forces with efficient equipment to
carry out their sovereign tasks. In its place, what State
would do otherwise?
Third, the renewal of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo’s military leadership is under way. Those
who follow the situation know that President Tshisekedi
Tshilombo has begun the changes in the military
leadership in our country. It is not fair to attribute to
the new heads of the FARDC the defects and faults of
their predecessors, who are accused of collaborating
with armed groups.
Fourth, the evidence of the investigative reports by
United Nations expert groups and other independent
national and international sources established that armed

22-7344225/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo are
supplied with troops, and even sophisticated weapons
that MONUSCO itself does not have, by neighbouring
countries. Subjecting the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to the notification obligation weakens it to the
advantage of its enemies, which are not subjected to
such a constraint and can buy weapons and give them to
insurgents to fight us. But we cannot equip ourselves.
That also exposes our country to another danger. All
States hold defence secrets. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo has no defence secrets because it is in the
public arena and has to declare even a machete.
Fifth, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is at
war. To hinder, even through suppliers, the strengthening
of its army, particularly with efficient war materiel, is
to weaken it and to deliver it to its enemies.
Sixth, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
neither a manufacturer nor an importer of nuclear,
chemical or other weapons of mass destruction to
justify it being placed under close surveillance by the
United Nations.
Seventh, and this is important, mechanisms have
been created at the regional level in the context of
the Nairobi and Luanda processes and are already
operational. There is the ad hoc verification mechanism
with the Angolans, and there is the East African
Community regional force to neutralize all armed
groups in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. If the
Security Council believes that the current notification
system does not prevent the Democratic Republic of
the Congo from equipping and reorganizing itself, then
why maintain it? What is its purpose? We are talking
about sanctions. Why are we being sanctioned?
If, in the draft resolution that it adopts at the end
of its deliberations, it could be agreed by the Security
Council to carry out the reconditioning of MONUSCO
and to lift the useless and unjustified obligation to
notify the purchase of war materiel, which unjustly
affects the Democratic Republic of the Congo, we will
have every reason to believe that the United Nations
has a genuine desire to put an end to the security
crisis in the Democratic Republic of the Congo once
and for all and to contribute to peace and stability in
the Great Lakes region. There will no longer be any
reason to reproach the United Nations. What is needed
is a resolution aimed at reducing tensions rather than
scoring points.
26/30

09/12/2022

Before I conclude, now is the time to renew the
Security Council’s appeal to bilateral and multilateral
donors to honour their commitments regarding
financing
the
Disarmament,
Demobilization,
Community Recovery and Stabilization Programme,
whose implementation is essential for the social
reintegration of former combatants of armed groups. I
will not touch on what happened in Nairobi any further,
as that has already been discussed.
In conclusion, on behalf of the Head of State and
the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, I want in all solemnity to ease the international
community’s concerns regarding the previously
mentioned hate speech against the Rwandophones who
are supposedly threatened in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. The Congolese people are not against the
Rwandan people, a brother people with whom they are
destined to live for eternity. However, they will always
rebel against belligerent and hegemonic leaders who
attempt to turn the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo into a zone of influence and free exploitation
whose natural resources they can plunder as they please.
The Congolese will fight with all their might against
that race of leaders, wherever they come from, who are
enemies of prosperity, of the influence of their country
and of peace and brotherly coexistence between the
peoples of the Great Lakes region.
The responsibility for solving the problems of
Congolese citizens, regardless of the community
to which they belong, comes under the purview of
Congolese institutions alone. The fate of the socalled Rwandophone Congolese will never be played
out anywhere in Africa or the world other than in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, of which they
are nationals. It is therefore a pretence and an act of
instrumentalization by our compatriots to position
themselves as defenders of their own interests by
attacking the country in which they claim nationality.
The interference of Rwandan leaders in the internal
affairs of the Democratic Republic of the Congo will
not solve any Congolese problems. On the contrary,
it fuels intercommunal tensions in North Kivu and
weakens national unity in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially by giving some Congolese
the impression that there are people who are being
used by foreign countries against their fellow citizens.
That is extremely dangerous and compromises any
possibility of establishing good-neighbourly relations
and cooperation between the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and Rwanda.
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

I appeal to our external partners in the international
community not to fall into the trap of endorsing such
interference, directly or indirectly. We only have
to imagine, in Africa, a continent fragmented by
colonization, what would happen if every State granted
itself the right to intervene in another’s territory on the
grounds that part of its community was under threat.
In Africa there would be no end to that, because all our
countries have cross-border populations — and that is
extremely significant.
I would like to correct the French Ambassador’s
remarks about Justin Bitakwira when he referred
to him as a member of the National Assembly of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. He is no longer
a member.
As President Tshisekedi Tshilombo continues
to reiterate, “Africa has better things to do than
wage war. The Congolese are not and never will be a
genocidal people.”
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Rwanda.
Mr. Gatete (Rwanda): I thank you, Madam, for
allowing me to address the Security Council. I thank
Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, for her briefing. I also thank
Mr. Mr. Peter Mutuku Mathuki, Secretary General of the
East African Community, Ms. Rebecca Kabuo and the
members of the Security Council for their statements.
Rwanda welcomes the efforts and commitment of the
leaders of the region to find a durable solution to the
conflict in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
especially President Lourenço of Angola, on the Luanda
road map, and Mr. Uhuru Kenyatta, former President of
Kenya, as facilitator for the East African Communityled peace process.
A military solution alone cannot solve the root causes
of the security crisis in the eastern Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Great Lakes region. Every country
in the Great Lakes region understands that peace in one
country depends on peace in the others. The regional
Luanda and Nairobi mechanisms are therefore essential
processes that need shared commitment and political
will for their full implementation, as well as the support
and understanding of the international community to
ensure their sustainability.

S/PV.9215

As a member of the region, Rwanda remains
committed to and fully supports the ongoing regional
peace processes. We have high expectations that they
will ultimately address the root causes and drivers of
the endemic crisis in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, which has an impact on its neighbours, including
Rwanda. However, we deplore the unhelpful external
interference in the regional and continental processes by
some members of the international community, which
serves to shield the Democratic Republic of the Congo
from accountability with regard to its unresponsiveness
to commitments made through the ongoing processes
and ultimately risks undermining the success of those
initiatives. Rwanda believes that long-lasting peace
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo cannot be
achieved by spreading a dangerous and false narrative
that exacerbates the problem and puts lives at risk.
Furthermore, parallel forums led by some countries are
counterproductive where the ongoing African regional
efforts are concerned and will have to cease if African
regional processes are to succeed.
Rwanda has made it clear that the conflict between
the Mouvement du 23 mars (M-23) and the Government
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo is an internal
matter, and that Rwanda should therefore be neither a
scapegoat nor equated with the M-23. That distortion
only masks the real problem and is an obstacle to
accountability for those who should be answerable for
addressing the root causes and drivers of the conflict
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. A lasting
solution requires responsibility to be placed where
it belongs.
While we agree with the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/892) that the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Democratic Republic of the Congo should
be respected, some questions remain unanswered.
First, when are we going to address the violations
of Rwanda’s sovereignty and territorial integrity by
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which have
occurred on several occasions, as verified by the
Expanded Joint Verification Mechanism? This year
alone, cross-border shelling on Rwandan territory took
place on 19 March, 23 May and 20 June, followed by
the violation of Rwandan airspace and territory by a
Democratic Republic of the Congo Sukhoi Su-25 fighter
jet on 7 November.
Secondly, when will the international community
address the persistence of the Forces démocratiques de
libération du Rwanda (FDLR) and the alliance between

22-7344227/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

the Forces armées de la République démocratique du
Congo (FARDC) and deadly armed groups, including
the FDLR? The FDLR is a sanctioned genocidal
terrorist group made up of remnants of the force that
committed the 1994 genocide of the Tutsi in Rwanda,
and it is known for spreading genocidal ideology. It
is surprising that while Ms. Keita mentioned all the
other key rebel groups in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo in her statement, she did not once mention
the FDLR, which is sanctioned by the Council. I do not
know if that was an accidental or a deliberate omission,
or whether she feels that the FDLR poses no threat to
any country. Rwanda has expressed concerns about the
FDLR for decades, including about its support from the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and its collusion with
the country’s national army, the FARDC. The alliance
between the FARDC and the FDLR was responsible for
several attacks on Rwandan territory and for skirmishes
that claimed the lives of innocent civilians.
At the last count, there were 132 armed local
and foreign armed groups in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Yet the international community
remains concerned about only one armed group and
ignores the rest, many of which are far more dangerous,
including the FDLR — a genocidal force that has been
listed by the Security Council. As I mentioned earlier,
military capabilities alone are not enough to resolve
the problems in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
More important, that will require the political will
to engage in inclusive dialogue, the implementation
of the signed agreements and addressing the lack of
accountability. With regard to the disarmament of the
armed groups operating in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, especially the foreign ones, we remain
concerned that the issue is not given enough attention
and support. Yet their presence in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo forms the core of the problem,
as raised in ongoing regional mediation efforts.
Hate speech against Rwandans and the
Kinyarwanda-speaking communities in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo has recently intensified, as
reported by the Special Adviser to the Secretary-General
on the Prevention of Genocide, Ms. Alice Nderitu.
Hate speech not only undermines social cohesion and
peaceful cohabitation but also endangers lives, as we
have seen in recent months. But unfortunately, hate
speech is becoming a way to gain political power, and
therefore a reason to perpetuate such violence against
ethnic minorities. In that regard, the issue of ethnic
minorities and ethnic cleansing must be a top priority on
28/30

09/12/2022

the Security Council’s peace agenda in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We are appalled by the silence
of the Council on the hate speech, xenophobia and
killings targeting the Congolese Tutsi population,
which has escalated. On that note, we thank the Special
Adviser of the Secretary-General on the Prevention of
Genocide for condemning and pointing out the ongoing
atrocious crimes. We also thank the representative of
Kenya for elaborating on the issue of hate speech in her
statement today on behalf of the African members of the
Security Council (A3). We have all heard the call of the
political, military and church leaders and civil society
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo calling for
the killing of those whom they term enemies, traitors,
infiltrators, the unwanted and foreigners.
Rwanda calls on the elected members of the
Council, particularly the A3, not to ignore the incidents
of atrocities and crimes against humanity committed
against people because of who they are, how they look
or their ethnic group. The Council should never again
allow itself to repeat its silence of 28 years ago, when it
passively watched the rapid, systematic and most widely
broadcasted genocide that took more than 1 million
lives in Rwanda. At that time — 28 years ago — only
three elected members of the Council — the Czech
Republic, New Zealand and Nigeria — spoke out, while
the other Council members remained silent in order not
to anger the genocidal regime.
Rwanda would like to remind the Council that
there are more than 80,000 Congolese refugees living
in refugee camps in Rwanda, many of them for more
than 20 years. When will those refugees be allowed to
safely return to their homes and finally live dignified
lives in their own country?
Let me conclude by reiterating the need for a holistic
approach to address the endemic crisis in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and call for the recommitment to
the Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework for the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the Region for
a long-lasting solution. In the same vein, Rwanda calls
on the Government of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to honour the various regional peace agreements
that have been established to restore order and stability
in the region.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Burundi.
Mr. Maniratanga (Burundi) (spoke in French):
The delegation of Burundi would like to congratulate
22-73442

09/12/2022

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

India on its presidency of the Security Council for the
month of December and takes this occasion to reaffirm
its full support. I welcome the participation in this
meeting of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Permanent Representative of Rwanda.
The delegation of Burundi welcomes the report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/892) and the comprehensive
briefings by Ms. Bintou Keita, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO); Mr. Peter Mutuku
Mathuki, Secretary General of the East African
Community (EAC); and Ms. Rebecca Kabuo, activist
and member of Lutte pour le changement.
The delegation of Burundi would like to reaffirm
its firm commitment to do everything possible to
advance the return of peace and security in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo. To that end, Burundi
will always favour finding a solution and all regional
and multilateral initiatives in the search for peace,
security and stability. Burundi welcomes the outcomes
of the Luanda and Nairobi processes, namely, the
operationalization of the ad hoc verification mechanism
on 9 November and the continued deployment of the
regional force of the East African Community in
North Kivu and South Kivu. Following the adoption
of the communiqué endorsing the Nairobi and Luanda
processes and the extraordinary meeting of the Chiefs
of General Staff of the EAC armed forces held in
Bujumbura on 8 November, it is clear that restoring
peace is a noble but immense task that will require
the international community’s political, diplomatic,
logistical and financial support for the Nairobi process
related to the military operations carried out by the EAC
regional forces, while not failing to provide logistical
support for the inter-Congolese dialogue.
The time has come to draw direct and concrete
lessons and to rethink the MONUSCO mandate in the
light of the current situation. While acknowledging the
immense work done by MONUSCO in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the presence of a regional force
calls for an up-to-date readjustment of its mandate in
order to coordinate military efforts among the armed
forces of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
MONUSCO and the EAC regional force and to secure
areas that have been overrun by negative and terrorist
forces, made up of local and foreign armed groups. In
that way, MONUSCO would take charge of defensive
and other tasks and the regional force would lead active

S/PV.9215

and operational missions, particularly in the eastern
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Based on certain elements of the SecretaryGeneral’s report and in the light of the deplorable
security and humanitarian situation, the delegation
of Burundi calls on the international community to
become more involved in order to end the suffering of
innocent civilians, women, children and the elderly,
while stressing the impact of forced displacement on
the agricultural production of the populations living in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo and the
importance of taking appropriate preventive measures.
If nothing is done, an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis is to be feared. Given the persistence of negative
and terrorist forces, which pose a threat to peace and
security, the Burundi delegation welcomes the inclusive
inter-Congolese consultations within the framework of
the EAC process, which once again attest to the region’s
commitment to the return of peace and security in
the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. The
delegation of Burundi believes firmly in the region’s
prospects for peace. War is the worst option in any
conflict insofar as it only creates more suffering, causes
the blood of innocent people to be spilled, increases the
number of orphans and casts a shadow over the future
of a State, a people and an entire region. It is Burundi’s
duty to do everything possible to prevent a domino effect
and unrest throughout the region. Regional diplomacy is
at work even if the whiff of gunpowder is increasingly
intense. However, nothing will weaken the determination
of President Ndayishimiye of Burundi, the current Chair
of the EAC, who can draw on Burundi’s experience and
his own wisdom to find the tools necessary for restoring
peace, stability and security in the subregion.
Considering all of this, there is still hope. Peace
and stability are possible in the eastern Democratic
Republic of the Congo and in our Central African and
East African subregions, on one condition. We need
to see all the countries of the region, and the entire
international community, join the regional processes
aimed at neutralizing the negative and terrorist forces
that are sowing destruction in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in hopes of turning the page on war once
and for all to open a new chapter — one that will mark
a new beginning for peace, stability and development in
our subregion.
The President: The Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo has asked for the
floor to make a further statement.

22-7344229/30

S/PV.9215

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Mr. Lutundula Apala Pen’apala (Democratic Republic of the Congo) (spoke in French): I will be brief.
I had two reasons for not wanting to address the issue of the Forces démocratiques de libération du Rwanda
(FDLR).
First, I would like to remind the United Nations that
on 20 September (see A/77/PV.5), in the General Assembly Hall, President Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo
called on all our partners, multilateral and bilateral, on
non-governmental organizations, national and international, and on the leaders of Rwanda and all individuals
and groups who have information on an FDLR leader
who may be somewhere in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo; on an area in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo where the FDLR is stationed; on FDLR attacks
carried out with the Forces armées de la République démocratique du Congo (FARDC) on Rwandan territory;
on any FDLR activity against Rwanda, even if only
political rather than military — to tell us about it. The
President said that right here at the United Nations. It has
been three months now and we are still waiting.
Secondly, as I said, there is currently an ad hoc mechanism, agreed with Rwanda in Luanda, for verifying accusations made by one country about another, led by a
general of the Angolan armed forces. The mechanism is
now operating in Goma, assisted by a Congolese liaison
officer, who is a general, and a Rwandan liaison officer
who I hope has been appointed. In other words, there are
mechanisms that are now in place. We are waiting — and
I have reiterated here in the Security Council the call by
President Tshisekedi at the United Nations — for anyone
with information to pass it on to us. We have even heard
an FDLR leader speaking on the radio since leaving the
Congo. We are at his disposal.
The representative of Rwanda spoke about ethnic
minorities, ethnic cleansing and genocide, which leaves

30/30

09/12/2022

me with the impression that he may be confused about
the country he is referring to. We in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo are not familiar with terms such
as “ethnic minorities”. Even adults in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo learned of the existence of the
term of genocide only in 1994. It was Rwandans who
carried out genocide in Rwanda. No Congolese citizen
has been associated in any way with such vile and
disgraceful acts, which brought shame on the whole
of humankind.
Indeed, quite the contrary, it is we in the Democratic
Republic of Congo who have suffered the effects of
genocide for the past 23 years. At the time, we wanted to
turn away Rwandan fugitives. It was here in New York
that we were told no, and that we had to respect the 1951
Geneva Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
Other African countries refused, but we obeyed the
United Nations. And today it is we who are paying a
heavy price for a genocide we did not experience in our
own country. That approach is not working any more,
and the international community must denounce the
completely cynical and brazen exploitation of an act
debasing humankind that has been systematically carried
out on the other side of our borders. It has nothing to do
with us. That is the outcome they want — to provoke this
kind of response so that they can say, “See, we told you
so”. But that will never happen. President Tshisekedi said
it here at the United Nations. Neither ethnic cleansing
nor anything else will ever occur in our country. We are
taking steps to ensure that it will not be exported to us.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m.

22-73442
