UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/1997/804
16 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

LETTER DATED 16 OCTOBER 1997 FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL
ADDRESSED TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

I have the honour to convey the attached communication dated
14 October 1997 from the High Representative, Mr. Carlos Westendorp, on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina (see annex).
I would appreciate your bringing it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.

(Signed)

97-27596 (E)

201097

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 2

Annex
Letter dated 14 October 1997 from the High Representative
for Implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina addressed to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to transmit to you the seventh report on the activities
of the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace Agreement in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see appendix). I would appreciate your making the report
available to the Security Council.

(Signed)

Carlos WESTENDORP

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 3

Appendix
Report of the High Representative for Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Secretary-General

I.

INTRODUCTION

1.
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1031 (1995) of 15 December 1995, in
which the Council endorsed the appointment of a High Representative to monitor
the implementation of the Peace Agreement and mobilize and, as appropriate, give
guidance to, and coordinate the activities of, the civilian organizations and
agencies involved in the implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina, I submit hereby the seventh report envisaged by Annex 10 of the
Peace Agreement and the Conclusions of the London Peace Implementation
Conference of 8 and 9 December 1995.
2.
The report covers the activities of the Office of the High Representative
and developments in the areas listed below during the period from the beginning
of July 1997 to the end of September 1997.

II.

INSTITUTIONAL ASPECTS

Office of the High Representative
3.
At the present stage of the peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina,
characterized as the consolidation period, the major international efforts are
concentrated on the most complicated part of the implementation of the Peace
Agreement - the civilian component. Needless to say, the success of all
activities in establishing lasting peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina essentially
depends on the realization of these aspects. Though the peace process continues
at a slow pace, the results achieved are moderate and the tasks ahead are
enormous, yet I believe there is still certain hope for optimism because the
international community has a clear-cut direction - the Peace Agreement and the
common understanding of the vital importance of its accomplishment. The main
responsibility for carrying out the civilian tasks lies with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina authorities. Only when the Bosnian parties themselves start jointly
implementing their commitments under the Peace Agreement, through, above all,
the effective functioning of their common State structures, will the peace
settlement be truly achieved and the peace process become irreversible.
4.
My headquarters in Sarajevo and the secretariat in Brussels have, in the
period described, continued to maintain operational coordination of civilian
implementation activities inside Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as contacts
with the headquarters of the respective implementation organizations and
agencies, closely following, to the extent possible, the various international
forums dealing with the Bosnian peace settlement.
5.
Regional coordination and monitoring of the situation on the ground, has
been a priority and my offices in Mostar, Tuzla and Banja Luka continued to
facilitate contacts at a local level, promoting inter-entity cooperation in a
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 4

variety of fields. The regional reach provided by these offices will be
essential during the consolidation period.
6.
My Deputy, the Brcko Supervisor, having established Office of the High
Representative-North in mid-April 1997, is successfully fulfilling his duties in
accordance with the Peace Agreement and the Arbitration Award for Brcko. His
office coordinates closely with all international organizations represented in
Brcko and in the Office of the High Representative-North area of responsibility
and is well supported by the Stabilization Force (SFOR), the International
Police Task Force (IPTF), the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe (OSCE) and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). Taking into account the increased tempo of the Supervisor's
activities as we approach the 15 March 1998 decision point, I intend to add
expert staff to his office temporarily to ensure proper coverage of tasks and
areas of concern.
7.
The capacity achieved by my office in Sarajevo to conduct preventative,
pro-active and follow-up action needs to be both preserved and developed;
conditions for such continuity require countries that contribute personnel to
maintain their current level of commitment. I'm thankful to the Governments who
have replaced or extended the terms of duty of the staff and hope that steady
contribution in this field would be maintained.
8.
On 17 September a team of 12 dear friends and very competent and dedicated
colleagues were tragically killed in a helicopter crash in Central Bosnia. All
of us were shocked by the untimely death of my Principal Deputy, Ambassador
Gerd Wagner, Leah Melnick, Charles Morpeth, Jurgen Schauf, Thomas Reinhardt,
Peter Backes, Livio Beccaccio, Andrzej Buler, David Kriskovich, William Nesbitt,
Marvin Padgett and Georg Stiebler. The loss of such selfless servants of the
peace process from different States of the world remind us of the countless
sacrifices that have been made by so many foreigners to help the troubled
country. We will push on with greater determination and resolve to complete the
task of implementing the Peace Agreement; peace and reconciliation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina will be their true and lasting memorial.

Peace Implementation Council
9.
The Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council has met twice during
the reporting period, in Sarajevo on 18 July, and in Brussels on 1 October.
Particular attention has been focused on the implementation of the Sintra
Declaration which set out in clear terms the exact performance expected of the
authorities in the coming months, including a number of specific actions to be
undertaken without delay. Furthermore, the Steering Board asked me to recommend
non-compliance measures in the case of delays by the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Such was the level of obstruction regarding the appointment of
ambassadors and the adoption of citizenship and passport laws, that I made such
recommendations to the Steering Board in both cases. More recently, I have
exercised the enhanced powers given to me in the Sintra Declaration in relation
to media issues.

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 5

III.

COORDINATION OF CIVILIAN IMPLEMENTATION
Overall coordination

10. Regular discussions with the representatives of Governments and
organizations have been maintained at all levels. I have made determined
efforts to consult personally with concerned leaders and value highly the
support I receive from them. My secretariat in Brussels has been especially
engaged in this maintenance of close contacts with international partners and,
further, in the provision of essential longer-range forecasting of issues
related to civilian implementation. In Sarajevo, I have continued to convene,
on a regular basis, Principals meetings with the participation of the Special
Representative of the United Nations Secretary-General, the IPTF Commissioner,
the UNHCR Special Envoy, the Commander of SFOR and the OSCE Head of Mission.
11. The Economic Task Force, which meets under my chairmanship in Sarajevo,
continues to be the key instrument for coordinating economic reform policies and
priorities of international reconstruction assistance. The Economic Task Force
has strengthened the implementation of political conditionality as requested by
the Third Donors' Conference in July. In addition, the Economic Task Force has
taken the lead in developing an anti-corruption strategy for Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
12. The Reconstruction and Return Task Force moved into a new phase of
operational activity and responsibility. On the operational side, Regional
Reconstruction and Return Task Forces were established for the Brcko/Posavina
area, the north-western region - addressing return and reconstruction issues in
the Una Sana Canton as well as the so-called Anvil area - and for the Sarajevo
and Gorazde Cantons. The Regional Reconstruction and Return Task Forces have
made important contributions to coordination among the appropriate agencies at
the field level and to regional inputs into the policy work of the central
Reconstruction and Return Task Force.
13. The Human Rights Coordination Centre Steering Board continues to meet on a
weekly basis to ensure prompt and thorough implementation of the priorities set
by the Human Rights Task Force. Plans are under way for a human rights workshop
to be attended by a wide range of organizations, including international and
local non-governmental organizations, to discuss progress and gaps in human
rights implementation in preparation for the next meeting of the Human Rights
Task Force.
14. The Freedom of Movement Task Force has continued to be a valuable forum for
exploring various ways to promote Freedom of Movement for people, goods and
services.

Common institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina
15. The Presidency, the Council of Ministers and Parliamentary Assembly
continue to meet albeit infrequently due to the lack of an administrative
structure and the outstanding decision on a final location. The internal crisis

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 6

in the Republika Srpska - the regular absence of Serb members - has also
substantially hampered the work of these institutions.
16. The Presidency held four regular working sessions and met several
international representatives during the reporting period.
17. In order to press for a solution on the diplomatic and consular network in
accordance with the deadline of 1 August fixed in the Sintra Declaration and
overcome the lack of spirit of compromise of the parties, I recommended on
2 August that Steering Board Members suspend relations with the Bosnia and
Herzegovina ambassadors with immediate effect. As a result, the agreement in
principle on the number (33) of embassies and permanent missions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the division of posts was reached and signed on 8 August on the
basis of a proposal negotiated by my office. A decision on the appointment of
ambassadors was made on 30 September pending the outstanding issue regarding
three postings. The issue of the staffing of the embassies and of the Ministry
of Foreign Affairs needs to be further addressed.
18. The draft laws on citizenship and passports also appeared on the agenda of
the Presidency sessions, after the failure of the Council of Ministers to reach
an agreement on this issue. The draft law on citizenship was debated and sent
back with comments to the Council of Ministers for its further consideration.
It is important to note that on 8 August the Presidency reached an agreement on
the rules of procedures of the Standing Committee on Military Matters.
19. Amongst other crucial issues that need further decisions of the Presidency
are the establishment of diplomatic relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, the common flag and the design of the Bosnia
and Herzegovina currency.
20. The Council of Ministers was again the most active of the common
institutions, though meeting on an irregular basis but on average at least once
weekly. During the reporting period, the Council made good progress on the
issues of civil aviation and telecommunications by signing important agreements
in these fields. The priority here now shifts to implementation of these
commitments. Progress on other issues has been less notable.
21. I believe that the Council of Ministers must take the required steps, with
appropriate support from my office to maintain what positive momentum exists, in
order to equip itself with the needed tools to meet its constitutional
obligations. This is particularly necessary when one notes the failure of the
Council in meeting Sintra deadlines, most evidently on the important draft laws
on citizenship and passports. The Council of Ministers was unable to agree to
the final draft texts my office prepared and which I believe present the fairest
and most realistic solution. As a result of the Serb members' refusal to accept
this draft, which was supported by the Bosniak and Croat members, I recommended
to the Steering Board that the passports of the Serb members of the Presidency
and of the Council should not be recognized as valid travel documents. This
recommendation still stands since the situation has yet to be resolved.
22. Both houses of the Parliamentary Assembly held their fourth session on
16 September in Lukavica at which the Law on the Official Gazette of Bosnia and
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 7

Herzegovina was adopted. This opened the way to the entry into force of the
quick start package I (package of essential legislation passed in late June).
The Parliamentary Assembly also passed two World Bank credit agreements on
education and transport previously signed by the Presidency members.
Furthermore the Parliamentary Assembly has installed its commissions.
23. The Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina held two sessions during
the reporting period. At the session of 27 July the Court adopted its rules of
procedure and elected its President and four Vice-Presidents. On 25 and
26 September the Court discussed its administrative structure and adopted the
decision on the organization of the Constitutional Court, which enables it to
employ the essential staff. The judges also dealt with the first of a total 13
cases which, so far, have been submitted to the Court.
24. Although the Rules of Procedure for the Standing Committee for Military
Matters were signed in early August, its first meeting duly occurred on
15 September. All members of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency along with
the respective Defence Ministers and Chiefs of staff from the two entities
attended the meeting.
25. I am determined to make the Standing Committee for Military Matters a
working institution rather than a facade of one, and in advance of this first
meeting, my staff established contacts with the three presidential-appointed
military advisers who provide the secretariat functions to the Committee. The
agenda was agreed and included an OSCE presentation on arms control and
preliminary discussion on the appointment of military attaches. The Standing
Committee for Military Matters will have a major role to play in the long-term
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina by encouraging openness, cooperation and
mutual trust between the entities. My Military Adviser will have to coordinate
and drive the Committee's secretariat and will continue to press for results
from the Committee.

Essential legislation
26. A draft law on citizenship of Bosnia and Herzegovina prepared by one of the
Council of Ministers, working in close cooperation with my office as well as
with the Council of Europe and UNHCR, has been before the Council of Ministers
since early this summer, but it has not been able to agree on outstanding
issues. The draft has also been considered by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency. The law on citizenship is extremely important, and it is essential
that the Common Institutions of Bosnia and Herzegovina adopt it without any
further delay.
27. As soon as the law on citizenship is adopted, the two entities will need to
harmonize their citizenship laws with that law. My office will, in cooperation
with the Council of Europe, offer its assistance to the entities in this
respect.
28. The draft law on passports, which regulates the form of the passports and
the way in which they are issued, is also before the Council of Ministers for

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 8

adoption, but it has not yet been able to resolve the issue on the design of the
passport.
29. Legislation adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly
does not enter into force before official publication. The Council of
Ministers, on its own initiative, agreed on a law on the Official Gazette of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It has been adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly and the new Gazette will shortly be regularly published
in the languages of three constituent people.
30. My office has, together with other international institutions, started the
process of elaborating the second package of essential legislation, including
legislation on frequency management and telecommunications, airspace management,
permanent election law, immigration law and permanent law on customs and customs
tariffs. The first draft of these laws are being prepared and will be presented
to the Bosnia and Herzegovina authorities soon.

Joint commissions
31. Activities of the Provisional Election Commission (Annex 3) chaired by
OSCE, are referred to in the elections sections of this report.
32. The Commission on Human Rights, which consists of the Human Rights Chamber
and the Ombudsperson (Annex 6) and the Commission for Real Property Claims
(Annex 7) continued their work.
33. The Human Rights Chamber, the Ombudsperson and the Commission for Real
Property Claims all face critical funding shortfalls. In response to the Sintra
Steering Board meeting's call the Bosnia and Herzegovina Government has
committed DM 200,000 for each institution from its 1997 budget. The Steering
Board also recognized, however, that the institutions will require international
support during the first years of their operation, and committed itself to
provide and to seek from others supplementary financial assistance to allow
their important work to continue. To meet that commitment, I have proposed to
the Peace Implementation Council Steering Board that funding for the three
institutions be provided for 1998 through assessed contributions according to
the same funding key used to determine contributions to the Office of the High
Representative.
34. Despite the critical funding situation, the work of all three institutions
continues to expand. As of 30 September, the Human Rights Ombudsperson (both
Sarajevo and Banja Luka offices) had opened 2,252 provisional files, registered
1,060 cases, and issued 49 final reports in individual cases and 10 special
reports. Thirty-three cases have been referred by the Ombudsperson to the Human
Rights Chamber. By 30 September, the Human Rights Chamber had registered 59
cases and rendered 11 decisions on admissibility of applications. Five public
hearings have been held and final decisions have been rendered in two cases.
During the same period, the Commission for Real Property Claims had received
over 40,000 claims, rendered more than 4,200 decisions, and sent 450 advisory
opinions to the Office of the High Representative Supervisor in Brcko. In
August, the Commission for Real Property Claims began offering to all
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 9

reconstruction agencies the service of checking property rights to private
houses. Since then, it has received requests to check property rights for a
total of 1,094 properties.
35. All three institutions have been hampered in their work by a low level of
cooperation from the authorities. In particular, authorities have frequently
failed to respond to reports or requests for information, or have responded
inadequately; the Ombudsperson continues to face difficulties in ensuring that
Federation authorities fulfil their responsibilities under Annex 6. For all
three institutions, there remains a serious gap with regard to steps taken by
the authorities to ensure that the decisions and recommendations of these
institutions are promptly and effectively implemented. Nevertheless, measurable
progress has been made in terms of the institutions' effectiveness and impact in
specific cases.
36. My office will continue to place a high priority on working with the
Ombudsperson, the Human Rights Chamber and the Property Commission to ensure
full cooperation by the authorities with each institution and to ensure respect
for their reports and decisions, including through the drafting of
implementation legislation where appropriate. We will also work diligently to
monitor and coordinate intervention in cases in which the authorities have
failed to meet those essential obligations.
37. The Commission to Preserve National Monuments (Annex 8), coordinated and
financed by UNESCO, held its fifth session on 22 July, and extended the
selection of monuments and sites for the appropriate national list. The listed
heritage is subsequently visited for analysis of condition, and the proper
documentation is prepared, two of the major problems being the lack of
documentation on historic sites and monuments, and its dispersion.
38. At its recent meeting, the Commission on Public Corporations (Annex 9)
agreed that railway inter-entity traffic be promptly re-established.
Instructions are given to the operating companies to work together and to take
whatever steps needed to implement that decision, starting with the line MaglajTuzla and Doboj-Zvornik and first with freight traffic. Following the legal
opinion issued by my office, a new organizational structure of the railway
sector was submitted to the Commission, but no consensus was yet reached. The
Commission is due to restart the examination of the energy sector and the
working group will, inter alia, examine the advisability of creating a body
between the two entities in order to increase coordination and devise a joint
policy in the field.

Elections
39. Since my last report, the voters in Bosnia and Herzegovina went to the
polls on 13 and 14 September in order to cast their ballots for the first
democratically elected municipal councils following the signing of the Peace
Agreement. The municipal elections were held in a calm, orderly and dignified
manner. This was the result of the cooperative attitude of the authorities,
promoted by a major planning effort on the part of all the key international
agencies drawing on experience accumulated during the 1996 electoral process.
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 10

40. Threats of election boycott were encountered throughout the preparation
process culminating in a temporary withdrawal of the Republika Srpska and
Federation representatives from the work of the Provisional Election Commission.
The Republika Srpska representative was withdrawn until the Republika Srpska
Election Commission received a copy of the final voters register; as a result of
talks in Belgrade certain operational concessions were made. The Croat
Federation representative was withdrawn, and only talks in Zagreb and
concessions concerning the electoral rules for the Central Zone in Mostar in
return to the adoption of significant amendments to the Herzegovina-Neretva
Canton Constitution could overcome a Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) boycott.
By such, both sides came on board in the eleventh hour allowing for an overall
participation of approximately 80-85 per cent of the electorate. The only
substantial obstruction of the process was encountered in Zepce where HDZ chose
not to participate.
41. As the international supervision of the municipal elections required an
operational plan for the implementation and management of the post-election
period, the Ministerial Steering Board meeting in Sintra endorsed the Election
Implementation Plan, which established an inter-agency monitoring mechanism Election Results Implementation Committees - tasked with the monitoring of all
aspects of the parties' implementation of the municipal elections. This plan is
established primarily to enable the international agencies to identify any
individual, political party, authority or others who obstruct the implementation
process, whereas the responsibility for actual implementation rests with the
parties.
42. With the end of the year, the mandate of the Provisional Election
Commission for supervision of the municipal elections will come to an end.
Then, the OSCE Head of Mission will, according to the Election Implementation
Plan, assess the overall electoral process and report to the OSCE Chairman-inOffice in the form of a municipal electoral process closure report. The final
phase in the municipal electoral process ends with this report.
43. On 5 August the Republika Srpska President requested OSCE to extend - or to
be more precise - expand its mission until the end of the year, in order to
supervise the preparation and conduct of the extraordinary Republika Srpska
National Assembly elections. It was understood that the voters register,
created via the affirmative voter registration for the municipal elections,
would constitute the basis for determining eligibility. It was also implied
that the Provisional Election Commission rules and regulations, with only the
necessary changes to accommodate the situation, would apply.
44. On 26 September, the OSCE Permanent Council formally decided to undertake
the task of supervising the Republika Srpska National Assembly elections, to be
held on a date proposed by the President of Republika Srpska in consultation
with OSCE. Furthermore, the Permanent Council decided to supervise other
elections to be held in Republika Srpska at a later date in accordance with
constitutional provisions, taking note of an agreement between the Republika
Srpska President and the Serb Member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency,
signed in Belgrade on 24 September.

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 11

45. My office has continuously stressed that elections held in Bosnia and
Herzegovina preceding the establishment of a Permanent Election Commission, must
be supervised by OSCE to deserve the attributes of being free, fair and
democratic. Furthermore, it is necessary that any such supervision is
accompanied by the application of the Provisional Election Commission rules and
regulations.
46. As elections are the confirmation of the constitutional system envisaged in
the Peace Agreement, future elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina will be of
paramount importance for the implementation of the Peace Agreement. Therefore,
facilitating the establishment of the Permanent Election Commission is one of
the most important tasks before my office. As envisaged in the first action
plan drawn up during the Peace Implementation Conference in London on 4 and
5 December 1996, the Permanent Election Commission is to be established by an
Election Law to be adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Parliamentary Assembly;
a first draft will be presented to the parties for their consideration in the
near future.

Federation issues
47. Throughout the Federation, the political and security climate continued to
improve. Refugee return, including to minority areas, is occurring especially
in the Central Bosnia Canton and the Zenica-Doboj Canton. Freedom of movement
does not seem to constitute a major problem any more. However, some worrisome
developments also occurred, such as the car bombing in West Mostar on
18 September and several attacks on religious objects.
48. My office continued to deal extensively with Federation issues. Of
particular note were a Federation Forum on 20 August and two high-level
Federation meetings on the Central Bosnia Canton on 5 and 27 August.
49. On 4 September, the Sarajevo Canton Assembly adopted the constitutional
amendments necessary to establish the city of Sarajevo. After municipal
elections, the city must be established, with guaranteed representation for all
three ethnic groups. The Office of the High Representative will closely follow
the formation of the City Council, the election of a mayor, and changes in
administration to ensure that all groups in the community share in the
governance of the Bosnia and Herzegovina capital.
50. On 13 September, the Cantonal Assembly of the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton
adopted amendments to the Cantonal Constitution concerning Mostar, thus
unblocking the way for municipal elections in which all major parties in the
Federation participated. The situation in Mostar, however, continues to be
volatile with the Croat partner not yet having honoured its obligation to
dissolve the Union of the three West Mostar municipalities.
51. In addition to Sarajevo and Gorazde, the two Cantons under a special
regime, i.e. the Herzegovina-Neretva Canton and the Central Bosnia Canton,
started the restructuring process for a new, unified Cantonal police. This
joint police is now operational in a number of ethnically mixed municipalities,
although problems persist in some municipalities. In light of their importance
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 12

for providing security, the establishment of joint police structures is a
precondition for a large-scale return of displaced persons and refugees to
minority regions.
52. In the Federation House of Peoples, HDZ interrupted its earlier blockade
that had arisen from the absence of an agreement on the law on split and new
municipalities, and in particular on the Croat populated Usora, and consented to
the adoption and amendment of a number of important Federation laws, including
the Federation budget for 1997. The question of split and new municipalities,
especially Usora, however, remains on the agenda and will have to be resolved
without further delay.

Republika Srpska issues
53. Since my last report (S/1997/542, annex), the constitutional and political
crisis in the Republika Srpska has deepened. It had started with Republika
Srpska President's suspension from office of the Minister of Interior on
corruption and embezzlement charges. On 3 July, the President dissolved the
Republika Srpska National Assembly on the grounds that it had become an
"uncritical instrument of the informal centres of power", thus openly
challenging the Serbian Democratic Party (SDS) leadership. Pale disregarded
this decision, and the SDS members of the dissolved Assembly continued to meet.
The Venice Commission, an advisory body of law experts under the auspices of the
Council of Europe, confirmed on 10 July that the President acted within her
rights and that the Republika Srpska Government could, until new elections, only
continue its work in a caretaker capacity. On 15 August the Republika Srpska
Constitutional Court ruled that the President's decision had been
unconstitutional. This decision was the result of political pressure including
a physical assault against one of the judges.
54. In parallel to the constitutional crisis, the security situation in the
Republika Srpska worsened. On 10 July, SFOR, in accordance with its mandate
under Annex 1 A of the Peace Agreement, tried to apprehend two persons who were
subject of sealed indictments for war crimes in Prijedor. The result of this
operation was one arrest and the death of the former chief of police of
Prijedor. In response, the SDS leadership orchestrated a defamation campaign
and launched attacks targeted against representatives of international
organizations, thus escalating an already volatile situation. At the same time,
Serb members of the Presidency and of the Council of Ministers temporarily
ceased their cooperation in the common institutions.
55. As a clear signal of the international community's resolve to address these
issues, IPTF and SFOR began to treat, as of 8 August, the Republika Srpska
special police according to the rules and regulations laid down in Annex 1 A of
the Peace Agreement. Security problems, however, continued. On 20 August,
IPTF, supported by SFOR, undertook weapon checks in a series of police bases in
Banja Luka. On 28 August acts of violence took place in Brcko including against
my regional office.
56. Regarding the media situation, my office enhanced its support for
independent media in Banja Luka and other parts of the Republika Srpska.

On
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 13

30 August, the North Atlantic Council in response to my call has confirmed
paragraph 70 of the Sintra Declaration and decided that SFOR could curtail or
suspend media networks acting "in persistent and blatant contravention of either
the spirit or the letter of the Peace Agreement". As an effort to get the
Republika Srpska Television to cooperate seriously, my office, SFOR and Pale
concluded the Udrigovo Agreement on 2 September, establishing the joint Media
Support Advisory Group.
57. At the end of September, the Republika Srpska remains de facto split with
its two power centres in Pale and Banja Luka. There are signs, however, that
the key players might be willing to overcome this split and find, on the basis
of constitutionality and cooperation with the international community, ways out
of the present crisis situation. On 24 September, the Republika Srpska
President and the Serb member of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Presidency agreed in
Belgrade to hold Assembly elections in November and elections of Republika
Srpska President as well as Republika Srpska member of Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency in December. On 26 September, both Banja Luka and Pale agreed with
IPTF to have the Republika Srpska police fully restructured.

Media
58. The general situation remains one of concern to the Office of the High
Representative. "State" media continued to pursue a nationalist and
inflammatory editorial line, although this is less severe in Bosniak media
within the Federation. Recent events in Republika Srpska including the seizure
of SRT transmitter sites by SFOR have underlined the continued abuse of accepted
norms in democratic media standards; the Office of the High Representative will
determine the necessary rules for SRT to broadcast in the future. Events in
West Mostar have seen an explosion of inflammatory language; this issue has been
raised within the Media Support and Advisory Group, chaired by the Office of the
High Representative and will be dealt with accordingly.
59. Underscoring the Office of the High Representative's commitment to a free
and democratic media within Bosnia and Herzegovina remains the development of a
strong, independent and alternative source of information. The Open Broadcast
Network (OBN) project continues to develop and now broadcasts to 60 per cent of
the territory of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the project development continues to be
hampered by late delivery of pledges by donor countries. Funding has now been
agreed for the Office of the High Representative inspired Independent Print
House project for Banja Luka; this will be a European Community supported
project and will provide a guaranteed print facility for independent newspapers
in Republika Srpska.

Return of refugees and displaced persons
60. My office has continued its efforts to support as well as coordinate
international and national actors to facilitate return and repatriation,
especially of persons who are returning to areas in which they would now be in
the ethnic minority. These efforts have focused on overcoming of political
obstacles to such returns in certain key areas as well as on supporting the
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 14

creation of the necessary conditions for return, also through an integrated
approach to the reconstruction of housing, social and other infrastructure.
61. More than 80,000 refugees have repatriated to Bosnia and Herzegovina from
countries in Europe since the beginning of the year and numerous displaced
persons more have been able to go home. However, almost all have gone to socalled majority areas - parts of the country administered by their own ethnic
group - because of continued political, security and administrative obstacles.
Successful returns of so-called minorities have been limited, but then such
movements have taken place in a more promising environment. Open Cities model,
the political breakthrough achieved in the Central Bosnia Canton with Federation
Government and international political support and some local return
arrangements are noteworthy developments. In the Central Bosnia Canton,
supported by the international community, the Cantonal authorities have prepared
a return programme which foresees the immediate return of displaced persons to
uninhabited houses and subsequent phased returns to inhabited houses and
socially owned apartments. Under this plan, minority returns have already begun
to previously blocked municipalities, such as Bugojno and Jajce. My Deputy, the
late Ambassador Gerd Wagner, was instrumental in turning a negative incident of
forced expulsions of newly returned displaced persons into a political incentive
to overcome political attitudes that had blocked inter-Federation returns in
Central Bosnia for all too long.
62. It is essential that limited international reconstruction funds be put to
their optimum use. This also involves conditioning assistance to necessary
political changes, and rewarding municipalities that support the peace process
and withdrawing funds from non-compliant municipalities. My office has been
advocating the development of mechanisms to deploy reconstruction assistance
rapidly and flexibly in support of political openings, and will call on the
major donor agencies to build such flexibility into their programmes for 1998.
63. The Coalition for Return gathers about 200 different associations of
refugees and displaced persons from all over Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia, Croatia and other host countries. The Coalition
continues to be supported by my office. It operates two information centres,
one each in Sarajevo and Banja Luka, the latter being in the process of starting
up. The Coalition issues a monthly bulletin which is distributed throughout the
country. Closely linked to the Coalition, a so-called roof project has been
ongoing over the last few months, providing immediate and non-bureaucratic help
for returnees through the network of the Coalition.
64. Finally, my office remains engaged in the chair of a working group on
return and reconstruction in the zone of separation.

Freedom of movement
65. Freedom of movement continues to improve gradually. The key advances in
the period described involve the recent signing of memoranda to reopen Tuzla,
Mostar and Banja Luka airports to civilian traffic and the 26 September opening
of the Gradiska border crossing between northern Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Croatia. Gradiska and other northern crossing points to be opened soon will
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 15

enable freedom of movement for persons, goods and services between the Republika
Srpska and Croatia.
66. The fact that international borders will now be open on all sides of Bosnia
and Herzegovina will encourage efforts to press forward with uniform visa and
customs policies throughout the country. Unilateral application of transit and
visa fees by the Republika Srpska authorities has been a recurring problem.
This must change, if the Republika Srpska authorities wish their citizens to
share fully in the benefits of freer international travel and trade.
67. The IPTF implementation of its new checkpoint policy, with essential
support from SFOR, is improving in effectiveness. Approvals for checkpoints
have declined from some 350 daily in May to one or two dozen daily in recent
weeks. Energetic dismantling of illegal checkpoints has shown local police that
it is prudent to comply.
68. The 26 September agreement of the Republika Srpska authorities with IPTF to
start immediately with police restructuring is another positive development.
Restructuring would involve reduction of the police force from 20,000 to 8,500
personnel and intensive screening and training of remaining officers to ensure
their adherence to democratic policing standards, as well as revision of rules
of procedure. Effective implementation of the Republika Srpska police
restructuring will be a key task for IPTF with the support of my office and
SFOR.
69. Meanwhile, efforts are continuing to ensure compliance with police
restructuring in the Federation, where progress in Herzegovina-Neretva and
Central Bosnia Cantons has not been without difficulties.

Missing persons, mass graves
70. The issue of missing persons remains highly volatile due to its political
importance as well as its personal importance to the surviving family members of
the missing. The exact number of missing persons is still uncertain; the
International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) has received tracing requests
for more than 19,500 persons and to this date the status of 1,271 missing
individuals have been clarified.
71. During the reporting period no major cross-inter-entity boundary line
exhumations have taken place. The main reason being, different interpretations
regarding the last agreement, and the political situation in the Republika
Srpska. Exchange of mortal remains as well as exchange of bodies have, however,
taken place between the parties.
72. Under the auspices of the International Expert Group on Exhumations and
Missing Persons, chaired by the Office of the High Representative, several
projects to assist the parties have been performed. Through international
forensic pathologists and forensic anthropologists, the Physicians for Human
Rights have been monitoring and providing technical assistance in three major
exhumations, and have assisted in more than 150 post-mortem examinations. A new
post-mortem protocol has been developed in order to standardize the collection
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 16

of data and it has been developed and tested in two major exhumations. In the
ante mortem database project, 5,400 interviews have been made and the
demographic information from informants has been computerized. Under the
identification project deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) tests have been carried out
on bodies exhumed in 1996 from a mass grave in Srebrenica.
73. The International Commission on Missing Persons has continued to support
family associations of missing persons as well as the ante mortem database and
the identification project. Additional donations of equipment for exhumations
and autopsies have also been delivered to the parties by the Commission. In
order to address all issues relating to missing persons more effectively a
substantial political will is required along with additional resources.

Humanitarian rights
74. Concrete steps need to be taken by the authorities to demonstrate their
commitment to protecting human rights, a fundamental precondition to
facilitating returns and to achieving social stability and economic development.
These steps include changing laws that are not in compliance with the
Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which incorporates the European
Convention on Human Rights; improving security conditions and freedom of
movement; protecting the right to fair trial and ensuring the rule of law; and
providing opportunities for equal access to employment, housing, education and
other public services, including documents.
75. The Sintra Declaration called for both Entities to amend their property
laws to eliminate the substantial barriers to return. On 20 August the
Federation Forum agreed that the three draft property laws prepared by the
Office of the High Representative would be adopted by 30 September. Federation
authorities have made some steps to meet that commitment - including its
government's decision to present one of the draft laws to the Parliament - but
all three laws need to be considered and adopted without further delay. At the
same time, Republika Srpska authorities have taken no action to amend the
existing law on abandoned property, which blocks return of refugees and
displaced persons.
76. An unsatisfactory human rights situation prevails in both Entities.
Violations of freedom of movement, harassment, violence, destruction of property
and discrimination on the basis of ethnicity and political affiliation continue
to be reported in many areas, most notably in the Republika Srpska. In a number
of these cases, police have failed to take effective action to prevent or
respond to incidents, and have not cooperated effectively with international
monitors. In these respects, the situation remains fundamentally unchanged from
my last report.
77. Many serious human rights violations which have occurred during the period
described are related to the critical issue of return of refugees and displaced
people. In Jajce, an IPTF investigation found that some 400-550 Bosniaks were
forced to leave their homes as a result of police inaction in the face of
intimidation, violence, arson and one murder. In Travnik, several violent
crimes committed against Croats have given rise to concerns over the security
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 17

environment in the community, although most of these incidents appear to have
motivations other than the ethnicity of the victims. There were a number of
reported cases of human rights abuses committed on political grounds. Also of
note during the reporting period is the continuation of the troubling pattern of
attacks on religious sites. On 3 September, a Catholic church in Grbavica
suffered minor damage in an explosion; on 25 September, a mosque in Tomislavgrad
was seriously damaged by a bomb.
78. The extensive list of human rights obligations which form part of the
Bosnia and Herzegovina Constitution must be brought into law through the
adoption of implementing legislation and by a review of existing laws to
determine their compatibility with international human rights standards. The
Federation's expert team continues to work on reform of the criminal procedure
code; similar efforts must be urgently undertaken within the Republika Srpska,
and international institutions, including the Council of Europe, should be
involved in the process.
79. Greater efforts must also be made by the authorities to inform the public
both of their rights and of the legal framework which has been created to
protect those rights. My office will continue to advocate for protection of the
rights of those persons who fall victim to the substantial gap which currently
exists between the standards set forth in the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution and existing law and to work with the Federation and the Republika
Srpska authorities to establish mechanisms and procedures for inter-entity
judicial cooperation.

Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia and strengthening the rule of law
80. Cooperation with the International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia
continues to be a key part of the process of peace implementation. The failure
of responsible authorities, particularly the Republika Srpska, to hand over
indicted persons presents a continuing threat to the peace process. The
surrender of 10 Bosnian Croats to The Hague on 6 October was a much welcome step
towards improved cooperation by Bosnian Croats and the Republic of Croatia. As
of 7 October, only 4 of 18 Croats subject to publicly disclosed indictments
remain at large and all 3 known Bosniaks indicted are held in The Hague. In
contrast, just 3 of 54 Serbs indicted by the Tribunal are in custody (2 indicted
Serbs are deceased).
81. International monitors and the media have documented and publicized the
current whereabouts of a number of persons who have been indicted by the
Tribunal, some of whom are believed to be working in a public capacity in the
municipalities of Prijedor, Bosanski Samac and Foca.
82. The responsible authorities must take immediate steps to execute arrest
warrants for persons indicted by the Tribunal and surrender all indicted persons
to the Tribunal. Domestic laws and Constitutional provisions that are used as
reasons for avoiding such steps are clearly superseded by the Bosnia and
Herzegovina Constitution and Annexes of the Peace Agreement, and must be amended
accordingly.
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 18

83. No new arrests in violation of the rules of the road occurred during the
past three months. This fact alone illustrates that the rules of the road
constitute an important deterrent to pretextual arrest, and are essential tools
for building confidence in the domestic legal system. Nevertheless, the threat
of unjustified arrest for war crimes remains a substantial obstacle to freedom
of movement, in part because local authorities in both entities continue to
refer repeatedly to "lists of war crimes suspects" which are wholly incompatible
with the rules of the road process. The Ministers of Justice of the two
entities have agreed to issue instructions to all relevant authorities informing
them of their obligations under the rules, including their obligation to
eliminate use of or reference to such lists. My office will continue to press
the authorities to comply with the rules of the road and will intervene in cases
in which the rules are violated and coordinate monitoring of war crimes cases
and trials.

Economic reform and reconstruction
84. The Economic Department of my office coordinates with donor agencies and
international financial institutions the international support for
macroeconomics management, structural reform, economic reconstruction and
refugee return. In addition, the Department will provide leadership on
governance issues, a key part of the beginning anti-corruption effort. The
Department is in urgent need for the secondment of economists with experience in
public finance, public financial management and privatization.
85. During the reporting period six grant agreements were signed with the
authorities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The World Bank approved credits in the
total amount of US$ 50 million for the financing of two projects with a total
cost of $195 million. The Third Donors' Conference convened in July resulted in
pledges exceeding $1.2 billion. With further pledges coming in, I am confident
that the estimated reconstruction need of $1.4 billion will be met. The
Conference conditioned disbursement of reconstruction aid on compliance with the
Peace Agreement, and handed the task of implementing political conditionality to
the Economic Task Force under my chairmanship.
86. The minimum legal framework for the Bosnia and Herzegovina economy was
adopted in June. In the Federation, key legislation on privatization has been
stalled over political disagreements regarding the assignment of the external
debt obligations of banks and enterprises. In cooperation with the United
States Treasury, I am working with the Bosniak and Croat leadership to resolve
the issue. The London Club of commercial creditors reached an Agreement in
Principle on debt restructuring involving a reduction of about 80 per cent in
the net present value of commercial debt. A debt reduction deal with the Paris
Club awaits the conclusion of an International Monetary Fund (IMF) Standby
Agreement. Disagreement over the currency design and the ongoing crisis in the
Republika Srpska continue to delay the Standby Agreement. However, the new
Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina has begun operating.
87. The reconstruction effort continues to be concentrated on infrastructure,
with a strong emphasis on employment generation. In the third quarter, some 500
new contracts were signed. This raised the total number of contracts to date to
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 19

about 3,300 with an aggregate contract value of approximately $1.4 billion.
However, major funding gaps remain in all major sectors. Political
disagreements continue to impede the resumption of main railway services. Their
resolution must remain a condition for further donor funding in the sector. In
telecommunications, a viable interim solution has been reached with the signing
by the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers of the European Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) of a memorandum of agreed principles and
the EBRD memorandum of understanding. This has opened the way for grants and
concessionary credits for the financing of telecommunications infrastructure.
The European Community project established the first inter-entity telephone
link. Yet, conditionality will still be needed to secure further progress in
the sector.
88. Under the supervision of my Deputy, Brcko Supervisor, some 320 families
have returned to the Brcko area, and return applications of an additional 5,000
people have been approved. Compared to the pace of refugee return,
infrastructure reconstruction and economic revitalization are lagging with the
attendant consequences for the local labour market. At the Donors' Conference,
the Brcko Supervisor called attention to the need for making revitalization of
the economy an integral part of the return process, and donors responded by
pledging funds. Project development and implementation, however, are not
proceeding rapidly enough. A deteriorating health situation, furthermore, will
require additional funding for a screening and vaccination programme.
89. The main impediments to a greater return of refugees have been the failure
of both entities to make the changes in the property legislation as well as the
political climate and economic destitution in the Republika Srpska. There have
also been substantial resource constraints in the housing sector. The financing
gap of $320 million-$420 million to fill the costs of the anticipated return was
not adequately addressed either by loan or grant financing.

Civil aviation
90. A major success of the period described was the joint signing by the
Co-chairman of the Bosnia and Herzegovina Council of Ministers of the memorandum
of understanding for the new Bosnia and Herzegovina Department of Civil Aviation
and the airport memorandums of understanding for Banja Luka, Mostar and Tuzla.
The Office of the High Representative main effort is now focused on turning the
concept of the Department of Civil Aviation into a fully operational and
responsible central body and on opening the airports to civilian air traffic.
91. The formation of an international secretariat which is the key to providing
arbitration within the Department of Civil Aviation during its infancy will be
the priority task of my office. The secretariat, chaired by the Office of the
High Representative initially, will comprise aviation experts from the
International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), Eurocontrol and the Federal
Aviation Authority joined by other influential players from the European
Community (Aviation Policy), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and
the Supreme Headquarters Allied Powers, Europe (SHAPE). The first joint meeting
of these agencies took place on 8 October; it is expected that the main
personnel will commence detachments to Sarajevo. I remain convinced that the
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 20

regeneration of civil aviation is pivotal to the economic and social recovery of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the topic will continue to be a high priority on my
agenda.

Mine clearance
92. I have agreed to a request by the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (UNMIBH) that the Office of the High Representative should become
fully involved in the formulation of the new Bosnia and Herzegovina national
demining organization. The Office of the High Representative's greater
participation is required to ensure the structure's adoption by the Council of
Ministers and to ease the anxieties of those donors who have been sceptical of
the United Nations contribution to Bosnia and Herzegovina demining so far. As a
result the representatives of UNMIBH and the Office of the High Representative
will chair an Interim Steering Committee which will be attended by the European
Union, World Bank, Mine Action Centre (MAC) and others. The aim of the group is
to bring together a powerful body of key donors who can ensure that the final
demining organization structure meets necessary requirements, and focus pressure
onto the indigenous Bosnia and Herzegovina organization in order to build a
Bosnia and Herzegovina national demining structure that is both transparent and
accountable. After 1 January 1998 the Interim Steering Committee will form into
a Steering Committee, which will maintain the required oversight of the national
organization that will replace MAC.

IV.

COOPERATION WITH THE STABILIZATION FORCE

93. Cooperation with SFOR, whose role is essential in providing the secure
environment necessary for civilian implementation, remains excellent. I am
pleased that SFOR will remain at phase III troop levels for the foreseeable
future and welcome the open debate regarding the need for a stable environment
for civilian implementation beyond the end of the SFOR mandate in June 1998. On
a more practical level my work and that of my principal staff, is becoming
increasingly hampered by the lack of available air transport within, and to and
from, theatre. Any additional support that could be provided would be most
welcome.

V.

LOOKING FORWARD

94. The successful implementation of the municipal election results will be a
major challenge in the coming months. The Election Implementation Plan,
endorsed in Sintra, establishes a two-stage certification period which will
close with the establishment of a functioning municipal assembly and election of
municipal authorities that fairly represent the election results. To this end,
an inter-agency monitoring mechanism will enable the identification of any body
that is obstructing the implementation process. In consultation with OSCE, I
may ultimately need to take appropriate action should implementation be
incomplete, however the responsibility for the installation of elected
candidates, their personal safety and for a fully functioning Municipal

/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 21

Assembly, lies squarely on the shoulders of the political parties and the local
authorities.
95. This is a significant task and an important step forward in the realization
of the peace process. Moreover, while I support the close attention being paid
to the prospect of other elections which might be held within the Republika
Srpska, these should not be allowed to detract from the satisfactory
implementation of the municipal election results. The international supervision
of these other elections will make technical and financial demands which should
be reflected in realistic target polling dates. The principle is clear: until
the establishment of the Permanent Election Commission - provided for under
Annex 3 - OSCE must be satisfied that all elections can be said to be free, fair
and democratic. Any such supervision must be accompanied by the strict
application of the rules and regulations relating to the rules for eligibility
to vote.
96. The establishment of the Permanent Election Commission is one of the key
tasks facing the authorities and my office in the coming months. It is to be
established by an Election Law to be adopted by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Parliamentary Assembly. To this end, I have engaged experts to prepare a first
draft which will be presented to the authorities for their consideration in the
near future. I must emphasize, however, that international supervisory
elements, at least for a transitional period, need to be built into the Election
Law.
97. The creation of open and independent media is crucial, not only for the
electorate to be fully informed of the choices available, but also for the
creation of a democratic society in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I will continue to
insist on dramatic media reform, not only in the Republika Srpska, but in the
Federation as well. Media abuse will be dealt with in a robust manner
reflecting the powers I was given in the Sintra Declaration. I will not
hesitate to recommend action, similar to that taken by SFOR in the Republika
Srpska, against other media outlets should it be required. West Mostar
television, for example, has been a source of concern and will receive greater
scrutiny over the coming months.
98. The use of force to achieve compliance can produce results in the short
term. However to achieve real reform of the media, alternative programming,
monitoring and legislation, is required. The OBN footprint is rapidly
expanding; I also intend to insert public information programming into media
networks. Until media laws have been adopted by the two Entities, I intend to
create, as a successor to the Media Experts Commission, an independent Media
Standards and Licensing Commission. This Commission will provide the interim
legal framework through which broadcasting media will be licensed and regulated.
My office is currently developing the working procedures of the Media Support
and Advisory Group which will form the executive body administering the powers
granted to me in Sintra.
99. I remain deeply concerned regarding the lack of resources - both financial
and in kind - for IPTF. Considerable steps forward have been made with the
police restructuring in the Federation, however, stagnation is likely if the
resources necessary to enable IPTF to carry through the reforms are not
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 22

forthcoming. Likewise, the recent agreement on restructuring in the Republika
Srpska could lose momentum. I urge nations rapidly to commit the funds
requested.
100. There has been some progress in the Common Institutions of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a number of the tasks established in the Sintra Declaration have
been achieved. However, on issues of substance such as citizenship and
passports laws and common flag, the Serb members of the Common Institutions
continue to obstruct. I do not believe that non-compliance measures in
isolation have the desired effect; we will be developing other means for
overcoming blockages. In particular, I believe we should consider the
possibility of strengthening my mandate to allow me, with the support of the
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to arbitrate on issues where agreement
cannot be reached. It is essential that, while assisting them to move forward,
we do not undermine the powers of the Common Institutions or the idea of
consensus enshrined in the Constitution of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
101. The Common Institutions remain fragile and require our support, however,
they must assume the responsibility given them by the electorate. To this end,
they must urgently resolve the issues of location and administrative services,
without which their work is superficial. My office continues to assist them
with logistical and secretarial support, a situation I consider unacceptable.
The emphasis over the next few months will therefore be on the establishment of
fully functioning bodies capable of carrying forward the workload on their own.
102. I welcome the emergence of an opposition within the Republika Srpska
leadership and a direct challenge to the corrupt and deceitful regime in Pale.
It is important however to note that alternative voices are not necessarily the
voices of reason or peace. Whoever exercises constitutional power following the
forthcoming elections will be tightly held to all the Republika Srpska
obligations under the Peace Agreement.
103. Ultimately, significant changes in the attitude of the authorities in the
Republika Srpska are impossible so long as indicted war criminals remain at
large. In particular, the continued and active political influence of
R. Kradzic directly obstructs implementation and threatens the security and
integrity of Republika Srpska. The complete failure by the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia to fulfil its obligations under the Peace Agreement in this respect
is unacceptable. All competent authorities are reminded of their obligations to
submit suspected war criminals to the Tribunal and, while I note the role of
Croatia in facilitating the voluntary appearance at The Hague of 10 indicted
Bosnian Croats, a great deal more remains to be done on all sides. This issue
must be urgently resolved.
104. The situation in the Federation has seen some improvements over the last
few months, most notably there have been significant minority returns of
displaced people within Central Bosnia. I must emphasize the crucial role that
my Deputy, the late Ambassador Gerd Wagner, played in facilitating this
breakthrough. I urge the authorities in the Federation to continue this process
and I look to the international community to reward such developments with fast
and flexible deployment of resources and funding to facilitate reconstruction
and return.
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 23

105. In Mostar, I welcome the removal of some of those who have actively
obstructed reconciliation and progress and expect positive engagement by their
successors. However, the situation there remains volatile in particular due to
the fact that the three West Mostar municipalities have not yet been dissolved.
I will recommend that non-compliance measures, such as the denial of travel
visas, be applied to all officials I perceive as actively blocking the peace
process.
106. On the wider issue of refugee return which has been far from satisfactory
in 1997, current property laws remain a serious impediment. Despite the Sintra
obligation to amend the laws, neither Entity has complied. I will therefore be
recommending non-compliance measures at the November meeting of the Steering
Board.
107. In Brcko, we are approaching the crucial phase of establishing a
multi-ethnic administration, police and judiciary. Both the Republika Srpska
and the Federation are reminded that the implementation of this phase and their
compliance with all orders of the Supervisor, will have a direct bearing on the
final award. Funds are urgently required to support the economic revitalization
essential to establishing a multi-ethnic society in Brcko and facilitating the
phased and orderly return process. To this end, I will be calling for a
conference to address these issues.
108. Completing the task of establishing and making operational the common
institutions of economic management remains a priority of my office.
Increasingly, however, the focus will shift to creating the conditions for
sustained growth well before international reconstruction assistance comes to an
end. I believe that the current political crisis in Republika Srpska will
result in a firmer commitment to the Peace Agreement; this will finally open the
way for starting the economic recovery in Republika Srpska which already has
benefited the Federation in an impressive manner. I urge donors to reward such
change rapidly and decisively. While economic recovery reinforces the peace
process by giving all groups a stake in the common future, I will also use
reconstruction assistance as a lever for directly furthering specific political
objectives.
109. With the opening of the Central Bank in August, all common institutions
have now resumed their work. The minimum set of basic legislation, the socalled quick start package was also adopted. However, much remains to be done.
Overdue tasks include: issuance of the common currency, implementation of the
common customs tariff schedule; installing the administrative capacity of the
Council of Ministers; and adopting the Foreign Investment Law. In addition, my
office is working with international agencies and local authorities on a second
set of essential legislation on the State level in the areas of customs, civil
aviation, frequency management and telecommunications.
110. Private investment and exports must increasingly replace reconstruction
assistance as the dominant sources of growth. The transition to a market
economy is key. In close cooperation with the World Bank, the European
Commission, the United States Treasury and the United States Agency for
International Development, my office is focusing on getting the privatization
process started, modernizing the framework for domestic and foreign investment,
/...

S/1997/804
English
Page 24

reforming the social security system as a prerequisite for easing the excessive
burden of contributions, and approximating basic commercial laws to the
standards of the European Union.
111. The Third Donors' Conference has agreed to the repeated suggestions of the
Peace Implementation Council that political conditionality be applied to
reconstruction assistance, and has given the Economic Task Force under my
chairmanship the mandate for implementing political conditionality. I expect
that a new structure I am setting up in the Office of the High Representative
will succeed in using the potential leverage.
112. I intend to take the lead in the fight against corruption and diversion of
funds, which causes growing concern in the international community. My office,
with the support of the World Bank and other main donors, has shown that the
source of corruption is not the use of reconstruction aid, but rather
opportunities for the evasion of customs duties and sales taxes, and for the
misappropriation of domestic public funds. I have requested the Economic Task
Force to develop a comprehensive anti-corruption strategy in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. An essential part of it will be the establishment of an
inter-agency group with local participation as means to raise public awareness
of the problem and create consensus on the necessary reforms.

-----
