S/PV.8692

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8692nd meeting

Thursday, 19 December 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Norman-Chalet. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Ipo
Mr. Trullols Yabra
Mr. Elé Ela
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Heusgen
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Popolizio Bardales
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Repkin
Mr. Mabhongo
Ms. Palmer

Agenda
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo
Letter dated 24 October 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/842)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (S/2019/905)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-42289 (E)
*1942289*

S/PV.8692

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation concerning the Democratic Republic
of the Congo
Letter dated 24 October 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/842)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Organization Stabilization
Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (S/2019/905)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2019/957, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/842, which contains a letter
dated 24 October 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council, and
document S/2019/905, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Belgium, China, Côte d’Ivoire, Dominican
Republic, Equatorial Guinea, France, Germany,
Indonesia, Kuwait, Peru, Poland, Russian
Federation, South Africa, United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States
of America
The President: The draft resolution received
15 votes in favour. The draft resolution has been
adopted unanimously as resolution 2502 (2019).
2/7

19/12/2019

I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2502
(2019), renewing the mandate of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO). By this resolution,
the Security Council seeks to endorse the emergence
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo into a new
phase of its history and to mark the importance of
the partnership between the United Nations and
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, in order to
contribute jointly to the protection of civilians and to
stabilize the country.
That is why the Council calls in particular on the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and the United
Nations to jointly develop a transition strategy that
will make it possible to clearly determine the priorities
to be implemented in order to meet the prerequisites
for the eventual withdrawal of MONUSCO, in what
the independent strategic review called a transitional
compact for lasting peace. This initiative will make
it possible to concentrate efforts on the east of the
country, which is still in the grip of violent clashes,
while pursuing efforts to consolidate the State and
its institutions. Through the resolution, the Security
Council also recalls its expectations regarding
the protection of civilians, which is at the heart of
MONUSCO’s Chapter VII mandate and which is the
responsibility of the entire Mission.
But beyond MONUSCO, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo will need the help of all its partners in
order to fully implement the reforms necessary for the
lasting stabilization of the country. I am thinking of
justice and security sector reform, and the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process in particular,
both of which are essential to ending the violence
that continues to affect parts of the country. I am also
thinking of the development programmes carried out by
President Tshilombo Tshisekedi and his Government,
which are aimed at promoting more equitable access to
available resources and basic services and at thereby
reducing tensions, particularly between communities.
The United Nations, international financial institutions
and bilateral and multilateral partners must all mobilize
in support of the Democratic Republic of the Congo so
as to enable it to achieve these objectives. MONUSCO
will not be able to do so alone. The Democratic Republic
of the Congo can count on the support of France. We
19-42289

19/12/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

have already planned support of €300 million over the
next five years.
Finally, in addition to these partners, it is first and
foremost the region that is called upon to mobilize. The
Great Lakes region has enormous development potential
and the States of the region have a collective destiny to
develop it. This objective has been rooted in the Addis
Ababa Peace, Security and Cooperation Framework
since 2013. The eradication of hostile groups, the
normalization of the extractive sector, legal and fiscal
harmonization and the establishment of regional
cooperation in customs and police matters require the
commitment of all States and subregional organizations.
France hopes that all the political leaders of the
region will fully seize the available opportunities to
definitively turn the page of the past and build together
a future in partnership.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): The three African
members of the Security Council — Côte d’Ivoire,
Equatorial Guinea and South Africa — welcome
the adoption of resolution 2502 (2019), extending
the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo (MONUSCO) for a 12-month period. The
MONUSCO mandate renewal for a 12-month period
will accompany President Félix Tshilombo Tshisekedi
and his Government in their journey towards peace and
stability for the development of the country and for the
good of their people.
We commend the penholder for its stewardship
of the negotiating process and for conducting the
negotiations in a transparent manner, in pursuit
of consensus. We would also like to extend our
appreciation to other members of the Security Council
for their constructive engagement.
We support the overall strengthening of the
MONUSCO mandate to protect civilians from the
threat of armed groups and welcome the indispensable
role played by the Force Intervention Brigade in this
regard. We commend MONUSCO for the valuable
and important role it has played in the security of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in support of
the positive political developments in that country.
The security situation in the east of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, however, underscores the need
for the Government to strengthen the capacity of State
institutions, with the support of MONUSCO.

S/PV. 8692

The three African members therefore view the
maintenance of the dual priority tasks set out in
the resolution as vital to addressing the situation.
Furthermore,
the
resolution
epitomizes
the
pronouncements made by President Tshisekedi on his
vision for MONUSCO in addressing the challenges
facing his country, in particular the security situation
pertaining to the eastern Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The three African members welcome the request
for the Secretary-General to work with the Democratic
Republic of the Congo Government to develop
benchmarks that are to be met for the successful and
responsible hand-over of MONUSCO tasks to the
Government. It is vital that, in this regard, the withdrawal
of MONUSCO be based on the positive evolution of the
situation on the ground and the successful meeting of
these benchmarks.
In closing, we look forward to further engagement
with all members of the Security Council and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government on
the future of MONUSCO, taking into account that the
Democratic Republic of the Congo needs to advance its
national security programme towards the development
of the country.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): Indonesia welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution to 2502 (2019).
We thank the penholder for its efforts in finding
compromise among diverging positions.
Indonesia voted in favour of the resolution for
several reasons, one of which is a response to the
call from the Democratic Republic of the Congo
to strengthen the capacities of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) and extend its
mandate. We also recognize MONUSCO’s invaluable
role in protecting civilians and maintaining peace and
stability in the country.
At the high-level event on improving peacekeeping
performance earlier this month, Ambassador Kelly
Craft stated that peacekeeping performance is about
accountability. While we subscribe to that statement,
we also emphasize that such accountability must
be balanced. MONUSCO is first and foremost a
peacekeeping mission that must adhere to a certain
standard of professionalism. At the same time, it is
important to recognize that performance standards
must apply to all components of the Mission, uniformed

19-422893/7

S/PV.8692

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

and civilian. To attain that standard, peacekeeping
mandates must also be matched with the necessary
resources. Peacekeepers and the people they serve will
always be at risk and in harm’s way if peacekeepers
have to do more with less. It is therefore vital to have
meaningful and regular consultations with troopand police-contributing countries throughout all
mission stages.
We welcome the improved balance in the section of
the resolution on performance. Indonesia reiterates its
commitment to working with Member States to improve
peacekeeping performance and create an accountable
peacekeeping mission. I salute the peacekeepers for
risking their lives and leaving their families behind to
pursue peace in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and in the world. Their safety and security will be at the
top of Indonesia’s priority.

19/12/2019

cooperation with the Government of the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. We also hope that the Secretariat
conducts the strategic review of the MONUSCO
mandate on the basis of respect for the views of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo Government so as
to ensure the gradual and orderly transfer of security
responsibilities from the Mission to the security forces
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. China stands
ready to work with the international community to
continue to contribute to the early realization of peace,
stability and development in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to take this
opportunity to thank France for its excellent work
during the negotiation of resolution 2502 (2019).

Since its establishment nearly 20 years ago, the
United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO)
has played an important role in maintaining peace and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
In the current complex situation, the Mission must
continue to fulfil its mandate.

Over the past year, the Democratic Republic
of the Congo has achieved an important political
transformation, and that effort is appreciated. Poland
welcomes the fact that the Security Council was able
to maintain a constructive position on the extension
of the mandate of the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo (MONUSCO) and adhere to its main priorities.
We believe that this will help the Government to
increase the State’s ability to provide minimum
conditions for the gradual transfer of responsibilities
from MONUSCO to the national authorities in the
future. The neutralization of armed groups and the
reduction of intercommunal violence remain necessary
conditions for improving the security situation and
ensuring respect for human rights in the country. In
that regard, we believe that the implementation of the
crucial disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme should be complemented by the community
violence reduction approach. It is essential that more
emphasis be put on the civilian and police components
of the Mission, which would not only support dialogue
and mediation at the central and local levels but also
promote the inclusiveness of the political process.

China welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2502 (2019), renewing the MONUSCO
mandate, and appreciates the flexibility of Council
members during the negotiating process, which
contributed to reaching consensus on the text and
demonstrated the unity of the Security Council. China
hopes that MONUSCO, in delivering its mandate, will
continue to enhance communication, coordination and

Looking ahead, it is of the utmost importance
that the Security Council remain in a constructive,
honest and open dialogue with the authorities about the
prospects of the United Nations presence in the country.
Poland hopes that future Security Council decisions in
that regard will be based on reality on the ground so that
two decades of United Nations peacekeeping efforts in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo are not lost.

Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): At
present, the overall situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo remains stable. In the year since he took
office, President Tshilombo Tshisekedi has made great
efforts to strengthen his Government’s capacity in
governance and security and to promote economic and
social development, with positive results. This fully
demonstrates the will and ability of the Government
and the people of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo to independently solve the problems facing the
country. At the same time, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is still facing many challenges in achieving
lasting peace, particularly in view of the severe problem
of armed groups in the eastern part of the country. As
such, it is necessary for the international community to
maintain is support.

4/7

19-42289

19/12/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Let me end by expressing our gratitude for the
tireless efforts of the entire MONUSCO team to support
peace, security and stability in the country.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Please allow me to express my thanks to France as
the penholder of resolution 2502 (2019), adopted today.
The United States fully supports the revised mandate,
which should improve the performance of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, consistent with the
request of the Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo that the Mission become leaner, better
equipped and better trained, with a stronger mandate
for the protection of civilians.
The United States has historically been and
will continue to be a strong supporter of meaningful
accountability and justice for victims of atrocities
through appropriate mechanisms. However, the United
States does not and cannot support any references to
the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the Rome
Statute that do not distinguish sufficiently between
parties and non-parties to the Rome Statute or are
otherwise inconsistent with the United States position
on the ICC, as announced by the White House on
10 September 2018. In particular, the United States
reiterates our continuing and long-standing objection
to any assertion of ICC jurisdiction over nationals of
States that are not parties to the Rome Statute, including
the United States and Israel, absent a referral from the
Security Council or the consent of such a State.
Our position on the ICC in no way diminishes our
commitment to supporting accountability for atrocity
crimes. The United States remains a leader in the
fight to end impunity and in supporting justice and
accountability for international crimes, including war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. The
United States respects the decision of those nations that
have chosen to join the ICC and, in turn, we expect that
our decision not to join the Court and not to place our
citizens under its jurisdiction will also be respected.
I now resume my functions as the President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo.
Mr. Empole (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to thank

S/PV. 8692

the Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the United Nations for organizing this meeting on
the situation in my country, the Democratic Republic of
the Congo and the renewal of the mandate of the United
Nations Organization Stabilization Mission in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO), and
for giving me the opportunity to address the Council.
Allow me to take this opportunity to again congratulate
the presidency on the very important work it is carrying
out throughout this month.
Allow me also to convey to the Security Council
the recognition and gratitude of my Government and
the Congolese people for the efforts made over the past
several years by the United Nations, which continues
to work to restore peace and stability in my country. In
particular, I thank Secretary-General António Guterres
for his determination and personal involvement in the
search for peace and a lasting solution to the situation
in the eastern part of the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
The Government of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo takes note of today’s adoption of
resolution 2502 (2019) and welcomes the renewal of
MONUSCO’s mandate for one year. That time will
be used to strengthen the strategic dialogue with the
United Nations until MONUSCO’s orderly and smooth
withdrawal. The important gesture that the Council
has just made is by no means a mere formality but the
renewal of a common commitment of the Government,
the United Nations, the Great Lakes region and other
partners to work together for peace, security and
stability in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
and the Great Lakes region with a view to achieving
the dream of sustainable development and economic
integration in the region.
Peace and security remain essential factors of
stability in the Great Lakes region, which is contingent
on full compliance with agreements and on the
political will of the leaders to work towards harmony
in the region. The loosening of tension and dynamic
cooperation observed throughout the year since the
accession to power of His Excellency Mr. Félix Antoine
Tshilombo Tshisekedi, President of the Republic
and Head of State, augur well for a better future for
the region.
The security situation in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo is generally calm, although it is still
dominated by the activities of national and foreign

19-422895/7

S/PV.8692

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

armed groups, as well as by intercommunal conflicts,
mainly in the eastern part of the country. Some national
armed groups, chiefly the Mai Mai, are associating with
foreign armed groups and forming dangerous coalitions.
It is in that context that the President launched
large-scale military operations on 30 October in Beni.
The operations are being conducted by the Forces
armées de la République démocratique du Congo
(FARDC), with the support of MONUSCO, with the
aim of eradicating all those threats, in particular the
Allied Democratic Forces-Madina Al-Tawheed wa
Mujahedeen (ADF-MTM), a terrorist group with
allegiance to the Islamic State. The military pressure
of the FARDC has begun to bear fruit, including the
neutralization of seven Mai Mai militias and the
recovery of several military effects in Mwera, in Fizi
territory, on 2 November; the surrender of 20 Mai Mai
Nyatura fighters in Ngungu, Masisi, in North Kivu on
25 November; the surrender of 120 fighters from the
Mai Mai Kalume group in South Kivu on 2 December;
the destruction of more than 95 per cent of the bases of
the destructive elements in the Conseil national pour
le renouveau et la démocratie and the capture of more
than 1,712 individuals, including 245 combatants and
10 political leaders of that harmful movement in Kalehe,
South Kivu, on 4 December; the recovery and control
of a number of ADF-MTM strongholds, including in
Mayangose, Мapobu-Carrières; and the neutralization
of leaders of the Forces démocratiques de libération
du Rwanda-Forces combattantes Abacunguzi, such
as Sylvestre Mudacumura, Musabimana Juvenal, also
known as Jean-Michel Africa, and Charles Kakule.
Despite those advances, we must deplore the
change in strategy of the defeated enemy, particularly
the ADF-MTM terrorists, who are now attacking
innocent populations in large urban areas, causing
death and desolation. Following the recent massacres
committed by elements of that terrorist group, the
President of the Republic decided to establish the
forward headquarters of the FARDC in Beni and called
for a more sustained involvement of MONUSCO.
The Head of State also proceeded to change the
entire command of the operational zone by rotating the
11,000 military personnel who were present in order
to relieve them and replace them with an increased
21,000 personnel. In addition, the Forces armées de
la République démocratique du Congo formed a rapid
intervention brigade and special forces, which are
currently deployed in that part of the territory to ensure
6/7

19/12/2019

the victory of our armed forces. The Government
has also deployed additional units of the Congolese
National Police in the extensive surrounding areas of
Beni that have been conquered by the FARDC in order
to ensure the security of the population.
As stated by the President of the Republic, the
Government and its armed forces are fully and
unstintingly determined to eradicate the armed groups
that are roaming the eastern part of the country, and
all possible means have been deployed to achieve that
objective. In that struggle, the Congolese Government is
counting on the support of MONUSCO and its partners
to restore peace, optimism and hope for a decent life to
the people of the eastern Democratic Republic of the
Congo. In that context, my Government appreciates
the decision of the Security Council, in choosing its
strategic priorities for MONUSCO’s new mandate, to
opt for protecting civilians and providing support to the
stabilization and strengthening of State institutions, as
well as to major governance and security reforms. My
country does indeed count on assistance and support
to the disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
programme, both for national armed groups that lay
down their arms to return to normal civilian life and
for foreign armed groups. That is because — and the
Council will agree — the disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration programme is of great importance for
reintegrating ex-combatants in order to ensure that they
do not fall into the hands of armed groups.
During the parliamentarians’ meeting convened in
Congress on 13 December, the Head of State reaffirmed
his unwavering commitment to reforming the security
sector, first and foremost to transform the FARDC into
a powerful, trained and equipped army; review the
Congolese National Police reform plan in order to adapt
it and establish a new reference plan on the theme “one
nation, one police”; and reform the intelligence services.
The idea of concentrating MONUSCO troops in
the six provinces where the presence of the Mission
is deemed necessary is in line with the Government’s
request to concentrate troops in provinces where
the threat level is very high and reduce troops in
areas where the threat is no longer present. In that
context, the President of the Republic has called for
a reconfiguration of MONUSCO, with a focus on a
qualitative resizing of the troops, which should be
fewer in number but better equipped and experienced
in dealing with asymmetrical warfare. My Government
19-42289

19/12/2019

The situation concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo

S/PV. 8692

intends to deepen its discussions on that topic within
the framework of our strategic dialogue.

3 December at the military court of the former province
of Kasai Occidental.

The Government is tirelessly focused on ensuring
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms,
as its function is to ensure that democratic freedoms
are respected, in particular by providing professional
supervision for public demonstrations. In the context
of combating human rights violations and violations
of humanitarian law committed against children in
conflict-affected territories, the Government continues
to implement the road map that was drawn up with
a view to ending the recruitment and use of children
in armed groups and to protecting them from sexual
violence. At the same time, the Congolese legal system
continues to pursue, independently and professionally,
hearings in the case of the assassinations of two United
Nations experts, taking into account the data obtained
from the international investigation and additional
elements from the team of the Special Prosecutor. The
most recent hearing, the thirty-second, was held on

In conclusion, allow me to recall that resolution
2502 (2019), which Council has just adopted, is aimed
at strengthening the performance of MONUSCO in
order to put an end to the suffering of the people in the
east of my country. As everyone knows, that situation
has caused millions of deaths, and the entire Congolese
population is eager for it to end. It is now up to us to
effectively set that process in motion.
I cannot end my statement without thanking all
the troop-contributing countries and the Blue Helmets
who have made this great sacrifice in order to restore
peace and security to my country. On another note, I
would like to extend to you, Madam President, and to
all members of the Security Council, on behalf of the
delegation of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
our best wishes for Christmas and the new year in 2020.
The meeting rose at 10.35 a.m.

19-422897/7
