4

General Assembly-Sixth Session

504 (VI). Measures to combat the threat of a
new world war anp to strengthen peace and
friendship among the nations
The General .Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 502 (VI) adopted at its
358th plenary meeting on 11 January 1952, which established a Disarmament Commission and authorized it
to consider all proposals designed to achieve the regulation, limitation and balanced reduction of all armed
forces and all armaments, including effective international control of atomic energy to ensure the prohibition of atomic weapons,
1. Decides to refer to the Disarmament Commission
the proposals contained in paragraphs 3 to 7 inclusive
of document A/C.1/698, 4 together with any other proposals which may be made during the present session
of the General Assembly on matters falling within the
terms of reference of the Disarmament Commission;
2. Decides also to transmit to the Disarmament
Commission for its information the records of the
meetings of the First Committee at which this item
was discussed. 5
363rd plenary meeting,
19 JanuMy 1952.

505 (VI). Threat8 to the political independence
and territorial integrity of China and to the
peace of the Far East, resulting from Soviet
violations of the Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship and Alliance of 14 August 1945 and from
Soviet violations of the Charter of the United
Nations
The General Assembly,
Considering that it is a prime objective of the United
Nations "to establish conditions under which justice
and respect for the obligations arising from treaties
and other sources of international law can be maintained",
Noting that the Republic of China and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics concluded on 14 August
1945 a Treaty 6 of Friendship and Alliance which provides, inter alia,
(a) That the Contractin~ Parties "agree . . . to
act in accordance with the principles of mutual respect
for each other's sovereignty and territorial integrity
and non-intervention in each other's internal affairs",
and
( b) That "the Soviet Government agrees to render
C~ina moral support and assist her with military supplies and other material resources, it being understood
that this support and assistance will go exclusively to
the National Government as the Central Government
of China",
Finding that the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
obstructed the efforts of the National Government of
China in re-establishing Chinese national authority in
• /bro., Sixth Session, Annexes, agenda item 67.
"Ibid., Sixth Session, First Committee, 487th-493rd meetings.
• ?ee Treaty Series, _Treaties and international agreements
reg~stered o_r filed and recorded ·with the Secretariat of the
United Nations, Volume 10, 1947, No. 68, page 300.

-------------·------

the three Eastern Provinces (Manchuria) after the
surrender of Japan and gave military and economic aid
to the Chinese Communists against the National Governmei.t of China,
Determines that the Union of Sc;viet Socialist Republics, in its relations with China since the surrender
of Ja pan, has failed to carry out the Treaty of Friendship and Alliance between China and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics of 14 August 1945.
369th pie.nary meeting,
1 Febru/Jlf'y 1952.

506 (VI). Admission of new Members, including
the right of candidate States to present proof
of the conditions required under Article 4
of the Charter
A

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
provides that membership is open to all States not
original Members of the Organization and that this
universality is subject only to the conditions that they
be peace-loving and accept the obligations contained in
the Charter and, in the judgment of the Organization,
are able and willing to carry out these obligations,
Considering that the judgment of the Organization
that they are willing and able to carry out these obligations and are otherwise qualified for membership ought
to be based on facts such as: the maintenance of
friendly relations with other States, the fulfilment of
international obligations and the record of a State's
willingness and present disposition to submit international claims or controversies to pacific means of settlement established by international law,
Considering that, according to the advisory opinion 7
of the International Court of Justice of 28 May 1948,
a Member of the United Nations voting on the application of a State for membership in the United Nations
is not juridically entitled to make its consent to admission dependent on conditions not expressly provided
by paragraph 1 of Article 4 of the Charter; and that
this opinion excludes the possibility that, consistently
with the letter and spirit of the Charter, Members can
base their votes on motives which are outside the scope
of Article 4 of the Charter,
Considering that, not only for these reasons but also
according to principles of international justice, it is not
possible to deny to States candidates for membership
in the United Nations the right to present proofs on
facts such as those recited in the first paragraph of the
preamble,
Recalling and reaffirming General Assembly resolutions 197 B (III) of 8 December 1948 and 296 K
(IV) of 22 November 1949,
1. Declares that the judgment of the United Nations
on the admission of new Members ought to be based
exclusively on the conditions contained in Article 4 of
the Charter ;
1
See Admis.;-ion of a State to the United Nations ( Charter
Article 4), Advisory Opinion, l.C.J .. Reports, 1948, page 57. '
