United Nations

A/RES/65/279

General Assembly

Distr.: General
21 July 2011

Sixty-fifth session
Agenda item 66 (b)

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 13 June 2011
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/65/L.76)]

65/279. Scope, modalities, format and organization of the highlevel meeting of the General Assembly to commemorate
the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban
Declaration and Programme of Action
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 64/148 of 18 December 2009, in which it, inter alia,
called for the commemoration of the tenth anniversary of the Durban Declaration
and Programme of Action adopted by the World Conference against Racism, Racial
Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related Intolerance, 1
Recalling also its resolution 65/240 of 24 December 2010, in which it decided
to hold a one-day high-level meeting of the General Assembly, at the level of Heads
of State and Government, on the second day of the general debate of the sixty-sixth
session, on the theme “Victims of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related intolerance: recognition, justice and development”,
Decides that the high-level meeting of the General Assembly to
1.
commemorate the tenth anniversary of the adoption of the Durban Declaration and
Programme of Action will be held on Thursday, 22 September 2011, and consist of
an opening plenary meeting from 9 a.m. to 11 a.m., two consecutive round tables
from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m., and a closing plenary meeting
from 6 p.m. to 7 p.m., and also decides that the morning meeting of the general
debate on that day will be held from 11 a.m. to 1 p.m. and that that arrangement
does not constitute a precedent;
Also decides that the speakers at the opening plenary will be the
2.
President of the General Assembly, the Secretary-General, the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, the Head of State of South Africa, one speaker
from each regional group and a representative of a non-governmental organization
active in the field of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related
intolerance;

_______________
1

10-52928

See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

*1052928*

Please rec cle

♲

A/RES/65/279

3.
Further decides that the organizational arrangements of the round tables
will be as follows:
(a) The round tables will address the overall theme of “Victims of racism,
racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance: recognition, justice and
development”;
(b) Each round table will be co-chaired by two Heads of State or
Government to be invited by the President of the General Assembly after
consultations with the regional groups;
(c) In order to promote a substantive and constructive dialogue, participation
in each round table will include Member States, observers, representatives of
entities of the United Nations system and experts, as well as selected representatives
of civil society organizations and non-governmental organizations that are active in
the field of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and related intolerance;
(d) Accredited delegates, observers and selected non-governmental
organizations that are active in the field of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia
and related intolerance will be able to follow the proceedings of the round-table
sessions in the overflow room;
(e)

The proceedings of the round tables shall be webcast;

4.
Invites the Holy See, in its capacity as observer State, Palestine, in its
capacity as observer, and the European Union, in its capacity as observer, to
participate in the preparatory activities and in the high-level meeting;
Invites the President of the General Assembly to draw up a list of
5.
representatives of civil society organizations, including non-governmental
organizations active in the field of racism, racial discrimination, xenophobia and
related forms of intolerance and, taking into account the principle of equitable
geographical representation, to submit the list to Member States for consideration on
a no-objection basis, for participation in the high-level meeting;
Reiterates its call for States to be represented at the high-level meeting,
6.
at the highest possible political level, including at the level of Heads of State and
Government;
Decides that the closing plenary meeting will comprise the presentation
7.
of summaries of the discussions by the co-chairs of the round tables and the
adoption of a short and concise political declaration aimed at mobilizing political
will.
96th plenary meeting
13 June 2011

2
