327 (IV). Voluntary transmission of
inf9hnation under part I of the
Stvbdard Form concerning Non•
Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Having noted with appreciation that more Members /esponsible for the administration of NonSelf-Governing Territories have voluntarily transmitted information on the geography, history,
people, government and human rights of the NonSelf-Governing Territories than in the previous
year, including in some cases information on the
development of self-governing institutions,
Recalli,ng the statement made in resolution 144
(II),12 adopted by the General Assembly on 3
November 1947, that the voluntary transmission
of such information and its summarizing by the
Secretary-General are entirely in conformity with
the spirit of Article 73 of the Charter and should
be therefore duly noted and encouraged,
1. Recommends that, when the revision is
undertaken of the Standard Form for the guidance of Members in the preparation of information
to be transmitted under Article 73 e of the
Charter, general information on geography, history, people arid human rights should cease to be
classified under the optional category of that
Form;
2. Erpresses the hope that such of the Members as have not done so may voluntarily include
details on the government 0f Non-Self-Governing
Territories in the information transmitted by them
under Article 73 e of the Charter.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

328 (IV). Equal treatment in matters
relating to education in Non-SelfGoverning Territories
The General Assembly
1. Invites the Administering Members to take
steps, where necessary, to establish equal treatment in matters related to education between inhabitants of the Non-Self-Governing Territories
under their administration, whether they be indigenous or not ;
2. Invites the Administering Members, in cases
where for exceptional reasons educational facilities
of a separate character are provided for different
communities, to include in the information transmitted under Article 73 e of the Charter full data
on the costs and methods of financing the separate
groups of educational institutions.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

329 (IV). Language of instruction in
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recognizing the importance of preserving and
developing the languages of the indigenous peoples
of the Non-Self-Governing Territories, and
Noting the appreciable steps already taken in
this connexion by the Administerin~ Members,
12
See Official Records of the second session of the
General Assembly, Resolutions. page 56.

41

1. Invites the Administering Members
(a) To promote the use of the indigenous
languages in the Territories under their administration;
(b) To make these languages where and whenever possible the languages of instruction in elementary, primary and secondary schools, without
prejudice to the use of any other language;
( c) To include in their reports to the SecretaryGeneral information on the scope and results of
such steps;
2. Invites the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization to undertake
an over-all study of the question, more particularly the measures which might be taken with a
view to the speediest use of indigenous languages
as vehicles of instruction in schools, taking into
consideration the desires of the inhabitants and
taking account in such a study of the experience
of other States in this matter;
3. Expresses the hope that, in accordance with
the obligation accepted under Article 73 d of the
Charter, the Administering Members will collaborate with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization in the conduct of
such a study.
263rd plenary meeting,
2 December 1949.

330 (IV). Eradication of illiteracy in
Non-Self-Governing Territories
The General Assembly,
Recognizing that one of the fundamental problems in Non-Self-Governing Territories is illiteracy,
Noting that the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization has agreed to
co-operate with the United Nations in giving
effect to the principles and obligations set forth
in Chapter XI of the Charter with regard to matters affecting the well-being and development of
the peoples of Non-Self-Governing Territories,
Noting that the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization's plans for an
expanded programme of technical assistance ,o
under-developed countries include the offer of
advice and assistance on fundamental educational
services generally, including the conducting of campaigns against illiteracy, the holding of seminars
and experimental or demonstration projects in
fundamental education,
Considering that the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization is a
specialized 1gency qualified to study plans and to
recommend the most appropriate action for the
promotion, in collaboration with the Members concerned, of systematic campaigns against illiteracy,
1. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization to communicate
to the Administering Members full information on
measures for suppressing illiteracy which could be
applied with satisfactory results in N on-Self-Governing Territories, and to communicate annually
to the United Nations an account of these measures
and of the extent to which its services in campaigns against illiteracy have been provided for
any of the Non-Self-Governing Territories at the
request of the Members concerned ;
