S/PRST/2004/9

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
6 April 2004
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4941st meeting of the Security Council, held on 6 April 2004, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Afghanistan”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on
behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council welcomes the results of the Berlin Conference on
Afghanistan, held on 31 March and 1 April 2004, co-chaired by the United
Nations, Afghanistan, Germany and Japan. The Council thanks Afghanistan
and Germany for jointly hosting this event, an important milestone on the way
to a secure, stable, free, prosperous and democratic Afghanistan.
“The Council expresses its full support for the commitment of
Afghanistan and the international community to successfully complete the
implementation of the Bonn Agreement and to continue the transition process
in Afghanistan through a lasting partnership, thus reflecting a model for a
common endeavour of the international community in its fight against
terrorism.
“The Security Council endorses the Berlin Declaration and stresses the
relevance of the Workplan of the Afghan Government, the Progress Report and
the Berlin Declaration on Counter-Narcotics, annexed to the Berlin
Declaration, and welcomes the significant financial multiyear commitments
made by the international donor community.
“The Security Council in particular expresses full support for the
commitment by the Government of Afghanistan to pursue the necessary reform
steps and actions as outlined in the Workplan.
“The Security Council welcomes the announcement of President Karzai
to hold direct presidential and parliamentary elections by September of this
year. The Council stresses the importance of a secure environment for free, fair
and credible democratic elections, and that to this end further efforts of the
Government of Afghanistan and of the international community are needed.
“The Security Council welcomes in this regard the decision taken by the
President of Afghanistan to implement vigorously the Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration programme, in particular to intensify it
ahead of the 2004 elections, and to continue the formation of the Afghan
National Army and the National Police.

04-30013 (E)

060404

*
0
4
3
0
0
1
3
*

S/PRST/2004/9

“The Council also acknowledges the commitment by NATO to expand
the mission of the International Security Assistance Force (ISAF) by
establishing five additional Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) by
summer 2004 and further PRTs thereafter, as well as the readiness of ISAF and
the Operation Enduring Freedom to assist in securing the conduct of elections.
“The Security Council welcomes the commitments totalling US$ 8.2 bn
for the fiscal years March 2004 — March 2007 made by participants at the
Berlin Conference for the reconstruction and development of Afghanistan and
stresses the importance with increasing absorption capacity for a growing
share of this assistance to be channelled through the Afghan budget as direct
budget support or as contributions to the Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust
Fund (ARTF) and to the Law and Order Trust Fund (LOTFA).
“The Security Council stresses that opium poppy-cultivation, drug
production and trafficking pose a serious threat to the rule of law and
development in Afghanistan as well as to international security, and that
therefore Afghanistan and the international community shall endeavour to
reduce and eventually eliminate this threat, including through the development
of economic alternatives. The Council reiterates the importance of increased
cooperation among neighbouring states and countries along trafficking routes
to strengthen anti-narcotic controls.
“The Security Council takes note of the appeal of President Karzai at the
Berlin Conference for additionally needed international support in countering
narcotics. The Council refers in this context to the necessary implementation
of the Afghan National Drug Control Strategy and the Counter Narcotics
Action Plans in the areas of law enforcement, judicial reform, alternative
livelihoods, demand reduction and public awareness. The Security Council
calls upon Member States to support the implementation of these Action Plans.
Afghanistan needs both human and financial resources to tackle this problem.
“The Security Council welcomes in particular the Berlin Declaration on
Counter-Narcotics within the Framework of the Kabul Good Neighbourly
Relations Declaration, signed by Afghanistan and its neighbours, as well as the
planned Conference on Regional Police Cooperation to be held in Doha on 18
and 19 May 2004.
“The Security Council invites the Secretary-General to include in his
future reports to the Security Council and the General Assembly on the
situation in Afghanistan, in addition to the information on implementation of
the Bonn Agreement, chapters on progress achieved in the implementation of
the Berlin Declaration, the Workplan of the Afghan Government and in the
promotion of regional and international cooperation with Afghanistan.
“The Security Council reaffirms its full support for the actions taken by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and United Nations
Assistance Mission in Afghanistan and reiterates the central and impartial role
of the United Nations in the international efforts to assist the Afghan people in
consolidating peace in Afghanistan and rebuilding their country.
“The Security Council will remain seized of the matter.”

2
