32

General Assembly -

in the Trust Territories, with increasing participation therein by :ndigenous elements of those Territories,
or to develop on the same basis organs of that type
already in existence ; that they should ensure that the
nature and_ powers of these organs reflect the special
status conferred on the Trust Territories by Chapter
XII of fhe Charter and by the Trusteeship Agreements; and that they should hasten the attainment of the
objectives set forth in Article 76 of the Charter,
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
859 (IX), Hearings of petitioners from the Trust
Territory of the Cameroons under French
administration

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 655 (VII) of 21 December
1952 and 758 (VIII) of 9 December 1953,
Having granted oral hearings 17 to petitioners, representatives of organizations in the Trust Territory of the
Cameroons under French administration,
1. Takes note of the statements of the petitioners,
representatives of organizations in the Trust Territory
of the Cameroons under French administration;
2. Decides to transmit to the Trusteeship Council
the statements of the petitioners for its study;
3. Recommends to the Council:
(a) To continue to give appropriate attention to the
matters raised by the petitioners ;
(.b) To request its next visiting mission to study
these matters ;
(c) To report accordingly to the General Assembly
at its tenth session.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.
860 (IX), The Togoland unification problem and
the future of the Trust Territory of Togoland
under British administration

Ninth Session

Territory has been such that, at the same time as the
Gold Coast assumes full responsibility for its own
affairs, the people of Togoland under British administration will have reached a stage of development when
the objectives of the International Trusteeship System
will have been substantially achieved and that the
Trusteeship Agreement should therefore be terminated,
Considering that, in accordance with Article 76 b
of the Charter, the future status of the Territory should
be determined in the light of its particular circumstances
and of the freely expressed wishes of its peoples,
1. Decides, in view of the eventual revision or termination of the Trusteeship Agreement, that steps
should be taken, in the light of the particular circumstances of the Trust Territory, to ascertain the wishes
of the inhabitants as to their future, without prejudice
to the eventual solution they may choose whether it be
independence, unification of an independent Togoland
under British administration with an independent Togoland under French administration, unification with an
independent Gold Coast, or some other self-governing or independent status;
2. Requests the Trusteeship Council to take into
account the views expressed in the Fourth Committee
at the ninth and previous sessions of the General Assembly, to consider what arrangements should be made
in pursuance of the above decision and to report thereon
to the General Assembly at its tenth session ;
3. Further requests the Trusteeship Council to
dispatch a special mission to the Trust Territories of
Togoland under British administration and Togoland
under French administration to make a special study
of these problems and tc, submit its report thereon
in time for the Council to report to the General Assembly at its tenth session;
4. Urges in the meanwhile that in the greater interests of the United Nations those directly concernei
will lend their utmost co-operation in the full an
early implementation of its recommendations containe
in General Assembly resolution 750 B (VIII) of 8
December 1953.
512th plenary meeting,
14 December 1954.

The General Assembly,
Bearing in mind its resolution 750 (VIII) of 8
December 1953,

NOTE

Noting the special report of the Trusteeship Council
in document A/2669 18 of 23 July 1954,
Noting the new situation described in the statement 19
of the United Kingdom Government to the effect
that the Gold Coast will assume full responsibility
for its own affairs within a measurable period, and
that it will thereafter be no longer possible for the
Administering Authority to administer the Trust Territory in accordance with articles 4 and 5 of the present
Trusteeship Agreement,
Noting also the view 20 of the Administering Authority that the progress of the inhabitants of the Trust

ELECTION OF A MEMBER TO THE COMMITTEE OF INFORMATION FROM NoN-SELF-GoVERNJNG TERRITORIES

17 See Official Records of the General Assembly, Ninth Session, Fourth Committee, 442nd, 443rd and 446th meetings.
1 s Ibid., Annexes, agenda items 35 and 52.
19 Ibid., document A/2660.
20 Ibid.

In accordance with the terms of resolutions 332
(IV) and 646 (VII) of the General Assembly, the
Fourth Committee was called upon to fill the vacancies
in the membership of the Committee on Information
from Non-Self-Governing Territories created by the
ex~iration of the terms of office of Ecuador and Indonesia.
l n consequence of the reduction of one Administrative Member (Denmark) in the membership of the
Committee on Information from Non-Self-Governing
Territories resulting from the adoption of resolution
849 (IX) above, one vacancy only remained to be
filled, and the Fourth Committeee, on behalf of the
General Assembly, at its 433rd meeting on 15 N ovember 1954, elected PERU to fill that vacancy.
