A /69/PV.84

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-ninth session

84th plenary meeting

Thursday, 2 April 2015, 11 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kutesa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  (Uganda)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Gunnarsson
(Iceland), Vice-President, took the Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 11.10 a.m.
Agenda item 113
Appointments to fill vacancies in subsidiary organs
and other appointments
(f) Appointment of members of the Committee
on Conferences
The Acting President: In connection with this
item, the General Assembly has before it a note by the
Secretary-General circulated in document A/69/107.
Members will recall that at its 64th plenary meeting,
on 5 December 2014, the Assembly took note of the
appointments of the Central African Republic, Namibia,
Paraguay and the Russian Federation as members of the
Committee on Conferences for a period of three years,
beginning on 1 January 2015. Members will also recall
that at its 79th plenary meeting, on 2 February 2015,
the Assembly took note of the appointment of France
as a member of the Committee on Conferences for a
term of office beginning on the date of appointment
and ending on 31 December 2017. Members will further
recall that two seats from the Asia-Pacific States, for
a period beginning on the date of appointment and
ending on 31 December 2017, remain vacant. On the
recommendation of the Chair of the Asia-Pacific
States, the President of the General Assembly has
appointed Sri Lanka as a member of the Committee on
Conferences for a term of office beginning on 2 April
2015 and ending on 31 December 2017. May I take it
that the Assembly takes note of this appointment?

It was so decided.
The Acting President: I would now like to draw
the attention of members to document A/69/843, in
which the Permanent Mission of Denmark to the United
Nations announces that Denmark will relinquish its
membership in the Committee on Conferences effective
1 April 2015, in favour of Austria, for the remainder
of its term ending on 31 December 2016. As a result,
a vacancy has occurred and a new member must
therefore be appointed to fill the unexpired term of
office of Denmark that commenced on 1 January 2014.
The President of the General Assembly has therefore
appointed Austria as a member of the Committee on
Conferences for a term of office beginning on 2 April
2015 and ending on 31 December 2016. May I take it
that the Assembly takes note of this appointment?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Regarding the remaining
vacant seat from the Asia-Pacific States, I urge the
group to submit their candidature as soon as possible.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this stage
of its consideration of sub-item (f) of agenda item 113.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Follow-up to the outcome of the Millennium Summit
Draft resolution (A/69/L.55)
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/837)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held a debate on agenda item 13 and
its sub-item (a), jointly with agenda item 115, at its

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

15-09446 (E)

*1509446*

A/69/PV.84

51st plenary meeting, on 14 November 2014. The report
of the Fifth Committee on the programme budget
implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/69/837.
The Assembly will now take a decision on draft
resolution A/69/L.55, entitled the “Statute of the United
Nations Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela Prize”. May I take
it that the Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution
A/69/L.55?
Draft resolution A/69/L.55 was adopted (resolution
69/269).
The Acting President: I am pleased to be here today
to deliver this statement on behalf of the President of
the General Assembly, His Excellency Sam Kahamba
Kutesa.
“I welcome the adoption today of resolution
69/269, through which the General Assembly has
taken another important step in paying tribute to
the extraordinary life and legacy of Mr. Nelson
Mandela.
“The United Nations Nelson Rolihlahla
Mandela Prize is not only dedicated to the memory
of Mr. Mandela, but also aims to recognize the
achievements of those who dedicated their lives to
the service of humankind through the promotion
of the purposes and principles of the Organization.
“In accordance with this resolution, Member
States, observers, intergovernmental organizations
and non-governmental organizations will have an
opportunity to submit their nominations for this
Prize. I encourage all to actively participate in
the nomination process, and in the coming days I
will take steps to ensure that the inaugural Prize
is awarded, in accordance with the Assembly’s
resolution.
“Mr. Mandela, who was the first democratically
elected President of South Africa, remains an
international symbol of hope, humility and
leadership. His legacy continues to inspire people
the world over, spanning generations, races and
religions. This unique Prize will serve as an
inspiration to all who work tirelessly to contribute
to and improve the well-being of others through the
promotion of the United Nations highest values,
including peace, reconciliation, human rights and
development.

2/9

02/04/2015

“I would like to extend my sincere thanks
and gratitude to Ambassador Sabri Boukadoum,
Permanent Representative of Algeria, for
his leadership and ably conducting informal
consultations on the Statute on my behalf. Further,
I wish to express my appreciation to Member States
for their constructive role and support throughout
those consultations.
“As we have done each year since 2010, this
18 July, we will observe the Nelson Mandela
International Day in recognition of his values and
dedication to the service of humankind. I invite
you all to participate in this day’s events as we
celebrate Mr. Mandela’s contributions and service
to humankind.”
The Assembly has thus concluded this stage of its
consideration of agenda item 115.
Agenda item 123 (continued)
(m) Cooperation between the United Nations
and the International Organization of la
Francophonie
Draft resolution (A/69/L.58)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and
its sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Senegal
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.58.
Mr. Cisse (Senegal) (spoke in French): It is my
honour to introduce, on behalf of all the sponsors and
under agenda item 123 (m), draft resolution A/69/L.58,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations and
the International Organization of la Francophonie”.
Since the draft resolution was submitted, the
following countries have joined the list of sponsors: the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Guinea, Lebanon,
Mali, Mauritania, Portugal, Seychelles, Togo and
Tunisia.
I would like to make an oral revision to the text
of the draft resolution. In the second line of the third
preambular paragraph, the draft should read “76 States
Members of the United Nations” instead of “80”.
The world today is more than ever beset with
multiple challenges with very complex contours that

15-09446

02/04/2015

threaten the universal and founding values ​​
of our
shared humanity. Accordingly, from the problem of
development to humanitarian issues or those related
to peace and security or human rights, the United
Nations is striving to put people at the pinnacle of world
affairs. The magnitude of this task, together with an
international context characterized by States forming
groups based on cultural affinity or regional interests,
invites the United Nations to develop and strengthen
its partnership with regional organizations. It is in
this spirit that the International Organization of la
Francophonie and the United Nations have undertaken
cooperation aimed at productively addressing the main
issues in the world today and in the world of tomorrow.
Draft resolution A/69/L.58 is inspired by the Dakar
Declaration, adopted at the most recent Summit of Heads
of State and Government of la Francophonie, held on
29 and 30 November 2014 in Dakar under the theme “La
Francophonie’s women and youth: Vectors for peace,
actors for development”. It aims to put the issue of
development, including sustainable development, at the
forefront of our priority concerns while strengthening,
inter alia, the provisions relating to peacekeeping, the
fight against international terrorism and the promotion
and protection of human rights.
Indeed, welcoming the contributions of francophone
countries and the International Organization of la
Francophonie to the consultations conducted by the
High-level Independent Panel on Peace Operations, the
draft resolution stresses the need for greater efforts to
move from early warning to quick response. In addition
to this primary objective, it is important to further
promote the participation of women and youth in
conflict prevention and peacekeeping efforts, without
forgetting the inclusion of the linguistic dimension in
peacekeeping operations. Also, given the seriousness
of the challenge of international terrorism, the draft
resolution urges these States to refrain from financing
and harbouring terrorist networks in accordance with
international law, including the relevant Security
Council resolutions.
Bearing in mind the adoption of sustainable
development goals and the ongoing negotiations for the
post-2015 development programme, the draft resolution
highlights the leading role of women and youth in efforts
to set up an inclusive economic development model based
on the promotion of human capital. Finally, the draft
resolution welcomes the strengthening of cooperation
between la Francophonie and the organizations of the

A/69/PV.84

United Nations system, such as UN-Women and the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
and other international partners, including the World
Intellectual Property Organization and the International
Committee of the Red Cross.
It follows from the foregoing that the cooperation
that governs the relationship between the United
Nations and la Francophonie remains a key contribution
in achieving the goals that we have set for ourselves
and that are organized around the three main pillars of
our beloved Organization, namely, peace and security,
development and human rights. It is my hope that
draft resolution A/69/L.58, which should be seen as a
relevant instrument for strengthening such cooperation,
will be adopted, as orally amended, by consensus and
sponsored by a larger number of countries, as has been
the case in previous years.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.58 entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie”, as
orally revised.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/69/L.58, the following countries have
also become sponsors of the draft resolution: Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Cameroon, Estonia, Georgia, Italy,
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Montenegro,
Ukraine and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.58,
as orally revised, without a vote?
The draft resolution, as orally revised, was adopted
(resolution 69/270).
The Acting President: In accordance with
resolution 33/18, of 10 November 1978 and decision
53/453, of 18 December 1998, I now call on the
Permanent Observer of the International Organization
of la Francophonie.
Mr. Tiendrebeogo (International Organization of
la Francophonie) (spoke in French): On behalf of the
International Organization of la Francophonie (OIF),
I would like to thank the General Assembly for its

15-094463/9

A/69/PV.84

adoption by consensus of resolution 69/270, entitled
“Cooperation between the United Nations and the
International Organization of la Francophonie”. My
thanks are those of Ms. Michaëlle Jean, Secretary
General of la Francophonie, and of the entire
Organization, consisting of 80 member States and
Governments from five continents, of which 76 are
States Members of the United Nations.
During her first visit to New York, in March 2015,
to attend the fifty-ninth session of the Commission
on the Status of Women, Ms. Jean welcomed the
particularly successful collaboration between our two
organizations and the joint work they do every day.
She reiterated the commitment of la Francophonie to
taking an active part in the work of the United Nations
throughout 2015, including in the preparation of the
post-2015 development programme, the International
Conference on Financing for Development to be held
in Addis Ababa in 2015 and the United Nations Climate
Change Conference that will take place in Paris in
December.
I would like to express our gratitude to both the
President of the General Assembly at its sixty-ninth
session, Mr. Sam Kutesa, and Secretary-General
Ban Ki-moon for the importance they attach to the
cooperation between our two institutions. I particularly
welcome the extremely successful partnerships with
various departments in the Secretariat and with
United Nations agencies, including UN-Women. These
working relationships reflect the two organizations’
shared perspectives on matters in the political, social
and cultural fields and on the three pillars of the United
Nations: maintenance of international peace and
security, development and human rights.
I thank the delegation of Senegal, facilitator
of resolution 69/270, for its constant availability
and join with it in welcoming the numerous recent
developments in cooperation between the United
Nations and OIF. This cooperation allows us resolutely
to promote cultural diversity in particular the defence
of multilingualism, which is necessary condition for
effective multilateralism. This implies strict respect for
the principle of linguistic plurality in the activities of
the Secretariat and the entire United Nations system. It
can also be seen in the context of renewed commitment
on the part of the International Organization of la
Francophonie to fighting terrorism and peacefully
managing and resolving crises, including those affecting
francophone countries. Such cooperation also allows

4/9

02/04/2015

for active participation in the process of developing and
implementing the post-2015 development programme
with a view to ensuring that it is inclusive, including
by taking into account problems relating to gender
equality and young people.
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute
to the group of Ambassadors of the International
Organization of la Francophonie, who work to promote
the values and ideals of the International Organization
of la Francophonie within the United Nations,
strengthen the links between the two organizations
and enhance the realization of the objectives we share.
The resolution that the Assembly has just adopted
reflects the efforts of the International Organization
of la Francophonie and the United Nations to better
coordinate and focus their actions, and encourages us
to continue our efforts and strengthen our synergies,
including with other linguistic groups, with which
we already enjoy fruitful cooperation. It was guided
by the same spirit that saw us hold. on 20 March, the
International Day of la Francophonie, a round table
on the theme “Language and diversity: factors of
peace”. We will work so that together we can take that
dialogue further. The International Organization of la
Francophonie reaffirms its strong commitment and its
readiness to play its full part.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (m) of agenda item 123?
(p) Cooperation between the United Nations and
the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM
Draft resolution (A/69/L.59)
The Acting President: Members will recall that
the Assembly held its debate on agenda item 123 and
its sub-items (a) to (y) at its 48th plenary meeting, on
11 November 2014.
I now give the floor to the representative of Ukraine
to introduce draft resolution A/69/L.59.
Mr. Sergeyev (Ukraine): On behalf of its main
sponsors — Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of
Moldova and Ukraine — I have the honour to introduce
draft resolution A/69/L.59, entitled “Cooperation
between the United Nations in the Organization for
Democracy and Economic Development — GUAM”.

15-09446

02/04/2015

The Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM is an international regional
organization comprising four member States:
Azerbaijan, Georgia, the Republic of Moldova and
Ukraine. According to its Charter, approved in 2006,
GUAM’s activities are based on achieving the following
purposes: promoting democratic values; ensuring the
rule of law and respect for human rights; ensuring
sustainable development; strengthening international
and regional security and stability; deepening
European integration for the establishment of common
security space and the expansion of cooperation in the
economic and humanitarian spheres; developing social,
economic, transport, energy, scientific, technical and
humanitarian potential of the parties; and intensifying
political interaction and practical cooperation in fields
of mutual interest. In order to achieve these purposes,
GUAM members are developing mutually beneficial
cooperation guided by the principles of respect for
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the States,
the inviolability of their internationally recognized
borders, non-interference in their internal affairs and
other universally recognized principles and norms of
international law.
GUAM member States interact in the framework
of other international organizations, in particular the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe
and the United Nations. Under its resolution 58/85,
adopted in 2003, the General Assembly granted GUAM
observer status. In December 2012, at its sixty-seventh
session, the General Assembly adopted by consensus
resolution 67/109, entitled “Cooperation between the
United Nations and the Organization for Democracy
and Economic Development — GUAM”, which,
among other things, emphasized the importance of
strengthening dialogue, cooperation and coordination
between the United Nations system and GUAM.
The current draft resolution before the Assembly,
A/69/L.59, is based on the aforementioned resolution.
The main objective of the current draft, if adopted,
is to reiterate the high level of cooperation between
GUAM and the United Nations and to create guidelines
for enhancing such corporation. Prior to the official
submission of the draft, three rounds of informal
consultations were held, where all interested delegations
had the opportunity to express to comments and
make proposals. I would like to take this opportunity
to warmly thank the delegations for their valuable
contributions and constructive approach in promoting

A/69/PV.84

the draft to the General Assembly, as well as to those
delegations which joined the list of sponsors. I would
like to ask the Assembly for its kind support for the
draft resolution, and I look forward to its adoption by
consensus.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/69/L.59,
entitled “Cooperation between the United Nations
and the Organization for Democracy and Economic
Development — GUAM”.
I give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution, in
addition to the delegations listed in the document
A/69/L.59, Latvia and Poland have become sponsors of
the draft resolution.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/69/L.59?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/271).
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of sub-item (p) of agenda item 123?
It was so decided.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The Acting President: I request the Rapporteur
of the Fifth Committee, Mr. Matthias Dettling of
Switzerland, to introduce in one intervention the reports
of the Fifth Committee before the Assembly.
Mr. Dettling (Switzerland): I have the honour to
present to the General Assembly the reports of the Fifth
Committee containing recommendations on issues
considered during the first part of the resumed sixtyninth session of the General Assembly.
The Fifth Committee met from 2 to 27 March and
held seven plenary meetings as well as numerous rounds
of informal and informal-informal consultations.
Notwithstanding a heavy schedule, it was particularly
satisfying that the Committee finished its work on time.
I am pleased to give the Assembly a brief account of the
results achieved during that session.
On agenda item 132, entitled “Programme budget
for the biennium 2014-2015”, in paragraph 6 of its

15-094465/9

A/69/PV.84

report A/69/422/Add.2, the Committee recommends the
General Assembly adopt the draft resolution entitled
“Special subjects relating to the programme budget for
the biennium 2014-2015”, which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 138, “Joint Inspection Unit”,
in paragraph 6 of its report contained in document
A/69/846, the Committee recommends that the General
Assembly adopt a draft resolution, which was adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 147, “Financing of the
International Residual Mechanism for Criminal
Tribunals”, in paragraph 6 of its report contained in
document A/69/693/Add.1, the Committee recommends
that the General Assembly adopt a draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
On agenda item 131, “Review of the efficiency
of the administrative and financial functioning of
the United Nations”, in paragraph 10 of its report
contained in document A/69/702/Add.1, the Committee
recommends that the General Assembly adopt two
draft resolutions. Draft resolution I, entitled “Progress
towards an accountability framework in the United
Nations Secretariat”, and draft resolution II, entitled
“Procurement”, were both adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
Finally, in paragraph 11 of the same report, the
Committee recommends that the General Assembly
adopt a draft decision on questions deferred for future
consideration, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
I assure delegations that the actions taken during
the 34th formal meeting of the Fifth Committee are
reflected in the reports before them. On a personal note,
I would like to thank delegations for their hard work and
the constructive spirit they showed during this fruitful
session of the Fifth Committee. We will be guided by
the same spirit of cooperation and compromise during
our second resumed session in May.
I would also like to thank the Chair of the Fifth
Committee for his leadership and dedication, and my
fellow Bureau members for their professionalism and
friendship. My best wishes for their success go to those
who have left the Committee or are soon to do so.
The Acting President: If there is no proposal under
rule 66 of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the

6/9

02/04/2015

General Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of
the Fifth Committee that are before it today.
It was so decided.
The Acting President: Statements will therefore
be limited to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been
made clear in the Committee and are reflected in
the relevant official records. I would like to remind
members that, under paragraph 7 of decision 34/401,
the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its
vote only once, that is, either in the Committee or
in plenary meeting, unless that delegation’s vote
in plenary meeting is different from its vote in the
Committee.”
I would like to further remind delegations that, also
in accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes and
should be made by delegations from their seats.
Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that
we are going to proceed to take decisions in the same
manner as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless
notified otherwise in advance. That means that I would
hope that we will proceed to adopt without a vote
those recommendations adopted without a vote in the
Committee.
Agenda item 131 (continued)
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/702/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before
it two draft resolutions recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 10 of its report and a draft
decision recommended in paragraph 11 of the same
report.
The Assembly will now take decisions on draft
resolutions I and II and on the draft decision.
The Assembly will first take a decision on draft
resolution I, entitled “Progress towards an accountability

15-09446

02/04/2015

system in the United Nations Secretariat”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 69/272).
The Acting President: Draft resolution II is
entitled “Procurement”. The Fifth Committee adopted
it without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 69/273).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take action on the draft decision, entitled “Questions
deferred for future consideration”. The Fifth Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted (decision 69/553 B).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
131.
Agenda item 132 (continued)
Programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/422/Add.2)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report.
I now give the floor to the representative of
Cambodia, who wishes to speak in explanation of
position.
Mr. Tuy (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like to
thank the President for convening this plenary meeting
on agenda item 132, “Programme budget for the
biennium 2014-2015”, and the related draft resolution,
A/69/422/Add.2. I would like to express Cambodia’s
view on part I of section III of the report, concerning a
request for a subvention to the Extraordinary Chambers
in the Courts of Cambodia (ECCC).
I would first like to take this opportunity to
acknowledge our great appreciation for the efforts
of the Group of 77 and China in support of our
request for a subvention to both the international and
national components of the Chambers during the Fifth
Committee’s consultations in December.
Today, I would like to confirm that in a spirit
of partnership with the United Nations, the Royal

A/69/PV.84

Government of Cambodia supports the revised draft
resolution on the proposed subvention for 2015 in
limiting it to the international component of the ECCC,
in the confidence that the United Nations will be in a
position to provide financial assistance to the national
component of the ECCC when it becomes necessary.
Over the past two years, the ECCC has encountered
shortfalls that disrupted the Chambers’ operations. It
is therefore important that we work together to find
a better way to address the funding for the ECCC’s
national component as well as its international one.
My delegation would again like to thank the
Secretary-General for his comprehensive report,
contained in document A/69/536, in which he discussed
the overall atmosphere surrounding the ongoing
developments and challenges facing the ECCC. The
report also records what has been achieved since
the hybrid courts were established in 2006 in close
collaboration between the Royal Government of
Cambodia and the United Nations.
The Royal Government of Cambodia has continued
to cooperate with its partners and all parties involved
in the ECCC process to ensure the smooth and
uninterrupted functioning of the Chambers during its
current conduct of the hearing on the evidence in its
case number 002/02 against Khieu Samphan, former
Head of State of Democratic Kampuchea, and Nuon
Chea, former Chairman of the Democratic Kampuchea
People’s Assembly. The Assembly may be aware that
under ECCC case number 002/01, those two top leaders
of the Khmer Rouge were found guilty on 7 August
2014 of crimes against humanity and sentenced to life
imprisonment.
Since its creation in 2006, the ECCC has received
shared contributions from the Royal Government of
Cambodia in kind and in cash. As pledged by Samdech
Akka Moha Sena Padei Techo Hun Sen, Prime Minister
of the Kingdom of Cambodia, during his meeting with
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon on the margins of
the Association of Southeast Asian Nations summit
held in November 2014 in Myanmar, in 2015 the Royal
Government of Cambodia will continue making its
contribution in support of the ECCC to a total amount of
$4.1 million. Of that total, $1.6 million goes to general
operating costs and $2.5 million to paying the national
staff’s salaries for the first half of 2015. That total
pledge of $4.1 million is equivalent to approximately
62 per cent of the 2015 revised budget for the national
component. Despite that pledge, however, we note

15-094467/9

A/69/PV.84

that there are still gaps to be filled for the second
half of 2015. In that regard, while sincerely thanking
our partners and donor countries for their financial
support, we would like to appeal to them to consider
funding the national component of the ECCC for its
second semester.
My delegation welcomes the Joint Statement on the
ECCC issued on 25 March in Phnom Penh, Cambodia,
by the Royal Government of Cambodia and the Special
Expert of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Assistance to the Khmer Rouge Trials. In it, both sides
expressed their continued full support for cooperation
in implementing all the provisions of the ECCC law and
the United Nations-Cambodia Agreement in order to
discharge the ECCC’s judicial mandate and procedures.
A memorandum of understanding was also signed on
how to operationalize the Legal Documentation Centre,
whose construction has been generously funded by the
Government of Japan.
Finally, I hope the United Nations will continue to
work closely with the Royal Government of Cambodia
in order to garner sufficient financial support from
donor countries to secure funding for the ECCC’s
national component for 2015.
The Acting President: We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution contained in document
A/69/422/Add.2, entitled “Special subjects relating to
the programme budget for the biennium 2014-2015”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/274).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
132.

8/9

02/04/2015

Agenda item 138
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/846)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution. The Fifth Committee adopted it
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes
to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/275).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
138.
Agenda item 147 (continued)
Financing of the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/69/693/Add.1)
The Acting President: The Assembly has before it
a draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. We will now take a decision
on the draft resolution, entitled “Construction of a
new facility for the International Residual Mechanism
for Criminal Tribunals, Arusha branch”. The Fifth
Committee adopted it without a vote. May I take it that
the Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
69/276).
The Acting President: The Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
147.
On behalf of the General Assembly, I would
like to thank Mr. František Ružička, Permanent
Representative of Slovakia to the United Nations and
Chair of the Fifth Committee, the members of the

15-09446

02/04/2015

Bureau and the Secretary of the Committee, as well as
all the delegations, for a job well done.

A/69/PV.84

The General Assembly has thus concluded its
consideration of all the reports of the Fifth Committee
before it.
The meeting rose at 11.55 a.m.

15-094469/9
