S/2002/183

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
20 February 2002
Original: English

Letter dated 20 February 2002 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244 (1999), I have the honour to
convey the attached report on the international security presence in Kosovo covering
the period 1 to 31 December 2001.
I should be grateful if you would bring it to the attention of the members of the
Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

02-25815 (E) 200202

*0225815*

S/2002/183

Annex
Monthly report to the United Nations on KFOR operations of the
Kosovo Force
1.
Over the reporting period (1 to 31 December 2001) there were approximately
38,500 troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) in theatre.
2.
The overall situation in Kosovo during the month of December remained
relatively stable despite some reports of inter-ethnic tension, predominantly in the
Mitrovica area, and of criminally motivated attacks throughout the province.
Security
3.
KFOR continued to monitor any signs of support for terrorism. On 14
December, the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
and KFOR search facilities in Dakovica and Pristina used by the non-governmental
organization Global Relief Foundation (GRF), detained three persons, and seized
computers, disks, audio- and videotapes, papers and cash. This operation was
coordinated with a similar search of GRF facilities in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
4.
Incidents reported involving inter-ethnic violence included: disputes between
Kosovar Serbs and KFOR troops who were escorting Kosovar Albanians visiting
their former homes in the Mitrovica area — one KFOR soldier was injured; injury to
a KFOR soldier in northern Mitrovica, when a grenade was thrown by a crowd
protesting a search of the homes of Serbian activists; the evacuation by KFOR of a
Kosovar Serb officer of the Kosovo Police Service (KPS) after being threatened by
the “bridge watchers”; and different incidents in Vucitrn, Lipljan, and Mitrovica
involving the stoning of Kosovar Serb buses by Kosovar Albanians.
5.
Incidents which are believed to be related to criminal activities include:
extensive damage to a café in Leposavic following a dispute between rival gangs of
Kosovar Serbs; an explosive device attack on a Kosovar Albanian restaurant in Novi
Koljlovica; a bomb attack on a shop in Prizren and a grenade attack on a petrol
station near Klina, in which a total of four people were slightly injured; several
incidents in central Kosovo involving firearms, in which a Kosovar Albanian died;
the shooting of a former NLA commander; the murder of a Bosniac from
Montenegro in Mitrovica in a drive-by shooting; and the discovery of the body of a
suspected drug dealer in a car in Mitrovica.
Border/boundary security
6.
KFOR continued its activities along the borders with the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia1 and with Albania to confiscate weapons, deter smuggling,
detain persons illegally crossing the borders, and deter others attempting to enter the
province.
7.
During the reporting period, 189 weapons, 217 mines, and 12,891 rounds of
ammunition were seized. Seventy-six people were detained and handed over to
UNMIK police. The number of attempted illegal border crossings on the Albanian
border increased over the reporting period. Although most were related to
__________________
1 Turkey recognizes the Republic of Macedonia with its constitutional name.

2

S/2002/183

smuggling, some involved Albanians seeking food and supplies when their villages
were cut off by bad weather.
Southern Serbia
8.
With regard to the Air Safety Zone (ASZ), KFOR and the Commander of the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia Joint Security Forces agreed Temporary Operation
Procedures following the North Atlantic Council’s decision in August 2001 to relax
the width of the ASZ from 25 kilometres to 10 kilometres.
Cooperation and compliance by the parties
9.
With regard to the Kosovo Protection Corps (KPC), UNMIK and KFOR have
rejected the latest version of the KPC Peace Establishment list delivered at the end
of September 2001 because of the high number of discrepancies. Procedures have
been agreed to create a new, valid Peace Establishment by the end of January 2002.
Once the list has been confirmed by UNMIK, KFOR will register the KPC members
and prepare new identity cards, on behalf of UNMIK.
10. Regarding the plan to reduce the KPC establishment, the first list of 375 names
for transfer to a reserve force was submitted by General Ceku on 14 December: of
these, 111 KPC members were considered unacceptable2 and their names were
removed from the list. The next steps to be taken will include a reduction in the
KPC budget and a rationalization of the infrastructure. A comprehensive review of
KPC weapons policy is nearing completion with the aim of reducing by Spring the
number of weapons authorization cardholders. On 24 December, the following three
policy documents dealing with the KPC were signed and released: COMKFOR
Directive 035 (a general policy statement); a COMKFOR Training Directive; and a
COMKFOR Directive to COMKPC.
11. During the period under review, four cases of non-compliance were reported,
the most serious of which related to the suspension of the Press and Information
Officer of Regional Tactical Group 4, who criticized UNMIK and KFOR following
the arrest of the first Kosovar Albanian charged with war crimes. Eleven cases of
non-compliance were closed, leaving 24 cases open, pending investigation, or
implementation of recent Joint Security Forces directions, or awaiting presentation
to the judicial system.
12. KFOR conducted a roll-call on 6 December 2001 at the six KPC locations to
check on discrepancies and absenteeism. Absenteeism has increased to 10 per cent
compared to 3.3 per cent reported six months earlier. The increase in absenteeism is
being investigated by KFOR.
13. The total number of weapons destroyed under the weapons destruction
programme remains at 10,132; the weapons destruction programme will resume in
January 2002.
14. The Federal Republic of Yugoslavia security forces remain in general
compliance with the terms of the Military Technical Agreement.

__________________
2 Reasons for non-acceptance: names unknown; members previously dismissed or removed.

3

S/2002/183

Cooperation with international organizations
15. KFOR continues to provide daily assistance to international organizations and
non-governmental organizations throughout Kosovo, on request, and to provide
security assistance in support of UNMIK police operations.
Return of refugees and displaced persons
16. The number of refugees from the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
estimated to be remaining in Kosovo has gone down from 23,200 reported in
November to 16,360.
Kosovo-wide elections
17. As previously reported, KFOR provided support to UNMIK and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe during the Kosovo-wide
elections held on 17 November. So far, the Kosovo Assembly has not been able to
elect a Provincial President.
Introduction of the euro
18. Procedures for the introduction of the euro to replace the Deutschmark, due to
be withdrawn in early 2002, began to be implemented with KFOR support at the
beginning of December. KFOR helped with security aspects and storage of the
currency.
Outlook
19. The security situation in Kosovo continues to be stable. Although ethnic
tension still exists, particularly in Mitrovica, the level of violence has decreased
across the province. Progress has been made on many fronts, however, including in
establishing the judiciary, improving the environment, introducing the euro, and
establishing the KPC reserve, but the formation of a governing coalition following
the election of the Kosovo Assembly remains uncertain, largely due to political
rivalries and manoeuvring within the ethnic Albanian parties.

4
