Reeolutlon1 adopted on the reporte of abe Flfth Commlttee

attention to the Ad Hoc Committee's report, with a
view to a ful! and speedy implementation of ali the
recommendations that have not as yet been covered in
their respective programmes of implementation;
4. Requests the Economic and Social Council, with
the assistance of the Committee for Programme and
Co-ordination, and recommends the specialized agencies and International Atomic Energy Agency, to continue to take appropriate measures in their respective
fields with a view to a full and speedy implementation
of all recommendations that have not as yet been
covered in their · respective programmes of implementation;
5. Appeals to Member States to ensure co-ordination
within their national representation on the organs
of the United Nations system in order to make possible the full implementation of the recommendations
of the Ad H oc Committee ;
6. Requests the Advisory Committee oh Administrative and Budgetary Questions, while endorsing its
proposals as set out in paragraph 9 of its ninth report
to the General Assembly at its twenty-third session,
to continue to review the progress made in the implementation of the recommendations of the Ad Hoc
Committee and to report to the General Assembly in
this regard in its annual reports on the administrative
and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency;
7. Reqiiests the Secretary-General, in his capacity
as chief administrative officer of the U nited N ations
and as Chairman of the Administrative Committee on
Co-ordination, to continue to encourage and facilitate
the implementation of the recommendations of the Ad
Hoc Committee by the United Nations, the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency,
and to submit to the General Assembly at its twentyfifth session a full and detailed report indicating clearly
and succinctly in individual sections the extent of
progress made by each one of them in implementing
the recommendations of the Ad H oc Committee and,
when applicable, the reasons for non-implementation.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.

B
The General Asse111bl)'
l. Takes m1te of the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on
the review of the administrative and management
procedures concerning the programme and budget of
the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations ;28
2. Reqitests the Secretary-General to refer, through
the consultative machinery of the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to the executive heads of the
specialized agencies and the International Atomic
Energy Agency, the special report of the Advisory
Committee on the Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations and similar reports in the future,
in the same manner as the General Assembly transmits
the Advisory Committee's reports on general
co-ordination ma-tters and on the administrative budgets
of the agencies.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
28 Jbid., Twe11ty-third Session, agenda item 80, document
A/7354.

75

2476 (XXID). Report of the United Natlon•
Joint Staff Pension Board
The General Assembly
Takes note of the report of the United Nations Joint

Staff Pension Board for 19682* and the annexes thereto
and of the observations of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions in its related
report. 26
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.

2477 (XXID). Unlted Natlon1 lntematlonal
School
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-

General28 and the report of the Board of Trustees of
the United Nations International School annexed
thereto, and the report of the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions thereon,17
N oting that all studies on the physical and economic
feasibility of building the United Nations International
School on thc site lying between East 39th and 40th
Streets west of First A venue have not yet yielded a
basis on which a decision to construct the building at
this site could be taken,
Considering that interim arrangements have been
made at East 54th Street and East 51st Street through
the Ford Foundation and the City of New York respectively for the period of construction of the new school,
N oting the rapid growth in school enrolment and
the urgent need for a permanent solution to the physical
problem of the School,
N oting with regret the slow growth of the Development Fund,
N oting that the Board of Trustees has made arrangements for necessary technical and financia! checks on
the cost of constructing a 1,500-pupil school at East
39th Street and has opened negotiations for an extension of the tease at East 25th Street to provide safeguards for ensuring that a new school can be constructed within the funds and the time available,
N oting that the School faces a deficit of $61,400 for
the current school year,
l. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
extend his good offices to the Board of Trustees of the
United Nations International School and to urge the
Board of Trustees to reach a specdy solution to the
problem of a permanent accommodation for the School
in order that the building of the permane111t premis~s
will if possible start before 1 J une 1969 ;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to explore with
delegations and with the Board of Trustees new proposals for achieving the target of the Development
Fund at the earliest possible date ;
3. Decides to contribute $61,000 to the International
School Fund in 1969 to cover the deficit foreseen
for the current school year ;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
1752nd plenary meeting,
21 December 1968.
2, /bid.,

Twent1-third SessiiJn, Supplemtnt No. 8 (A/7208).
H /bid., Twenty-third Session, An11ezcs, agenda item 82,
document A/7220.
26 fbid., agenda item 83, document A/7358.
2r !bid., document A/7389.
