UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY
OFFICIAL
THIRTY-NINTH

COUNCIL
“-,,..

RECORD .-uNclB wABY
YE!i%“‘993

MEETING:

15 FEBRUARY

1984

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page
1
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2514). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov,
President of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*..............

WV.2514

I

Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a$reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which
information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions
and
Decisions of the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

2514th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 15 February 1984, at 11.30 a.m.
President:

Mr. S. Shah NAWAZ

The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent
Representative of France to the Urlited Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/16339)

(Pakistan).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, Egypt, France, India, Malta, Netherlands, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Peru, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland,
United States of America, Upper Volta, Zimbabwe.
Provisional
1. Adoption
2.

2. The PRESIDENT:
I should like to inform members
of the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Italy- and Lebanon, in which they
request to be invited to participate in the discussion of
the item on the agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives foparticipate in the discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with the
relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (S/Agenda/2514)

of the agenda

The situation in thk Middle East:
Letter dated 14 February 1984 from the Permanent Representative of France to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/16339)
The meeting

At -the invitation
of the President, Mr. Fakhoury
(Lebanon) took a place at the Council table and
Mr. Jannuzzi (Italy) took the place reserved for him at
the side of the Council chamber.

was called to order at 11.40 p.m.

Tribute to the memory of His Excellency Mr. Yuri Vladimirovich Andropov, President of the Presidium of
the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union

3. The PRESIDENT:
The Council is meeting today in
response to a request contained in the letter dated
14 February 1984 from the representative of France to
the President of the Council [S/16339].
4. Mr. de La BARRE de NANTEUIL
(France) [interpretation from French]: Allow me first of all to extend
to you, Sir, on behalf of my delegation, my congratulations on your assumption of the presidency of the Security Council for the month of February. Your distinguished qualities as a diplomat, your vast experience in
international affairs and your keen judgement guarantee that yours will be an effective and impartial presidency. I am sure that it will afford our countries an
opportunity to forge even closer bonds of friendship.

It is with deep sorrow that we
1. The PRESIDENT:
have all learned of the passing away of an outstanding
statesman of our time, His Excellency Mr. Yuri V.
Andropov, President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. As the principal
organ of the United Nations on which the Member
States have conferred the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, it is
fitting for the Security Council to pay a tribute to President Andropov’s deep commitment
to the cause of
world peace, the ending of the arms race and peaceful
co-operation among States. Permit me, as President of
the Council and on your behalf, to convey to the representative of the Soviet Union and through him to the
Government of the Soviet Union, the Soviet people and
the bereaved family our sincere condolences.

5. I should also like to congratulate your predecessor, Mr. Chamorro Mora of Nicaragua, on the impartial manner in which he conducted the work of the
Council last month.
6. Finally, on behalf of my Government I should like
to join in the condolences that have been extended
to the Soviet delegation on the demise of Mr. Yuri
Andropov, President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Soviet Union.

On the proposal of the President, the members of the
Council, standing, observed a minute of silence.
Adoption

of the agenda
7. France has requested an urgent meeting of the Security Council to consider the situation in the Beirut

The agenda was adopted.
1

area. Indeed, that situation has become particularly
serious as a result of recent events that have once again
radically altered the elementsof the Lebanese problem.
Of even greater concern is the fate of the civilian population, which has been subjected to fighting and bombardment and constantly exposed to the threats and

restoration of a precarious calm in~Beirut and the area
immediately surrounding it.
’ -, .;
,_,
I
12. Circums&ces have now changed. The risks of
now such that the international comurgency face up to its responsibilities.
As matters now stand, recourse” to‘an international
force to replace the multinational force has become a
necessary step towards easing tension. It is with that
conviction that the French Government has in recent
months and, more particularly, in the past few weeks,
taken up the subject with the Governments of a number
of countries concerned at the serious situation in the
Middle East.
13. A United Nations force is needed, and the most
suitable way to provide it is undoubtedly to send certain
detachments from the United Nations Interim Force in
Lebanon (UNIFIL) to Beirut. Certainly, if the United
Nations asked us we should not object to French elements of UNIFIL being among those detachments. But
it is undoubtedly preferable that the international force
in the Beirut area should contain no national of the
States which are permanent members of the Security
Council. France is prepared to include this provision in
the plan which should now be provided by the Council.

9. During the tragic summer of 1982, it will be recalled, the Council met on a number of occasions in
an attempt to bring a halt to the fighting and to provide some assistance to the.civilian population. With
regard to Beirut, in particular, France submitted a
draft resolution [S/1525SJRev.2], suggesting the creation of a United Nations force, but on 26 June 1982that
draft resolution was not adopted owing to the negative vote cast by a permanent member of the Council
[238Zst meeting]. A few weeks later the Council unanimously adopted resolution 521 (1982), paragraph 5 of
which suggested the deployment of United Nations
forces to assist the Lebanese Government to ensure
“full protection for the civilian populations in and
around Beirut”.

14. Replacing a multinational force by an intemational force involves two things: first, for this force to
take up position in the Beirut area, and for its mandate
to be limited to that area; as is the case at present for the
contingents of the multinational force; and, secondly,
to take up that position upon the departure of the multinationai force, which without any further reason to
exist or intervene, either in Beirut or elsewhere in
Lebanon, should withdraw, together with its accompanying ships.

10. It was clear, however, that lengthy negotiations
would be required in order to reach agreement on the
creation of such a force. Thus, aware of the extreme
urgency of the situation, France decided to respond
positively to the express request made by the Lebanese
Government, in agreement with all the country’s political elements, regarding the creation of a multinational
force. However, I should like to recall that on 21 September 1982 I had written to the Secretary-General a
letter [S/25420], in which I stated:

15. The discussion beginning today-which,
we
hope, will end speedily with the adoption of a resolution
containing immediately applicable provisions-is particularly serious for the very future of Lebanon. The
many Lebanese statements in recent days in support of
United Nations action give proof of this, if proof be
needed. The United Nations has sent a Force to southem Lebanon. By authorizing the Secretary-General to
use part of that Force in Beirut, the United Nations will
be contributing, as is its duty, to the protection of the
civilian population and thus to the reestablishment of
peace, which is necessary for the restoration of the
territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and independence of Lebanon, in implementation of the resolutions
already adopted in this connection, which have for too
long yielded no result.

“The French Government, in its desire to support
decisions of the Security Council, would have wished
that a United Nations force might be created, as
proposed in Council resolution 521 (1982), paragraph 5.”
Il. Although it has subsequently been lauded by
some and disparaged by others, for 16months the multinational force has none the less attempted, with courage and tenacity and at very great sacrifice, to carry out
its mission in keeping with the mandates given by the
Lebanese Government to its national contingents. Although an interposition force had earlier been called in
to ensure the withdrawal of Palestinian forces from
Beirut in security and dignity, the multinational force
was sent in, under the conditions I have mentioned,
more particularly to protect the sorely stricken camps
of Sabra and Shatila and generally to contribute, in so
far as it was able and in difficult circumstances, to the

16. For its part, France is prepared to make the necessary commitments and arrangements. We are sure that
all member States have the same desire to permit the
Council to shoulder its responsibilities.
17. Mr. OVINNIKOV (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [interpretationfrom Russian]: On behalf of the
2

Soviet delegation,. I should like to express sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President, and other representatives
who have expressed their condolences on the passing of
the President of the ,Presidium of the Supreme Soviet
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and Gen;
eral Secretary of theCentral
Committee of the Corni’
munist Party of the Soviet Union Yuri Vladimirovich
Andropov.
,.
18. The entire life and multifaceted activities of Yuri
Vladimirovich
Andropov, particularly during the period when he headed the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and the Soviet State, were devoted to the basic
task facing mankind today: eliminating
the threat of
nuclear war and strengthening universal peace and security.
19. The bright image of Yuri Andropov, an eminent
son of the Soviet Union, a staunch, consistent champion of peace throughout the world, a man who fought
to strengthen co-operation and links between peoples,
will always remain in the hearts of the Soviet people and
progressive mankind as a whole.

20. Speaking in Moscow the day before yesterday
-on 13 February-the
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union, Konstantin Ustinovich Chernenko, said in particular the following about the consistent foreign policy
S‘) /
of our country:
‘I ‘.’
“‘The Soviet Union as .a great socialist Power fully
recogx%es.its responsibility to peoples for preserving
and strengthening-peace.
We are open for peaceful,
mutually beneticia~‘&$eration
with States in all
continents. We are for a pe+ful
solution of all controversial international
problems through serious
and constructive talks on .the basis of equality. The
Soviet Union will fully co-operate ,with .a!! Slates
which are prepared to assist through practical deeds
to lessening international
tensions and creating an
atmosphere of trust in the world; in other .words, with
those who will truly seek, not to prepare for war, but
to strengthen peace. We believe that with these
aims in mind, we should make full use of all available mechanisms, including, naturally, the United
Nations, which was established for Breserving and
strengthening peace.”
The meeting

rose at POOL

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Sations publications
ma! be obtained from hookrtorcs
and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult )our bookstore or write to: United Nation\. Sales Sectron. New York or Geneva.
CO,MMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLlCATlOSS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dam les hbraines et iec agences dCpositaires du
monde entier. Informez-vous
auprb de votre lihratre ou adressez-tous
j, : Nations Unies. Section
des ventes. New York ou Genke.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE LAS NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estzin en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas panes del mundo. Cons&
a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccibn de Vmtas,
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho in United

Nations.

New York

00300

‘90;xX313-Febrwuy

199%2,050
