S/2020/140

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 February 2020
Original: English

Implementation of resolution 2470 (2019)
Report of the Secretary-General

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2470
(2019), in which the Secretary-General was requested to report every three months
on progress made towards fulfilling the mandate of the United Nations Assistance
Mission for Iraq (UNAMI). The report covers key developments relating to Iraq and
provides an update on the activities of the United Nations in Iraq since my previous
report of 22 November 2019 (S/2019/903) and the briefing to the Security Council by
my Special Representative for Iraq and Head of UNAMI on 3 December 2019.

II. Summary of key political developments
A.

Political situation
2.
Popular protests demanding substantial political, economic and social reforms,
which had started on 1 October 2019, continued during the reporting period in
Baghdad and in central and southern governorates.
3.
The last week of November witnessed a significant escalation in violence,
particularly in Dhi Qar and Najaf Governorates, where clashes between protesters and
security forces contributed to the rising number of deaths and injuries. On
27 November, protesters set fire to the Consulate of the Islamic Republic of Iran in
Najaf. On 29 November, the representative of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani
delivered a sermon, in which he emphasized that it was “forbidden to attack peaceful
protesters” or to “prevent them from exercising their right to ask for refo rms”, noted
the “failure of the concerned authorities” to deal with the protests and called upon the
Council of Representatives to take the necessary action to “prevent the country from
sliding into violence, chaos and destruction”.
4.
On the same day, the Prime Minister, Adil Abd Al-Mahdi, announced that he
would submit an official letter to the Council of Ministers to request approval from
the Council of Representatives for his resignation. On 1 December, the Council of
Representatives accepted the Prime Minister’s resignation, which he had submitted

20-01707 (E)

260220

*2001707*

S/2020/140

on 30 November, with immediate effect. 1 As a next step, the Speaker of the Council
of Representatives, Mohammed al-Halbousi, announced that he would send a letter
to the President, Barham Salih, calling for a Prime Minister-designate to be nominated
in accordance with the Constitution. Meanwhile, the Government remained in place
in a caretaker capacity.
5.
Following the resignation of the Prime Minister, political blocs consulted with
a view to identifying a consensus nominee within the 15-day constitutional deadline,
in accordance with article 76 of the Constitution. The 15 -day period started on
4 December when the President, through whom the nomination must be channelled,
received the official notification. In an effort to secure political consensus on a
nominee, the President met with the heads of most political blocs and with academics
and union leaders on 9 and 11 December, respectively.
6.
On 9 December, parliamentarians from all political blocs submitte d to the
President a list of preconditions for a candidate to be nominated, including that
candidates be politically independent, that they hold only Iraqi nationality, that they
had not held any executive or legislative position since 2003 and that they b e
acceptable to the protest movement. The submission was signed by 174 of the 329
parliamentarians.
7.
On 11 December, protesters in Baghdad issued a statement announcing their
criteria for the prime ministership, which was similar to the parliamentary lis t but also
required the nominee to be under the age of 55, to pledge not to run in the next
elections and to commit to implementing substantial reforms.
8.
On 19 December, the constitutional deadline for the nomination of a consensus
candidate expired without a name being submitted to the Council of Representatives,
despite intense negotiations. On the same day, the President sought a legal opinion
from the Federal Supreme Court to identify the largest parliamentary bloc, which,
under article 76 of the Constitution, had the right to nominate the Prime Ministerdesignate. In its opinion issued on 22 December, the Court stated that the term “largest
parliamentary bloc” referred to the largest bloc in parliament after the 2018 elections,
noting that it was immaterial whether it had run as a single list during the elections
or was constituted from multiple parties after the elections.
9.
After the Federal Supreme Court ruling, the Bina’ bloc sent a letter to the
President indicating that it was the largest parliamentary bloc according to the Court’s
criterion and nominating the Minister for Higher Education, Qusay al -Suhail, as
Prime Minister-designate. The nomination was rejected by other political blocs and
Mr. al-Suhail subsequently withdrew his candidacy. On 23 December, the President
received an official letter from the Speaker, identifying the Bina’ bloc as the largest
parliamentary bloc and nominating the Governor of Basrah, Asaad al -Eidani, as the
bloc’s replacement candidate. Again, the nomination was rejected by other political
blocs. In a letter addressed to the Speaker dated 26 December, the President declined
to nominate Mr. al-Eidani, citing as reasons his responsibility to the people and his
“national responsibility towards the stability and security of the country”. He
referenced as an additional reason the fact that Mr. al-Eidani did not meet the
preconditions set out by political blocs in the parliamentary submission of
9 December. The President also indicated his readiness to resign if the parlia ment did
not accept his actions as constitutional.
10. On 20 December, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, through his representative,
said in his weekly sermon that early elections and a new Government were needed to
steer the country out of the situation of civil unrest. He called on political blocs to
__________________
1

2/15

At the time of drafting of the present report, the Prime Minister remained in office, in a caretaker
capacity.
20-01707

S/2020/140

expedite the passage of a “fair and credible” electoral law that satisfied the aspirations
of voters and brought them closer to their representatives.
11. On 29 January, the President gave political blocs a four-day period to agree on
a nominee for the prime ministership, stating that he would exercise his constitutional
powers to assign the most acceptable candidate if no agreement had been reached by
the 1 February deadline. Hours before the deadline, the Pre sident nominated
Mohammed Tawfiq Allawi as the Prime Minister-designate and asked him to form a
new Government within the 30-day period stipulated in the Constitution. Following
his nomination, Mr. Allawi delivered a televised address to the Iraqi people s etting
forth priorities for his premiership, including the protection of the right to peaceful
protests, accountability for violence against demonstrators, the formation of an
inclusive and non-sectarian Government, socioeconomic reforms and preparations f or
early elections.
12. During the reporting period, security developments had significant political
repercussions (see paras. 23–35). Following air strikes on locations near the border
between Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic on 29 December and close to Baghdad
International Airport on 3 January, the Prime Minister called for an extraordinary
parliamentary session to develop an official Iraqi position.
13. On 5 January, attending an extraordinary session of the Council of
Representatives, the Prime Minister delivered an address that laid out two options for
the Council of Representatives to review, namely, ending the presence of foreign
troops in Iraq or reviewing the conditions of their deployment. On the
recommendation of the Prime Minister, parliamentarians subsequently adopted a
decision calling on the Government to end support from the international coalition to
counter Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and to work to end the presence
of all foreign troops in Iraq. They also called for control of all weapons to be restricted
to the State and for official complaints to be submitted to the United Nations and the
Security Council regarding the air strikes conducted by the United States of America.
14. Meanwhile, the parliamentary constitutional review committee continued its
work. A separate presidential review committee completed its meetings on
21 December. In addition, a ministerial review committee, formed on 18 November,
also met. The presidential and ministerial committees agreed to start preparing a joint
report on their findings, to be submitted to the presidency of the Council of
Representatives.
15. Throughout the constitutional review process, Kurdistan Regional Government
representatives expressed concerns over the possible implementation of fundamental
constitutional changes that could negatively affect the Kurdistan Region, most
notably discussions on the federal status of the Republic of Iraq and the system of
governance (parliamentary or presidential system).
16. Public protests continued during the reporting period, with violent clashes
occurring in Baghdad, Dhi Qar, Karbala’ and Wasit Governor ates. On 6 December,
unidentified masked men fired at protesters on Sinak Bridge and in Khilani Square in
Baghdad, causing deaths and injuries, according to the Iraqi High Commission for
Human Rights. The incident was condemned by the Government on 7 Decem ber.
Between 12 and 18 January, tensions escalated between protesters and security forces
throughout the southern governorates over attempts to reopen schools and
universities, with some protesters forcibly preventing students and teachers from
accessing educational institutions.
17. On 12 January, protesters in Dhi Qar Governorate temporarily closed the
Baghdad-Basrah highway and gave a one-week deadline for the ratification of the
new law on elections to the Council of Representatives, the confirmation o f election
20-01707

3/15

S/2020/140

dates, the formation of a new Government and the publication of the investigation
into the deaths of protesters in Nasiriyah. Similar demands were expressed by
protesters elsewhere. On 19 and 20 January, with the demands unmet, protesters in
Baghdad and other governorates attempted to block major routes, including access to
ports and oil facilities, leading to clashes.
18. On 24 January, a large-scale demonstration, called for by Muqtada al-Sadr,
against the presence of foreign troops in Iraq, took place in Baghdad. Prior to the
event, members of the ongoing protest movement voiced their rejection of the
demonstration. Following the event, the crowd dispersed without incident. Later in
the evening, however, clashes broke out between members of the protest movement
and security forces in central Baghdad. On 25 January, security forces began to clear
roads in Baghdad and sit-in sites in Basrah and Dhi Qar Governorates.
19. In the Kurdistan Region, on 11 December, the Council of Ministers of the
Kurdistan Regional Government approved a draft pension reform bill and submitted
it to the Kurdistan Regional Parliament. The bill included a series of measures to
improve transparency with respect to salaries, pensions and allowances for public
servants. The Kurdistan Regional Parliament decided to delay the parliamentary
recess by one month in order to expedite the passing of the bill. The pension reform
bill was subsequently passed on 16 January.

B.

Relations between Baghdad and Erbil
20. Limited progress was made during the reporting period on relations between
Baghdad and Erbil. Although a preliminary agreement on oil and revenue -sharing was
announced on 25 November, the agreement is yet to be submitted to the Council of
Representatives for its first reading.
21. The Speaker of the Council of Representatives visited Erbil on 22 December.
He met separately with the President of the Kurdistan Region, Nechirvan Barzani,
and with the leader of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, Masoud Barzani, to discuss
political and security developments in Iraq and the region and pending legislation
before the Council of Representatives.
22. The Prime Minister of Iraq travelled to Erbil on 11 January and met separately
with the President of the Kurdistan Region and with the Prime Minister of the
Kurdistan Region, Masrour Barzani. Mutual relations, regional security and the threat
from ISIL were among the issues discussed. The Prime Minister also travelled to
Sulaymaniyah Governorate and met the First Deputy Secretary -General of the
Patriotic Union of Kurdistan, Kosrat Rasul Ali.

C.

Security situation
23. Remnants of ISIL continued to launch frequent asymmetrical attacks against the
Iraqi people and security forces, particularly in areas of Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala,
Erbil, Kirkuk, Mosul and Salah al-Din Governorates. Iraqi security forces continued
their action against ISIL cells throughout these areas. On 7 and 29 December,
respectively, Iraqi security forces launched phases seven and eight of Operation Will
of Victory, with phase seven aimed at clearing ISIL remnants from parts of Diyala,
Kirkuk and Salah al-Din Governorates and phase eight aimed at launching further
operations in those areas and in Ninawa Governorate. Military operations also
extended to western Anbar and areas along the border between Diyala and
Sulaymaniyah Governorates.

4/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

24. On 5 December, the Iraqi Joint Operations Command reported that two rockets
landed on the Balad airbase in Salah al-Din Governorate, where United States and
Iraqi troops are co-located, without causing casualties or material damage. On
9 December, the Command reported rocket attacks against compounds near Baghdad
International Airport, wounding six Iraqi soldiers. Additional rockets, which landed
close to the airport perimeter, were reported on 11 December. On 27 December, the
Security Media Cell of the Office of the Prime Minister reported that mortar shells
had landed on the K1 military base, located 13 km north -west of Kirkuk. On
29 December, the United States Department of Defense stated that a rocket attack on
an Iraqi base near Kirkuk had “resulted in the death of a United States citizen and
injured four service members and two members of the Iraqi security forces”. No group
claimed responsibility for the attack. The Popular Mobilization Forces, in a statement
on 28 December, denied involvement in the incident.
25. On 29 December, the Command reported air strikes on three Popular
Mobilization Forces locations close to the Iraqi-Syrian border in Anbar Governorate,
including the headquarters of Kata’ib Hizbullah, the forty-fifth brigade of the Popular
Mobilization Forces. On the same day, in a statement, the United States Department
of Defense noted that “United States forces have conducted precision defensive
strikes against five Kata’ib Hizbullah facilities in Iraq [three] and Syria [two]” in
response to the group’s “repeated attacks on Iraqi bases that host Operation Inherent
Resolve coalition forces”. The statement also indicated that attacks against United
States and coalition forces “must cease”. On 30 December, the Popular Mobilization
Commission announced that 25 members of the Popular Mobilization Forces had been
killed and 51 injured.
26. The political leadership of Iraq issued statements denouncing the air strikes. In
a statement issued by his spokesperson on 29 December, the Prime Minister described
them as a “violation of Iraq’s sovereignty”. On 30 December, the President, the
Speaker and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs also issued statements in which they
described the air strikes as “a violation of Iraq’s sovereignty”, called upon all parties
to “exercise restraint” and “rejected the use of Iraqi territory as an arena for external
conflicts”. Similar statements were issued by the office of Grand Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani and the leaders of many political blocs.
27. On 31 December, mourners, predominantly from the ranks of the Popular
Mobilization Forces, gathered in Baghdad for the funerals of those killed in the air
strikes on 29 December. Hundreds subsequently entered the former International
Zone and gathered in protest outside the Embassy of the United States. Fires were
started close to the perimeter wall, external facilities were destroyed, and some
demonstrators attempted to enter the compound. Later that day, the Prime Minister
stated that attacks against, or harassment of, foreign embassies and representations
were strictly prohibited by the security forces and would lead to punishment under
the law. By the evening of 1 January, protesters had withdrawn from the perimet er of
the Embassy.
28. On 3 January, the United States announced the death of the Commander of the
Iranian Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, General Qasem Soleimani, following an
air strike close to Baghdad International Airport. The death of the Iraqi D eputy
National Security Adviser and Deputy Chairman of the Popular Mobilization
Commission, Jamal al-Ibrahimi (also known as Abu Mahdi al-Muhandis) and others
was subsequently confirmed. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in a
letter dated 3 January addressed to me and the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/13), stated that the air strike constituted “a gross violation of the fundamental
principles of international law”. In identical letter s dated 6 January addressed to me
and the President of the Security Council (S/2020/15), the Government of Iraq
condemned “in the strongest possible terms” the act, which violated “the sovereignty
20-01707

5/15

S/2020/140

of Iraq and the principles of international law”. The Iraqi political leadership and
Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, among others, condemned the air strike and called for
maximum restraint on all sides. The Iraqi National Security Council stated that “the
air strike had violated the rules of conduct for the [United States] presence in Iraq”.
In a letter dated 8 January addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/20), the United States Government stated that, “in accordance with Article
51 of the Charter of the United Nations”, it had “undertaken certain actions in the
exercise of its inherent right of self-defence”, including “an operation on 2 January
2020 against leadership elements of Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps… on
the territory of Iraq”. The letter further stated that the “actions were in response to an
escalating series of armed attacks in recent months by the Islamic Republic of Iran
and Iran-supported militias on United States forces”. In a letter dated 29 January
addressed to me and the President of the Security Council ( S/2020/81), the
Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran firmly rejected “the claim that the Iranian
armed forces conducted armed attacks against the United States in the years 2019 and
2020” and categorically rejected “the attribution to Iran of any armed attack against
the United States by any entity or individual in Iraq and the region”. The letter also
stated that it considered the invocation of the right to self-defence “an extremely
arbitrary interpretation of international law, particularly Article 51 of the Charter of
the United Nations”.
29. On 5 January, the Combined Joint Task Force known as Operation Inherent
Resolve announced that, owing to “repeated attacks on bases housing its troops”, the
international counter-ISIL coalition would pause its activities in Iraq until further
notice. On 4 and 5 January, rockets were fired and landed within or close to the forme r
International Zone in Baghdad.
30. On 8 January, the Government of Iraq and the United States reported that the
Islamic Republic of Iran had launched missiles against military bases hosting United
States troops in Anbar and Erbil Governorates. The Security Media Cell of the Office
of the Prime Minister stated that a total of 23 missiles had fallen in Iraq, on the Ayn
al-Asad airbase and to the west of Hit City in Anbar Governorate, and on two
locations in Erbil. A spokesperson for the Prime Minister confirmed that no casualties
had been registered, and that the Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran had
informed him in advance. Also on 8 January, the Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Javad Zarif, stated that the missile str ikes had “concluded”
the country’s “proportionate measures in self-defence under Article 51 of [the] UN
Charter”. The United States confirmed, on the same day, that there had been no
American casualties. In an update on 24 January, the United States Department of
Defense reported that a number of service members had been diagnosed with
“traumatic brain injuries” and that some required hospitalization.
31. In identical letters dated 9 January addressed to me and the President of the
Security Council (S/2020/26), the Government of Iraq stated that the missile strike
was “a breach of the sovereignty of Iraq and a violation of the principles of good neighbourliness… and international law”. The President, the Prime Minister, the
Speaker and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, among others, also called on all parties
to prevent further escalation. The Government of the Islamic Republic of Iran, in a
letter dated 16 January addressed to me and the President of the Security Council
(S/2020/44), described, inter alia, the strike as a “measured and proportionate
response, in exercising its inherent right to self-defence”.
32. The Security Media Cell reported that the Balad airbase was targeted again on
12 January, with eight rockets landing but causing no casualties. On 14 January, the
Cell also reported a rocket attack on the training camp in Taji, to the north of Baghdad,
again without casualties. The camp hosts coalition forces.

6/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

33. Early on 21 January, the Security Media Cell reported that three rockets had
landed within the vicinity of the Embassy of the United States in the former
International Zone in Baghdad. On the same day, the Prime Minister strongly
condemned the attack as a “crime against a diplomatic mission on Iraqi soil” and
instructed the Baghdad Operations Command to launch an investigation, according
to a statement by his spokesperson. No casualties were reported.
34. On the evening of 26 January, the Security Media Cell reported that five rockets
had landed within the former International Zone. Shor tly after, the Prime Minister
noted that a number of rockets had fallen within the United States Embassy
compound. The Prime Minister subsequently issued a statement condemning the
incident, which he described as an unlawful action that weakened the State and
undermined its sovereignty and the sanctity of diplomatic missions in Iraq. According
to his statement, the Prime Minister instructed the security forces to investigate the
incident and arrest those responsible. In a phone call with the Prime Minister on
27 January, the Secretary of State of the United States, Michael Pompeo, expressed
appreciation for the commitment of the Government of Iraq to strengthen security for
United States personnel and diplomatic facilities. The United States Department of
State reported that there had been one injury.
35. During the reporting period, the Ministry of National Defence of Turkey
reported continued military activity against Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK)
positions in northern Iraq.

D.

Regional and international developments
36. Iraq continued its efforts to establish stronger relations with its neighbours and
to diversify its regional partnerships. On 17 December, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Mohamed Ali Alhakim, met counterparts from Jordan, Lebanon a nd Turkey
on the margins of the Global Refugee Forum, held in Geneva, to discuss ways to
maintain and strengthen social and economic stability in the Middle East region.
37. From 21 to 24 January, the President of Iraq attended the World Economic
Forum in Davos, Switzerland, and met counterparts from Estonia, Germany, Jordan,
the Netherlands and the United States, as well as the Secretary -General of the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Jens Stoltenberg. The President of the
Kurdistan Region, also attended the Forum. On 25 January, the President of Iraq
visited the Holy See and Italy.
38. On 21 January, the Speaker travelled to Jordan to discuss bilateral relations and
regional developments.
39. Discussions with the following high-level visitors to Iraq focused, inter alia, on
strengthening bilateral relations and regional and international political and security
developments, including continued cooperation to counter ISIL: on 17 December, the
Governor-General of Australia, David Hurley; on 19 December, the Under Secretary
of State for Political Affairs of the United States, David Hale; on 9 January, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Turkey, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu; on 14 January, the Political
Director General of the Federal Foreign Office of Germany, Philipp Ackermann; on
15 January, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar,
Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al-Thani; and on 18 January, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs and Expatriates of Jordan, Ayman Safadi.
40. Telephone conversations included calls between the President of Iraq and the
Vice-President of the United States, Michael Pence, on 11 December; the Prime
Minister and the United States Secretary of Defense, Mark Esper, on 16 December;
the Prime Minister and the President of the United States, Donald Trump, on

20-01707

7/15

S/2020/140

31 December, as well as several calls between Iraqi senior officials and the Secretary
of State of the United States in December, including on the protection of diplomatic
missions.
41. On 31 December, the President of Iraq spoke with the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh
Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, and, on 5 January, the Prime Minister spoke with the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Jean-Yves Le Drian.
42. Throughout January, the President, the Prime Minister and the Speaker engaged
regional and international partners to call for de -escalation, reaffirming the need to
respect the sovereignty of Iraq. The Prime Minister held telephone discussions with
several partner nations to discuss the decision taken by the Council of Representatives
on 5 January regarding the presence of foreign troops in Iraq, including those of
Canada, France, Germany, Jordan, the Netherlands, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and the United States. The Prime
Minister also spoke with the Secretary-General of NATO and with the High
Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Josep
Borrell.
43. On 7 January, the Speaker had conversations with the Minister for F oreign
Affairs of Canada, François-Philippe Champagne, and the Speaker of parliament of
Turkey, Mustafa Şentop on issues of common concern, including developments in
Iraq.

III. Update on the activities of the Mission and the
United Nations country team
A.

Political activities
44. The Special Representative engaged extensively with a wide range of
stakeholders, including the Prime Minister, the President and the Speaker, political
leaders, the Supreme Judicial Council, various groups of peaceful protesters, human
rights defenders, religious authorities and union representatives, to discuss their
demands and identify possible solutions. She also discussed the short - and mediumterm measures proposed in her “Next step” document of 10 Novemb er, focusing on
electoral reform, security sector reform, counter-corruption efforts, constitutional
review and the enactment of a number of pending laws that would promote, among
other issues, good governance, economic diversification and reconstruction. The
Special Representative repeatedly condemned the intimidation, abduction, unlawful
arrest and killing of unarmed protesters, urging the Iraqi authorities to protect
protesters and to press ahead in addressing the people’s demands for reforms.
45. The Special Representative also held multiple meetings with the leadership of
Iraq and parliamentarians to discuss electoral reforms. During discussions on the new
law on elections to the Council of Representatives, she reaffirmed the readiness of
the United Nations to provide electoral advice and technical support, including
information on international best practices. She urged parliamentarians to reflect
provisions in the new law that promoted the demands of their constituents for
credible, free, inclusive and participatory elections.
46. Subsequent to the resignation of the Prime Minister, the Special Representative
met with Iraqi political leaders, emphasizing the importance of reaching consensus
on a way forward to resolve the political stalemate over the no mination of a candidate
as new Prime Minister-designate within the framework of the Constitution. Following
the decision adopted by the Council of Representatives on 5 January regarding the
presence of foreign troops in Iraq, my Special Representative met with the Prime

8/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

Minister, the President and the Speaker to discuss the potential impact of the removal
of foreign troops, including on the continued fight against ISIL. Emphasizing the
importance of Iraqi unity and sovereignty, the Special Representative urged all parties
to exercise maximum restraint and to resume dialogue as the only means to build
stability, resilience and peace in Iraq and beyond.
47. In the same context, my Special Representative travelled to Erbil on 13 January,
where she met the President of the Kurdistan Region and the Prime Minister of the
Region, to discuss internal security and economic issues, as well as political
developments in the country and region.
48. On 18 January, the Special Representative was received in Doha by the Dep uty
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Qatar, with whom she discussed
the situation in Iraq and related regional developments.
49. The Deputy Special Representative for Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance
visited Basrah on 11 December, where she met local officials to discuss the response
by security forces to ongoing public protests in the south. She also met with civil
society activists and tribal leaders to discuss the demands of protesters, resolution of
the ongoing political impasse, voter engagement in future elections and the building
of social cohesion and inclusion in the southern governorates.
50. The Deputy Special Representative continued to chair workshops across Iraq
for young civil activists, organized by UNAMI in cooperation with the Supreme
Commission on Coexistence and Social Peace in the Office of the Prime Minister and
the al-Amal Association, an Iraqi non-governmental organization. At a workshop in
Tikrit, Salah al-Din Governorate, on 21 December, local youth representatives took
advantage of the presence of senior local political figures to discuss their proposed
solutions to the challenges facing their country.
51. During the reporting period, UNAMI held consultations with the Women
Advisory Group for Politics and National Reconciliation in Iraq to solicit its input on
the Government’s ongoing review of the Constitution. The Group proposed the
inclusion of a constitutional article that would guarantee women’s representation at
all levels of governance and independent institutions through a quota, among other
suggestions, in accordance with the principle of inclusion in the Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, to which Iraq is a party.
According to article 49 of the current Constitution, the 25 per cent quota provision is
only applicable to the representation of women in the Council of Representatives.

B.

Electoral assistance
52. UNAMI intensified its engagement during the reporting period with the Council
of Representatives and its Legal Committee as deliberations continued on proposed
changes to the law on elections to the Council of Representatives and the Law on the
Independent High Electoral Commission. The Mission’s Electoral Assistance Office
provided technical assistance and advice to the parliamentary Legal Committee on
best practices for electoral reform and the reorganization of the Independent High
Electoral Commission. My Special Representative also discussed electoral reform
with the Speaker and various political leaders. My Deputy Special Representative for
Political Affairs and Electoral Assistance met with members of the Council of
Representatives to discuss draft electoral legislation and the provision by the United
Nations of technical assistance in future electoral processes.
53. On 5 December, the Council of Representatives adopted a new Law on the
Independent High Electoral Commission, which provided for the appointment of nine
electoral commissioners, including one woman. All commissioners are judges (fi ve

20-01707

9/15

S/2020/140

nominated by the Supreme Judicial Council, two by the Shura Council, and two by
the Judicial Council of the Kurdistan Region). It also mandates the appointment of
new, non-partisan officials for senior and mid-level positions in the restructured
Commission. The female commissioner was appointed as the new Chief Executive
Officer of the Independent High Electoral Commission.
54. Following protracted deliberations and negotiations between political blocs, the
new law on elections to the Council of Representatives was approved by the
parliament on 24 December. The law is expected to provide for a new electoral system
(the single non-transferable vote based on subgovernorate level constituencies, with
seats to be allocated to candidates who receive the highe st number of votes).
However, the final text of the law had not been issued during the reporting period.

C.

Human rights and rule of law activities
55. The Mission’s Human Rights Office issued its second and third special reports
on the public protests on 5 November and 11 December, respectively. The third report,
covering the period from 5 November to 8 December, noted that serious human rights
violations and abuses continued to occur in the context of ongoing protests, including:
killings, excessive use of force and disappearances, as well as ill-treatment and
violations of the procedural rights of arrested demonstrators. Between 1 October and
26 January, protest-related violence resulted in at least 467 deaths and at least 9,131
injuries were caused by tear-gas canisters, live ammunition or shrapnel. The number
of those injured may exceed 21,000 if those suffering from excessive tear-gas
inhalation are included.
56. Throughout the protests, UNAMI continued to receive credible reports of
killings of activists and journalists involved in the protests, carried out by unknown
armed men described as “militia”, “unknown third parties”, “armed entities”,
“outlaws” and “spoilers”. On 12 December, the Government established a committee
to review the allegations of killings and disappearances. Although some
investigations were conducted, no information regarding the findings or steps
concerning accountability has yet been made public.
57. The Mission also documented threats against activists and high-profile
demonstrators and cases of disappearances. Since the beginning of the protests,
UNAMI has received credible reports that Iraqi security forces arrested and detained
thousands of demonstrators, typically without warrant and mostly without providing
those arrested the means to contact their families or defence lawyers, prompting fears
that those arrested were being held incommunicado or had been disappeared. In Babil,
Basrah, Dhi Qar, Karbala’, Maysan and Muthanna Governorates, most schools and
universities have remained closed since early November, following strikes and calls
for school closures by demonstrators.
58. Women continued to participate in the ongoing demonstrations for political and
economic reform in Iraq, hoping to achieve a more balanced and meaningful
representation in politics and the economy, and urging reform measures to also benefit
women, in particular those from vulnerable and impoverished groups.
59. Following the monitoring of trials conducted in previous reporting periods, on
28 January, UNAMI and the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights issued a report entitled “Human rights in the administration of justice
in Iraq: trials under the anti-terrorism laws and implications for justice, accountability
and social cohesion in the aftermath of ISIL”. The report outlined the main findings
based on information collected from 794 criminal hearings and provided
recommendations to the Government, with the aim of enhancing criminal justice
procedures and safeguards.

10/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

60. With the approval of the Ministry of Justice, the Mission’s Human Rights Office
conducted 16 visits to places of detention and interviewed 31 detainees within its
detention monitoring programme, implemented throughout Iraq. The monitoring
activity aims to support the Government´s efforts to address and prevent torture and
ill-treatment at sites of deprivation of liberty, through targeted recommendations
based on the collection and analysis of credible information obtained during the visits.
In parallel, the Government’s report on the implementation of the Convention against
Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment was
submitted to the Committee against Torture in 2019, as part of the second reporting
cycle.
61. My report on children and armed conflict in Iraq (S/2019/984) was discussed by
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict of the Security Council on
8 January 2020. In the report, details were provided on six grave violations against
2,114 children, which were verified during the period from July 2015 to July 2019
and distressingly high levels of violations against children were noted.
62. On 24 January, the International Day of Education, the United Nations in Iraq
brought together teachers, government officials and students in Ninawa Governorate
to discuss obstacles faced in improving access to education for children, in particular
those who have lived under the territorial control of ISIL.
63. On 6 December, a mass grave was discovered in the Suqur area of Fallujah
district of Anbar Governorate. On 22 December, a judge of the co mmittee on mass
graves in Anbar Governorate issued an order to preserve and protect the site and to
postpone exhumation owing to technical constraints.
64. To commemorate Human Rights Day, UNAMI held events across Iraq on
10 December. Marking the global theme for 2019, “Youth standing up for human
rights”, UNAMI facilitated events in Baghdad, Kirkuk, Basrah and Mosul with young
human rights defenders and activists. In Erbil, UNAMI distributed approximately 660
booklets containing the nine core international human rights treaties in the Sorani
Kurdish language, the first known translation of those texts into the language.
65. Also on Human Rights Day, to mark the closure of the 16 Days of Activism
against Gender-based Violence campaign, my Deputy Special Representative
addressed political leaders and women activists in Halabjah, Kurdistan Region.
Reflecting on gender-based violence against women and girls in Iraq, she praised the
efforts by political and civil society actors to support the passage of anti -domestic
violence legislation, which has not yet been submitted to the Council of
Representatives for approval.
66. As part of a global initiative of the Human Rights Committee established under
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, on 26 December, UNAMI
brought together 15 young activists (between the ages of 12 and 17) to discuss draft
general comment No. 37 of the Human Rights Committee on the right to freedom of
peaceful assembly, relating to the interpretation of article 21 of the Cov enant. Their
insights will contribute to informing the drafting of general comment No. 37, which
is expected to be finalized in 2020.

D.

Humanitarian assistance, stabilization and development
67. As of 31 December 2019, there remained approximately 1. 4 million internally
displaced persons in Iraq. An estimated 4.6 million people have returned home after
having been displaced by ISIL, but the sustainability of some of these returns remains
in doubt, while development gains do not meet projected targets. During 2019,
humanitarian partners reached just over 1.5 million people with some form of

20-01707

11/15

S/2020/140

assistance, or 85 per cent of the 1.75 million targeted in the 2019 Humanitarian
Response Plan. Over 100 humanitarian actors are working in 1,300 locations across
Iraq, nearly a threefold increase in geographical scope from the beginning of 2019,
reflecting expanded priorities beyond the in-camp internally displaced persons, who
had been the focus during the period 2017–2018. The 2019 Humanitarian Response
Plan attracted $641 million in funding, or 92 per cent of the $701 million sought. The
2020 Humanitarian Response Plan seeks $520 million to meet the acute needs of 1.77
million in-camp internally displaced persons, out-of-camp internally displaced
persons and returnees in areas of high severity.
68. Notwithstanding notable successes during 2019, humanitarian operations in Iraq
were significantly affected during the reporting period by the protests, as local
government curfews, among other operational and security cha llenges, restricted the
movements and activities of the United Nations and non -governmental organizations.
69. Coordination between humanitarian actors and relevant federal ministries was
periodically interrupted during the reporting period. The disruptio n of coordination
was particularly detrimental to humanitarian operations, as the mechanism for
granting access authorization letters to non-governmental organizations was paused,
with no alternative procedures put in place. As of mid -January, such organizations
operating in Iraq did not have a centrally authorized way to pass through checkpoints
and carry out vital aid delivery programming. Efforts were made by United Nations
agencies, funds and programmes and by partners during the reporting period to fin d
local solutions to facilitate the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
70. Despite operational and security challenges, the United Nations continued to
support humanitarian and development efforts in Iraq, which also received significant
numbers of Syrian refugees during the reporting period. As of 26 December, a total
of 18,776 individuals had arrived in Iraq from the Syrian Arab Republic, the majority
in the Kurdistan Region.
71. Following extensive advocacy by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees, the Permanent Committee for Refugee Affairs in Iraq of
the Ministry of Interior, the federal Government entity mandated to register and
document refugees in Iraq, continued the process of registering Syrian refugees in the
central and southern governorates, which had started in November 2019.
72. During the reporting period, humanitarian partners in Iraq undertook
winterization efforts for internally displaced families. The shelter and non -food items
cluster identified 84,000 internally displaced families who were in need of winter
assistance support. Humanitarian partners provided essential winter kits, children’s
winter clothing, sealing-off kits for people living in critical shelter and tent
replacements. Government authorities also provided kerosene, clothing and tents.
73. The United Nations continued to support stabilization efforts in Iraq. During the
reporting period, 19 projects were completed through the Funding Facility for
Stabilization. Completed projects included four cash-for-work projects, three in
Ninawa Governorate and one in Kirkuk Governorate, which, together, provided
livelihood opportunities to 918 people, including 320 women. The rehabilitation of
647 housing units in west Mosul was also completed. To date, the F acility has
successfully completed the rehabilitation of 22,946 homes across Anbar and Ninawa
Governorates.
74. In 2019, the Facility received $260 million in contributions. It has now
completed a total of 2,304 projects across the five Governorates in Ira q that were
previously under the control of ISIL (Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninawa and Salah
al-Din). Overall, the Facility delivered its highest level of financial assistance to date
in 2019, at $272.4 million, which included funding received in previous yea rs. The
12/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

Facility’s funding gap stands at $205 million out of a total requirement of
$1.38 billion.
75. During the reporting period, the United Nations increased its efforts to support
national capacities in the country’s mine action sector. In December, a project for the
employment of “mixed teams” on explosive hazard management, consisting of female
and male members of both the Yazidi and Muslim communities in Sinjar, Ninawa
Governorate, was successfully concluded. Based on the success of the project, the
Mine Action Service developed a new operational model that prioritizes national
ownership and more effective approaches to mine action.
76. On 5 December, the International Labour Organization (ILO), the Ministry of
Labour and Social Affairs, and representatives of employers’ and workers’
associations signed the first decent work country programme in Iraq, at a ceremony
in Baghdad. The programme, which will run from 2019 to 2023, supports national
initiatives to promote decent work and strengthen the country’s capacity to
mainstream decent work into social and economic policies. Under the programme,
ILO will work with the Government and with workers and employer organizations to
support national initiatives to prioritize private sector development, which wi ll, in
turn, support job creation, strengthen social protection, prevent and eliminate child
labour, and improve social dialogue in order to promote rights at work.
77. The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), with the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia and the Oxford Poverty and Human Development
Initiative, supported the Ministry of Planning during the reporting period in
strengthening the routine measurement of child poverty and the development of a
national multidimensional poverty index. The index will be used to inform the
implementation of the poverty reduction strategy of Iraq and as a tool to guide
government social spending to better address poverty and inequality. To the same end,
UNICEF, in collaboration with the Ministry of Planning, Zain telecommunications
company, the United Nations Development Programme and the World Food
Programme, implemented an innovative model to estimate and map poverty using
mobile data and satellite imagery, with the aim of providing poverty estimates i n real
time and informing an emergency response.
78. The United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) conducted a national stakeholder
consultation to explore opportunities for the implementation in Iraq of Security
Council resolution 2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security, and drafted a road
map for future courses of action. Forty representatives of United Nations agencies,
funds and programmes, civil society organizations, government officials and you th
from different parts of Iraq attended the two-day consultation, held on 5 and
6 December in Erbil. As a result, a coalition on youth and peace and security will be
formed, comprising youth organizations, non-governmental organizations, United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, and relevant government entities.
79. UNFPA also trained 268 young people on the prevention of violent extremism
and peacebuilding in 10 governorates, during which they learned practical facilitation
skills to prevent conflict and violence, and to design and implement campaigns on
preventing violent extremism. Some 1,349 young people participated in activities that
promote tolerance and peace among youth and equip them with techniques to address
issues related to the prevention of violent extremism. The participants also developed
action plans on preventing violent extremism for Anbar, Baghdad, Diyala and Najaf
Governorates, which will be rolled out in 2020.
80. The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
developed new training materials on the prevention of violent extremism through
education, designed for use by primary school principals, teachers and parents.
During the reporting period, 78 teachers and school managers, seven principals and
20-01707

13/15

S/2020/140

three officials from the Ninawa Directorate of Education were trained in the
prevention of violent extremism through education. In late December, 300 parents
enrolled for training programmes on the topic in Mosul.
81. The World Food Programme resumed a programme focused on school feeding in
late December, which had been on hold since June 2018 pending the appointment of
the Minister for Education and subsequent civil unrest that impeded student and staff
access to schools. The school feeding programme will reach some 300,000 children in
1,200 schools in 11 governorates. It is fully funded by the Government of Iraq.

E.

Security and operational issues
82. Throughout the reporting period, the Department of Safety and Security in Iraq
continuously monitored developments across the country and implemented security
risk management measures to enable continued United Nations operations. Regular
security advisories and alerts were issued to keep United Nations personnel informed
of precautionary measures. The risk of collateral damage to United Nations compounds
in Baghdad was heightened by their proximity to key protest sites, as stray bullets hit
the United Nations compound, without causing casualties or material damage.
83. The Government of Iraq enforced public access restrictions to the former
International Zone during the reporting period. The perimeter and access points of the
United Nations compounds in Baghdad have been reinforced. There were indirect fire
incidents against the former International Zone on 4, 5, 8, 21 and 26 January.
84. During the reporting period, the Department of Safety and Security supported
an average of 65 field missions per day across the country, with assessed risk levels
ranging from medium to high. Close coordination with the host Government ensured
the proper flow of information and the necessary security support for United Nations
operations.
85. UNAMI continued to provide logistical and administrative support to the United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by
Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in the delivery of its mandate.

IV. Observations
86. I am deeply concerned about the impact of increasing regional tensions on Iraq.
With the assistance of the international community, Iraq has made significant progress
in overcoming the threat of ISIL, enabling the country to focus more resources on
fostering stabilization, reconstruction and development, and strengthening relations
with countries in the region. Yet, on its path towards greater stability, Iraq still needs
to overcome a number of political, security, humanitarian and economic challenges. As
a result, the country can ill afford any action that risks undermining its fragile recovery.
87. This is a moment for all stakeholders to exercise maximum restraint and explore
avenues for peaceful dialogue, negotiations, and renewed regional and international
cooperation. I therefore appeal to all regional and international stakeholders to work
with the Government of Iraq and to remain committed to supporting Iraq in its
reconstruction and economic development, as a key element of political stabilization
in Iraq and the region. The Iraqi people deserve a peaceful, prosperous and dignified
future.
88. Human rights violations in the context of the ongoing demonstrations remain a
grave concern. I urge all actors to refrain from violence and reiterate my call for the
swift conduct of serious investigations into all acts of violence. Accountability is of
14/15

20-01707

S/2020/140

utmost importance. Continued impunity will generate further discontent. Impartial
and transparent accountability processes for crimes committed in any context will
prove crucial in promoting peaceful coexistence and social cohesion. I also remind
the Iraqi authorities of their obligation to protect peaceful protesters, diplomatic and
consular facilities and personnel, and public and private property.
89. Building a stable, secure and prosperous Iraq requires an effective and
accountable Government committed to the rule of law, addressing corruption and
strengthening viable and responsive State institutions. I hope the designation of a new
Prime Minister will lead to the formation of a Govern ment that will be able to take
swift and effective action to develop and implement reforms that meet the aspirations
of the Iraqi people.
90. Support for humanitarian operations in Iraq remains crucial. Humanitarian
partners estimate that 4.1 million people in Iraq will require some form of
humanitarian assistance in 2020, with 1.8 million considered to be in acute need. A
solution to the access restrictions facing humanitarian partners is urgently required so
that assistance can reach those in need. I also encourage Member States to contribute
to the 2020 Humanitarian Response Plan for Iraq, which seeks $520 million to meet
the acute needs of 1.77 million in-camp internally displaced persons, out-of-camp
internally displaced persons and returnees in areas of high severity.
91. The preliminary agreement between the Kurdistan Regional Government and
the federal Government on oil and revenue-sharing is encouraging. The negotiation
process demonstrates that both parties can resolve outstanding issues through
dialogue and negotiation. I encourage the parties to formalize the agreement without
further delay and move on to address other outstanding issues, including the security
structures and administrations of Kirkuk and Sinjar.
92. Current efforts to ensure free, credible, inclusive and participatory elections
should continue. Inclusive political participation is essential during this challenging
time. I welcome the adoption of the Law on the Independent High Electoral
Commission and the appointment of a woman as the Chief Executive Officer of the
Commission. I encourage the Council of Representatives to expedite the dissemination
of the final text of the new law on elections to the Council and to clarify outstanding
issues. The United Nations reiterates its readiness to continue working with the
Government of Iraq and the Independent High Electoral Commission to strengthen
electoral capacities. At the same time, I call on Member States to continue to provide
the necessary support, including by devoting further resources towards electoral
assistance, to ensure that the country’s electoral reform process can be a success.
93. The contribution of women to ongoing reform discussions is not only an
important driver for the advancement of women’s rights, but also a necessity for more
balanced decision-making that benefits all Iraqis.
94. The cooperation of the Supreme Judicial Council in facilitating the Mission’s
programme of trial observation is welcome. In order to address the needs of victims
and their families for justice, accountability and reparation, I reiterate the vital need
for fair trials, in line with the domestic legal framework of Iraq and its obligations
under international law.
95. Finally, I would like to express my appreciation to my Special Representative,
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert, and the United Nations staff in Iraq for their continued
dedication to implementing the Organization’s mandate under challenging
circumstances. The United Nations remains strongly committed to supporting Iraq in
building a peaceful, just and prosperous country.

20-01707

15/15
