S/PRST/2002/22

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
23 July 2002
English
Original: English and French

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 4583rd meeting of the Security Council, held on 23 July 2002, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation
concerning the Democratic Republic of the Congo”, the President of the Security
Council made the following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the seriousness of the events that took
place in Kisangani on 14 May 2002 and immediately thereafter, and expresses
its appreciation for the report and recommendations presented to the Council
by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
(S/2002/764), building on the investigation conducted in association with the
United Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo
(MONUC) into the events to which the Council had drawn the attention of the
High Commissioner for Human Rights (S/PRST/2002/17). It reiterates its
strong condemnation of the killings and attacks against civilians, soldiers and
police officers that took place on 14 May 2002 and thereafter in Kisangani.
The Security Council stresses that the Rassemblement Congolais pour la
Démocratie (RCD-GOMA) is responsible for the massacres that took place
after regaining control over the city’s radio station on 14 May. The Security
Council demands that RCD-GOMA take the necessary measures to bring the
perpetrators and those among them who ordered or were involved in the
massacre to justice. The Security Council stresses that Rwanda has a duty to
use its strong influence to ensure that RCD-GOMA comply with this demand.
“The Security Council stresses that RCD-GOMA will be held
accountable for any extrajudicial executions, including among members of the
civil society or detainees at the detention centres of RCD in Kisangani. It also
stresses that Rwanda has a duty to use its strong influence to ensure that RCDGOMA takes no such action. It requests MONUC to continue its investigations
in cooperation with the OHCHR in order to gather further information
concerning the massacres in Kisangani and to make recommendations on
concrete measures to be taken to effectively end impunity. It recalls MONUC’s
mandate to extend its protection, in accordance with its resolution 1417 (2002)
of 6 June 2002, to civilians under imminent threat of physical violence, in the
areas of deployment of its armed units and as it deems it within its capabilities.
“The Security Council reiterates that the RCD-GOMA must demilitarize
Kisangani without any further delay or condition and stresses this would
prevent any future recurrence of these recent tragic events. RCD-GOMA must

02-49153 (E)

230702

*0249153*

S/PRST/2002/22

also cooperate with MONUC and OHCHR in their investigations to identify all
the victims and perpetrators in Kisangani so that the latter will be brought to
justice, and also to ensure an end to all violations of human rights and to
impunity in all areas under its control.
“The Security Council expresses its serious concern at the absence of
accountability throughout the Democratic Republic of the Congo noted in the
report of the OHCHR, and calls on all parties to take immediate steps to ensure
an end to impunity and full respect for human rights.
“The Security Council also expresses its deep concern at the
strengthening of troops in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo. It
expresses particular concern at the situation in South Kivu, in particular in the
Hauts Plateaux and around Minembwe, where fighting has increased between
the Rwandan Patriotic Army and Banyamulenge, supported by other armed
forces. It calls for the cessation of this fighting, which is having a severe
humanitarian impact on the population in the area. It calls on the Government
of Rwanda to cooperate with the teams from MONUC and OCHA which are to
be sent to the area as soon as possible to establish the facts, including by
providing the necessary security guarantees.
“The Security Council also expresses its concern at the rising tensions in
the Ituri region and calls on all parties to exert restraint. It also expresses
concern at the military actions in Pweto. It requests the Political Committee of
the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement to address expeditiously the issue of Pweto,
in accordance with the Kampala and Harare plans for disengagement and with
the decisions taken by the Joint Military Commission (JMC), and in
accordance with its resolution 1399 (2002) of 19 March 2002.
“The Security Council welcomes efforts and good offices of the Republic
of South Africa, in its capacity as chair of the African Union, and of the
Secretary-General, to help the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda
reach an agreement to tackle the problem of the armed groups and to take
forward the withdrawal of Rwandan troops, in the context of the full
withdrawal of all foreign troops from the territory of the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, in accordance with the Lusaka Ceasefire Agreement and relevant
Security Council resolutions. In this regard, it encourages the leaders of the
two countries to continue working out ways to address their fundamental
security concerns, and welcomes the discussions between representatives of
the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda on the idea of a curtain of
troops, as a mechanism for countries of the region to cooperate to ensure the
security of their common borders. The Security Council requests MONUC and
the JMC to assist the parties in the development of the curtain mechanism.
“The Security Council reiterates the importance it attaches to an allinclusive agreement on the political transition, taking into account the progress
achieved in Sun City, and in this regard expresses its full support for the efforts
of the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General and calls on all actors in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo and in the region to cooperate fully with
him. The Council welcomes the support of the African Union, in particular
through the Special Representative of the Interim Chairman of its Commission,
for this process.

2

S/PRST/2002/22

“The Security Council reaffirms the sovereignty, territorial integrity and
political independence of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and all other
States in the region.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support for the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and for all MONUC personnel, and demands that RCD-GOMA fully
cooperate with the Special Representative and MONUC in the implementation
of their mandate.
“The Security Council, noting the encouraging political developments
both in terms of contacts among the Congolese parties and among regional
States, calls on all the parties to recommit themselves to taking forward these
political processes and to refrain from any military action that would
undermine the progress for peace.”

3
