General Assembly-Thirty-first Session

20

2. Welcomes the important steps taken during t~e
year by the International Atomic Ei:iergy Agency 1~
concluding safeguards agreements with many States,
3. Urges all States to continue to co-operate with
the International Atomic Energy Agency and to take
all necessary measures to enhance the r~cognized _efforts
of the Agency in the fulfilment of its tas~s m the
various fields of the peaceful uses of atonuc energy,
in accordance with its statute;
4. Commends the International Atomic Energy
Agency on the role it played in the preparatio!1 of the
latest survey of uranium resources, product10n and
demand and urges that this survey should be kept
under constant review;
5 Notes with appreciation the efforts of the Internati~nal Atomic Energy Agency in connexion with its
work regarding the physical protection of nuclear 1!1aterials and its detailed study of the concept of regional
fuel cycle centres;
6. Requests the International Atomic_ En~rgy
Agency to inform the General Assembly at its th1rtysecond session of the results of the Salzburg conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to trans~it to
the Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency the records of the thirty-first se~sion _of
the General Assembly relating to the Agency s activities.
61st plenary meeting
JO November 1976

31/12.

Question of Cyprus 32

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of Cyprus,
Deeply concerned over the prolongation of the Cyprus crisis, which endangers international peace and
security,
Reiterating its full support for the sovereignty, independence, territorial integrity a~d non-align~ent of the
Republic of Cyprus, and callmg once agam for the
cessation of all foreign interference in its affairs,
Deeply regretting that the United Nations resolutions
on Cyprus have not yet been implemented,
Mindful of the need to solve the problem of Cyprus
without further delay by peaceful means in accordance
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations,
1. Reaffirms its resolutions 3212 (XXIX) of 1 November 1974 and 3395 (XXX) of 20 November 1975;
2. Demands the urgent implementation of the
above-mentioned resolutions;
3. Calls upon all parties concerned to co-operate
fully with the Secretary-General in this regard;
4. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
provide his good offices for the negotiations between
the representatives of the two communities;
5. Expresses the hope that the Security Council will
consider appropriate steps for the implementation of
its resolution 365 (1974) of 13 December 1974;

6. Requests the Secretary-General to follow up the
implementation of the present resolution and report
thereon to the Gcncr:ll Assembly at its thirty-second
SeSSH>n;

7. Decides to include the item entitled "Question of
Cyprus" in the provisional agenda of its thirty-second
session.

65th plenary meeting
12 November 1976

:{ I 13.

Co.operation hetwcen the United Nation!I
and thP Or~anization of African Unity

The General Asse,n/;/y,
Recalling all its previous resolutions on co-operation
between the United Nations and the Organization of
African Unity, including in particular resolution 3280
(XXIX) of 10 December 1974,
Taking note of the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Assembly of Heads of State and Government of
the Organization of African Unity at its thirteenth
ordinary session, held at Port Louis from 2 to 6 July
1976,
Taking into account the statement made by the current Chairman of the Assembly of Heads of State and
Government of the Organization of African Unity at
the 31 st plenary meeting of the General Assembly on
14 October 1976,:1~
A ware of the important role which the Organization
of African Unity is playing in helping to achieve the
objectives of the United Nations in the world in general
and on the African continent in particular,
Noting with smisfaction the continued efforts of the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and other organizations within
the United Nations system to help solve the serious
problems which principally affect southern Africa,
A ware of the urgent need to give increased assistance
to the victims of colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid resulting from the intensified acts of repression against the African peoples by the Government
of South Africa and the illegal racist minority regime
in Southern Rhodesia (Zimbabwe),
Conscious of the need to take effective steps for the
widest possible dissemination of information relating to
the struggle of the African peoples concerned for their
liberation from colonialism, racial discrimination and
apartheid,
Bearing in mind the positive results achieved in the
work of the United Nations bodies concerned as a
direct consequence of the participation of representatives of the national liberation movements recognized
by the Organization of African Unity in the relevant
proceedings of these bodies in an observer capacity,
I . Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on co-operation between the United Nations and the
Organization of African UnityH and commends his efforts in promoting such co-operation;
2. Again expresses its appreciation of the outstanding contribution made hy the Organization of African
:::: Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Scs-

2.lso sect. I above, foot-note 7, and sect. X.B.2 below,
decision 311403.
32 See

·°'io11. P/cnarv Meetings. 31 st meeting, paras. 74-97.
:ii

A/31/217.

II.

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

---------~

Unity in the relevant work of the United Nations bodies
concerned, including in particular the positive role
played by the Administrative Secretary-General and the
General Secretariat of the Organization of African
Unity;
3. Welcomes the efforts of the Organization of
African Unity to find African solutions to some of the
issues of vital importance to the international community;
4. Reaffirms the determination of the United Nations, in co-operation with the Organization of African
Unity, to intensify its efforts to find a solution to the
present grave situation in southern Africa;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to continue to
take the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation
at the political, economic, cultural and administrative
levels between the United Nations and the Organization
of African Unity in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly, particularly with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of
colonialism and apartheid in southern Africa, and, in
this connexion, draws attention to the Assistance Fund
for the Struggle against Colonialism and Apartheid
established by the Organization of African Unity;
6. Draws once again the attention of United Nations bodies, in particular the Security Council, the
Economic and Social Council, the Special Committee
against Apartheid, the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples and the United Nations Council
for Namibia, to the continued need to take effective
measures to associate closely the Organization of African Unity regularly with all their work concerning
Africa;
7. Invites the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to
continue and intensify their co-operation with the Organization of African Unity;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its thirty-second session a report
on the implementation of the present resolution and
on the development of co-operation between the Organization of African Unity and the organizations concerned within the United Nations system.

67th plenary meeting
16 November 1976
31/16. Credentials of representatives to the
thirty-first session of the General Assembly
A

The General Assembly
Approves the first report of the Credentials Committee. 35
76th plenary meeting
23 November 1976
35 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-first Session, Annexes, agenda item 3, document A/31/308.

21

B
The General A.1sembly
Approves the second report of the Credentials Committee.313
105 th plenary meeting
20 December 1976
31/20.

Question of Palestine

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 3376 (XXX) of 10 November 1975,
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, 37
Deeply concerned that no just solution to the problem of Palestine has been achieved and that this problem therefore continues to aggravate the Middle East
conflict, of which it is the core, and to endanger international peace and security,
Reaffirming that a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East cannot be established without the achievement, inter alia, of a just solution of the problem of
Palestine on the basis of the attainment of the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people, including the right
of return and the right to national independence and
sovereignty in Palestine, in accordance with the Charter
of the United Nations,
l. Expresses its appreciation to the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People for its efforts in performing the tasks assigned
to it by the General Assembly;
2. Takes note of the report of the Committee and
endorses the recommendations contained therein, as a
basis for the solution of the question of Palestine;
3. Decides to circulate the report to all the competent bodies of the United Nations and urges them to
take necessary action, as appropriate, in accordance
with the Committee's programme of implementation;
4. Urges the Security Council to consider once
again as soon as possible the recommendations contained in the report, taking fully into account the observations made thereon during the debate in the General Assembly at its thirty-first session, in order to take
the necessary measures to implement the above-mentioned recommendations of the Committee so as to
achieve early progress towards a solution of the problem of Palestine and the establishment of a just and
lasting peace in the Middle East;
5. A uthorizcs the Committee to exert all efforts to
promote the implementation of its recommendations
and to report thereon to the General Assembly at its
thirty-second session;
6. Requests the Committee to promote the greatest
possible dissemination of information on its programme
of implementation through non-governmental organizations and other appropriate means;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to give the widest
possible publicity to the Committee's work and to
86 Ibid., document A/31/308/ Add, 1.
37 Ibid., Thirty-first Session, Supplement

No. 35 (A/31135).
