NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pap

. . . . .. , . . , . . . , .. , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . .

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . , , . . , . . . . . . . , . . .

1

The situation in Namibia . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . , . , . , . . . . . . . , . . . I . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l960)

S/PI’. 1960

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. : .) are normally published in
quarterly S~~ppleme~~ts
of the Qfricial Rec*ortls of the Secllrity Cor/ncil. The date
of the document indicates the suppl?ment in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions ad
Dectkions c?f‘the Security Council. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . , ,) are normally published in
quarterly Suppl~men~.s
of the qfkial
Recotds of’ the Security Cottncil. The date
of the document indicates the supplyment in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutiotls crtzd
Decisiotu of the Security Cout~cil, The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative
on that date.

1960th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
pyesiderzt: Mr. Iqbal A. AKHUND

(Pakistan).

2. The PRESIDENT:
In addition, I have just received
letters from the representatives of Burundi, Poland and
Sri Lanka, in which they also request to be invited
to participate in the debate. I therefore propose that
the Council agree, in accordance with the provisions
of Article 31 of the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, to invite those representatives to participate in the discussion without the right
to vote.

present: The representatives of the following States:
Benin, China, France, Guyana, Italy, Japan, Libyan
Arab Republic, Pakistan, Panama, Romania, Sweden,
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
ofGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic
of Tanzania, United States of America.

Provisional

7 October 1976, at 3 p.m.

agenda (S/Agenda/l960)
3. I shall invite those representatives to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber, on the understanding that they will be invited
to take a place at the Council table when it is their
turn to speak.

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia

Adoption of the agenda

The situation in Namibia

4. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Burundi.
I welcome him and invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.

I. The PRESIDENT:
In accordance with decisions
previously taken /I954th
NIUI 1956tl~ to 1959th
meetings],
I shall now invite the President and
other members of the United Nations Council for
Namibia, and the representatives of Algeria, Cuba,
Democratic Kampuchea,
Egypt, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar,
Malawi, Mauritius,
Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Saudi Arabia,
Sierra Leone, Somalia,
Yemen, Yugoslavia and
Zambia to participate in the Council’s discussion
without the right to vote,

5.

Mr. BWAKIRA
(Burundi) filltP/~~,‘Ptcltic,Ir ,finn~
Mr. President, may I join the speakers who
have preceded me in conveying to you my warmest
congratulations on the occasion of your accession to
the important and difficult post of President of the
Council for the month of October. I should also like
to thank you and, through you, to thank all the members of the Council for having enabled me to set forth
the views of the Government of the Republic of Burundi
before on the very important question before it.

Fwrd~):

6. Availing myself of this opportunity, I should like
to pay a well-deserved tribute to your predecessor,
the President of the Council for the month of September, Ambassador Kikhia of Libya, who fulfilled
his responsibilities to our full satisfaction.
7. Once again the Council is meeting to consider the
question of Namibia. The General Assembly has
devoted innumerable meetings on this question, on
which it has adopted several’resolutions. The International Court of Justice has also had the question of
Namibia before it and has handed down unequivocal
advisory opinions on the subject. In other words, this
is not a new question, and everything has been said
I

the provisions of this resolution, just as it has always
categorically
rejected all the just demands of the
Organization
of which it claims to be a Member
State. But why should we expect that resolution to
succeed any better than the many other trusting appeals
of our Organization?

and even repeated on the subject. None the less,
I should like to add my comments, which lay no claim
to originality,
to those of previous speakers on this
question, to say that Burundi condemns the illegal
occupation of Namibia by South Africa.
8. In August 1966, the Namibian people, led by its
cr~trrrt gartle movement,
the South West Africa
People’s Organization
(SWAPO), and conscious of
its historic responsibilities,
began its struggle against’
the occupation of its territory by racist South Africa.
Two months later on 27 October of the same year,
the General Assembly revoked South Africa’s mandate
‘over Namibia through its resolution 2145 (XXI). The
same resolution laid upon the United Nations the
responsibility
for administering
Namibia and leading
it towards self-determination
and independence. A
year later, in 1967, concerned to discharge its
responsibility,
the United Nations created the United
Nations Council for Namibia and appointed a United
Nations Commissioner
for Namibia. The role of the
Council for Namibia was to assist the people of
Namibia to exercise its right to self-determination
and
to obtain its freedom and independence within a united
Namibia. The International
Court of Justice, seized
of the question, handed down four advisory opinions,
among them that of 1971’ declaring the South African
presence in Namibia illegal.

13. Instead of complying with the decisions of the
Council, South Africa has continued its policy of
savage repression of the Namibian
people, forcing
concentration
camps,
entire
populations
into
inflicting
upon them the indescribable
suffering
mentioned by Mr. Bill Anderson, a former member
of the South African armed forces, in his statement
before the United Nations Council for Namibia2.
14. Faced with the success of the People’s Liberation Army of Namibia, the fighting arm of SWAPO,
South Africa has inteniified
since the adoption of
resolution 385 (1976) its installation
of military bases
in Namibia as a Eaunching pad for armed aggression against neighbouring
countries. The cases of
aggression against Angola and Zambia are still fresh
in our memory. Not long ago, the Council was
called upon to consider the complaint
of Zambia
against South Africa, and it condemned the latter
for its acts of aggression.
15. The militarization
of Namibia mentioned by the
Chairman of SWAPO, Comrade Sam Nujoma, continues while the so-called representatives
of the
Namibian people participate in the Turnhalle tribal
talks. Believing it would hoodwink the international
community,
South Africa gathered puppet elements
paid by its rtgime to participate in a so-called constitutional conference.

9.

All these trusting appeals have been regarded by
the Government of Pretoria as mere decisions-to
be
treated with contempt.

10. Recently again, in January 1976, this Council
adopted resolution 385 (1976) demanding that South
Africa make a solemn declaration undertaking
to
withdraw its illegal administration from Namibia so as
to permit the Namibian people to accede to freedom
and national independence. Today we have met to
give a concrete expression to paragraph 12 of that
resolution, by which the Council decided

16. Burundi endorses the just position of SWAPO,
and of the United Nations Council for Namibia-of
which it is a member-and
rejects the proposals of
the constitutional conference in Windhoek. My country
supports the just claims of SWAPO,
namely, that
only SWAPO, an organization
recognized by the
Organization of African Unity and the United Nations
as the sole authentic representative of the Namibian
people, should participate with South Africa in any
debate concerning the future of the Namibian people;
and that any constitutional
conference that takes
place must be held with SWAP0 under United Nations
auspices and not with the remote-controlled
puppets
of the nprrrtheitl rCgime. Moreover,
South Africa
must liberate the political prisoners languishing in
South African prisons and enable them to participate
in the relevant discussions.

*‘to remain seized of the question and to meet on
or before 31 August 1976 for the purpose of
reviewing South Africa’s compliance with the terms
of [this] resolution and, in case of non-compliance
by South Africa, for the purpose of considering
the appropriate measures to be taken under the
Charter.”
11. The demands addressed by the Council to South
Africa are well known. None the less I should like to
recall their contents: to withdraw its armed fbrces
from Namibia;
to accept free elections in Namibia
under United Nations auspices; to put an end to as
the bantustanization
of Namibia; to release political
prisoners and to respect Universal Declaration of
Human Rights in Namibia.

17. My country is convinced that the victory of the
Namibian people is inevitable, but in order to avoid
shedding the blood of the innocent in Namibia we are
pleased at the diplomatic steps taken in the last few
days regarding the settlement of the Namibian problem.
We hope that the results will be satisfactory. In any
case, these steps should be taken within the frame-

12. In analysing the behaviour of South Africa after
the adoption of resolution 385, (1976) cannot but
admit that South Africa has not implemented
any of
2

work of resolutions adopted by the United Nations
and ,should enhance the prestige of the Organization.

ample testimony of the importance
the issue at hand.

lg. The struggle carried on by the Namibian people
under the leadership of SWAP0 is the same as that
ofthe peoples of southern Africa in general against the
I,p&r~+/ regime and against the minority racist regime
cf lan Smith. Indeed, some of the Members of the
Organization believe that some of the elements of the
problem can be tackled whereas others may be left
aside for the moment. Any attempt at a partial solution,
supposedly to take advantage of the path of least
resistance, is doomed to failure. If the entire problem
in southern Africa is not taken into account, there will
be no solution.

25. Only a few days ago, speaking in the General
Assembly, Poland’s Minister for Foreign Affairs,
Stefan Olszowski, stressed the following tasks with
regard to the situation in the southern part of Africa:
“The time has come, in keeping with United
Nations resolutions, finally to put an end to the
racist regimes in Namibia, Rhodesia and South
Africa. The struggle of the peoples of Zimbabwe and
Namibia for independence, the question of the
liquidation of all the remnants of colonialism and the
elimination of apartheid require the resolute support
of the entire international community, The rationale
of historical justice makes it compelling that the
inalienable rights of the peoples of Namibia ,and
Zimbabwe to their sovereign statehood be secured
unconditionally and without delay.“4

19. My delegation believes that we should not forget
that the aptr~heitl regime which subsists in South
Africa is the root of all the evil.
20, As I stated before the General Assembly,
Burundi are convinced that

and urgency of

we in
26. This position of ours is not new. Over the last
30 years in the course of which the United Nations
has dealt with the problem of Namibia’Poland has from
the very outset lent its unreserved support to the cause
of the liberation of the people of Namibia, in accordance with its inalienable right to freedom and independence. Our stand has always been consistent with
the fundamental position of the Polish People’s Republic. of support for and solidarity with the peoples
fighting for their freedom and the elimination of the
last vestiges of colonialism, and it is inherent in the
very principles of our socialist ideology and derives
from our own historical experiences. It is in the same
spirit that Poland has for long served on the Special
Committee on decolonizatior? and is at present a
member of the United Nations Council for Namibia.

“The failure of the international Organization in
its task of administering and bringing this Territory
to freedom and independence are due not so much
to the refusal of Pretoria to hand over power to
SWAPO, which is the only legitimate representative
of the Namibian people, but also to the active and
blind support which certain major Powers give to the
South African regime.“”
21. At a time when the Council is to consider the
measures to be adopted to force South Africa to
implement resolution 385 (1976), my country suggests
that the provisions of Chapter VII of the Charter
be applied in their full severity. We request moreover
that Member States should increase their material
assistance to SWAP0 in its liberation struggle as well
as to all those who are struggling against the npartheid
r&me in southern Africa.

27. Already last January, when the Security Council
was considering the same question, the Polish delegation pointed out [1882nd meeting] that the continued
occupation of Namibia by South Africa was rapidly
becoming one of the most serious seedbeds of tension
on the African continent. Today, despite resolution 385
(1976), which once again condemned the continued
illegal occupation of the Territory of Namibia by
South Africa and called for the holding of free
elections under the supervision and control of the
United Nations for the whole of Namibia as one
political entity, the situation remains equally grave.
In fact, as far as the main aspects of the illegal
occupation of the Territory by South Africa are
concerned, it has even deteriorated.

22. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the
representative of Poland. I invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
23. Mr. TREPCZYfiSKI,
(Poland): Mr. President,
the Polish delegation congratulates you warmly on
Your assumption of the high office of the President of
the Council. Your own statesmanship and the longstanding co-operation between Poland and Pakistan
add greatly to our satisfaction at seeing you preside
Over the Council, as it is dealing once again with the
question of the situation in Namibia.

28. First, internally, Namibia has been turned into a
police State, with martial law all over its northern part.
As the Council was told last week by Mr. Nujoma,
communities have been uprooted and taken to cpncentration camps, villages have been destroyed, crops
have been burned and livestock have been confiscated” [1956th meeting, pcm. 811. Indeed, it was
more than a statement of facts when the SWAP0

‘24~ MY delegation is grateful to you and to the members of the Council for having accorded us the
OPPortunity to present once again Poland’s position
on the problem before the Council. The fact that the
Present debate is taking place with the participation
of a number of ministers for foreign, affairs as well
as the IPresident of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma, offers
I
3

to enforce the decisions of the Council, will onlv
serve to satisfy the existing statistics. Yet anothei
moral condemnation of South Africa’s policies, under
the circumstances, can hardly serve the real cause
of Namibia. Hence, we fully support the proposals of
the Organization of African Unity and of the, African
Group, made in this Council in the spirit of the recent
Colombo decisions to the effect that the Council should
avail itself of the sanctions which would directly
affect the South African regime and make it withdraw
from Namibia. The latest proposals of SWAP0 in this
regard constitute the most realistic platform for
immediate action.

leader declared that since the Council adopted resolution 385 (1976), South Africa has in fact increased
its atrocities in Namibia. Such was the reply of the
racist regime to the unanimous plea of the Council.
Instead of free elections the so-called constitutional
conference was organized in order to mislead world
public opinion. Its infamous declaration of 18 August
1976 was rightly termed by the United Nations Council for Namibia to be totally lacking in legitimacy,
ambiguous and equivocal, since the proposals of the
so-called conference do not even approach any of the
requirements
for genuine self-determination
and
independence
laid down by the United Nations
[S/12185, LlnMCX, pam. 61.

33. The revolutionary
and national
liberation
struggles of the last several decades have proved
beyond any doubt that the decisive role in the struggle
for a nation’s independence is played by the nation
itself. We are happy, therefore, that extremely
important changes have recently taken place in the
southern part of Africa. The struggle conducted by the
peoples of Namibia and Zimbabwe against white
supremacy’ has achieved a fresh impetus and new
dimensions. The black population of South Africa
has also intensified its fight against the inhuman system
of upmtheid. In the genera1 relationship of forces in
southern Africa, in spite of the rapid expansion of its
military arsenal and co-operation with some countries
of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization,
the
position of the Pretoria regime has been considerably
weakened. The support for and solidarity with the
Namibian
patriots, who, under the leadership of
SWAPO, the authentic representative of the people
of Namibia,
have-despite
repression-intensified
their legitimate struggle, are gaining momentum. We
hail those developments as yet one more illustration
of the inevitability
of the final eradication of all
remnants of colonialism and racism, regardless of the
attempts of the forces of the past to reverse the
course of history.

29. Secondly, on the African plane, the occupation
of Namibia continues to be a direct threat to the peace
and security of the independent African countries, the
most evident example of which was the open aggression committed by South African troops against independent Angola. On 31 March, in its resolution 387
(1976), the Council condemned South Africa’s aggression against the People’s Republic of Angola and
demanded that South Africa desist from the utilisation
of the international Territory of Namibia to mour$
provocative or aggressive acts against the People’s
Republic of Angola or any other neighbouring African
State. But a few months later, the South African
regime once more used the Territory of Namibia as a
springboard for repeated acts of aggression against
yet another independent African State, this time
against the Republic of Zambia. Again, in its resolution 393 (1976), the Council strongly condemned
the armed attack and declared that the liberation of
Namibia and Zimbabwe and the elimination of crpcwthpicl in South Africa are necessary for the attainment
of justice and lasting peace in the region. No one
should have any doubt that a regime like the one of
South Africa, which in the last 16 years has increased
its military budget tenfold and tripled it within only
the last three years, will never want to cease voluntarily
its aggressive actions against the independent States
of Africa, especially those bordering it.

34. In its usual consistent and principled manner,
Poland stands ready to contribute its utmost to the
cause of independent Namibia.

30. Thirdly, in the global context, the illegal occupytion of Namibia by South Africa represents an evergrowing threat to international peace and security.

35. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the head
of the delegation of Sri Lanka to the thirty-first session of the Genera1 Assembly, Ambassador Kanakaratne. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.

31. The question of Namibia has already been the
subject of at least 16 Security Council resolutions
and more than 100 the General Assembly resolutions,
all of them unimplemented. It is indeed a very sad
set of statistics, the best example of how and by whom
the effectiveness of the United Nations is being
impeded. On the one hand, we have the racist regime
in South Africa; on the other, those who support it in
various forms, including arms deliveries, often using as
a pretext an invented and non-existent “communist
threat”.

36. Mr. KANAKARATNE
(Sri Lanka): Mr. President, let me first convey to you our warm congratulations on your assumption of the high office of President of the Council for this month. With a person of
your wide experience and diplomatic skill presiding
over these important meetings, we can all be confident
that the deliberations of the Council on the situation
in Namibia will be under expert guidance. My delegation is particularly happy to see such a distinguished
representative of a friendly neighbour State of ours
entrusted with such a responsibility.
May I also

32. My delegation is afraid that one more resolution, unless it provides for stern and effective steps
4

congratulate and convey our thanks to your predecessor, the representative
of Libya, who presided
Over the Council during his term of office last month
with great acceptability. The delegation of Sri Lanka
thanks the other members of the Council for having
given it an opportunity to participate in this meeting
in the hope that our modest contribution
to its discussions will help in finding a just and timely solution
of a problem which has proved itself to be an
intractable one.
37, Council has taken cognizance of document
s/12188, containing the text of the resolution concerning Namibia adopted by the Fifth Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held in Colombo a few weeks ago. It is to carry
out the mandate entrusted to it as the current Chairman of the Group of Non-Aligned
Countries, in paragraph 5 of that resolution that Sri Lanka has sought to
participate in these discussions and to bring the content
of the resolution to the attention of the Council.
38. The international
community
would do well to
remember that the situation in Namibia is one of the
longest-standing issues which have engaged the
attention of the United Nations. The speakers who
have preceded me have drawn the attention of the
Council to the long history of the crisis we are now
met to resolve. Nevertheless,
I think it would be
useful for the Council to refresh its memory on the
history of the Namibian question in so far as the
United Nations is concerned. The International Court
of Justice, in its advisory opinion of 21 June 1971’,
has summarized the attempts, both of the General
Assembly and of the Security Council, to seek a
pacific settlement of this problem. We are still, in
October 1976, once more grappling with an issue which
first was brought to the attention of the world body
30 years ago, for it was as far back as 9 February 1946
that the General Assembly, by its resolution 9 (I),
invited all States administering
territories held under
Mandate to submit trusteeship agreements. All of
them, with the single exception of South Africa,
responded positively to this request. From that resolution to the most recent of over 100 General Assembly
resolutions, the Government of the Union of South
Africa has shown an indifference and an intransigence
which are totally inconsistent with its obligations as a
signatory of the Charter.
39. After 20 years of patient and restrained appeals
by the world body to that Government and in the face
of its obduracy, the Genera1 Assembly eventually
adopted, in 1966, its resolution 2145 (Xxi) terminating
the Mandate exercised by South Africa. Four years
later the Council adopted resolution 276 (1970),
declaring the continued presence o,f South Africa in
Namibia to be illegal, and called upon all Member
States to act accordingly. It was,because, in the words
?f the international
Court of Justice, the Assembly
In paragraph 106 of ‘its advisory opinion of 1971,
lacking the necessary pow&s to ensure the withdrawal

of South Africa from the Territory, enlisted the cooperation of the Security Council. Thus acting in
accordance with Article 11, paragraph 2, of the
Charter”. It is important to note in this context
that in paragraph 2 of resolution 276 (1970), the Council declared that “the continued presence of the South
African authorities in Namibia is illegal” and that
consequently all acts taken ‘by the Government of
South Africa ‘Lon behalf of or concerning Namibia
after the termination of the Mandate are illegal and
invalid”. In paragraph 5 of that resolution the Council further called upon “all States, particularly those
which have economic and other interests in Namibia,
to refrain from any dealings with the Government of
South Africa which are inconsistent with paragraph 2
of [this] resolution”.
40. The delegation of Sri Lanka speaks today before
the Council not in anger but in sadness. We cannot
find in the 30-year history of the United Nations any
other single issue on which a Member State has
persistently and deliberately ignored so many and such
authoritative resolutions of the General Assembly and
of the Security Council. In 1971 the International
Court of Justice, the principal judicial organ of the
United Nations, handed down its now famous advisory
opinion. The Government
of South Africa fully
participated in the proceedings of the Court and,
under the norms of civilized international behaviour,
should have accepted the advisory opinion and at least
begun to act in keeping with its much vaunted claim
that it is acting in southern Africa to preserve civilization and law and order. My Government is deeply
disappointed that a founding Member of the United
Nations should behave in a manner which can only
be described as subversive of the very foundations of
internatidnal
conduct. We cannot recall any issue
which has come up before the United Nations ovel
the last 30 years o,n which the views of the three
principal organs of the United Nations-the
General
Assembly, its legislative body, the Security Council,
its principal executive organ, and the International
Court of Justice, its main judicial arm-have
been
stated with such clarity and unanimity.
41. A moment ,ago I said that my delegation was
speaking with sadness. What is at stake now is not
so much the attitude of the Government of a Member
State towards the Organization, but rather the effectiveness of the world body in finding a just and
peaceful solution to this problem. Much has been
said in recent times about the impotence of the
United Nations. In fact, accusations were being
levelled at the United Nations until very recently to
the effect that the Organization was being imperilled
because of the irresponsibility,
so-called, of its new
majority, We have seen self-appointed defenders of
the prestige and the authoriiy of the world body
proclaiming to the world, in sometimes picturesque
and sometimes piquant language, the dangers that
now face’ the Organization. My delegati,on makes so
bold as to say that if the effectiveness and efficacy of

45. It is in this spirit that we of the non-aligned group
of nations approached this problem in Colombo when
the resolution on Namibia was adopted by the Fifth
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries. My Prime Minister, Mrs. Sirimavo Bandaranaike, in her message marking Namibia
Day, 26 August, this year, stated, and I quote:

the United Nations in maintaining international peace
and security is in danger, that danger does not come
from the so-called irresponsibility of the new majority
but rather from the inactivity and impotence of the
more influential and major Members, which have stood
by with folded arms, permitting a single Member
State to flout the decisions of the Council, to ignore the
resolutions of the General Assembly and even to
question the opinions of the International Court of
Justice. .

“The observances today mark the determination
of the international
community
to continue this
struggle to a successful conclusion, and to end the
injustice of the illegal occupation of Namibia by
South Africa, its racist policies and its schemes for
the fragmentation of the Territory by the creation
of bantustans. On behalf of Sri Lanka, on behalf
of the Non-Aligned
Movement, as its Chairman,
and in the name of humanity, I urge all nations to
redouble their efforts for the ending of this injustice
and for the restoration of the rights of the people of
Namibia to self-determination
and freedom in a
united Namibia.”

42, As has been pointed out by all the speakers who
have preceded me, time does not stand still for any
of us. It is our belief that before time finally runs out
we-and
particularly
those Governments without
whose moral and material support South Africa
cannot continue on its present course-have one more
opportunity for a final effort to resolve this crisis and
prevent ‘the loss of life and the embitterment
of a
major segment of the human race. Although we
welcome any and all initiatives that could be taken,
or now are being taken, for a peaceful resolution of
this situation, we must clearly state that the prime
responsibility for such action lies with the United
Nations, since it is the United Nations that is now
legally responsible for the affairs of Namibia.

Subsequently, in her statement to the General Assembly on 30 September, the Prime Minister, speaking
as Chairman of the Non-Aligned
Group, stated in
reference to Namibia and other problems of southern
Africa as follows, and I quote:

43, We listened with considerable attention to the
restrained and constructive statement made by
Mr. Sam Nujoma, the President of SWAPO, [!956th
Il?e~~fin~~], which has been recognized by the
General Assembly as the sole authentic representative
of the people of Namibia. We were heartened by
the offer he made on behalf of his people in that
statement. It is the view of my delegation that in that
statement lies perhaps the only and final answer if
we are seeking to avert a major disaster in that part
of the continent of Africa. My delegation would,
therefore, urge the Council to lay down as basic principles for a settlement the following: recognition of
SWAP0 as the only legitimate representative of the
people of Namibia; arrangements for talks between
SWAP0 and the Government of South Africa without
any further delay, under the auspices of the United
Nations, regarding the transfer of power; withdrawal
of the Government of South Africa from Namibia
without further delay in accordance with the terms of
resolution 385 (1976); preservation of the territorial
integrity of Namibia against the attempts of the Government of South Africa to fragment the Territory;
commitment
by the Government of South Africa to
withdraw its armed forces from Namibia; release of
all political prisoners in Namibia before the talks I have
just referred to take place.

“The Message from Colombo, as far as it concerns southern Africa, is also directed to the nations
which are continuing to collaborate with those
regimes, thereby giving them a false sense of
security and a semblance of respectability to which
they are not entitled.

“All initiatives towards a just solution of these
problems are naturally welcome as long as they are
genuinely designed to expedite the transition from
obduracy to reason. At the same time, I should
make it clear from this forum that if reason were to
fail and the peoples of Africa were forced to resort
to the ultimate solution through armed struggle,
every non-aligned nation would stand solidly behind
them.“6
46. Mr. HUANG
Hua (China) (ttatwl~~tiorz @in
C’hin~se): Mr. President, having listened attentively
to the statements made by the Foreign Ministers and
representatives of many African countries, the Chinese
delegation would like now to make a few observations
on the question of Namibia.
47. In recent years, with the powerful support of
the numerous third world countries and their people,
the African countries and people in particutar, the
armed struggle waged by the people of southern
Africa against racist domination
and for national
liberation
has reached a new high, vehemently
pounding away at the reactionary rule of the racist
regimes in southern Africa. The armed struggle of

44. That the President of SWAP0 has offered to
meet the South African authorities is a welcome sign
of his sincerity in working for a non-violent and bloodless resolution of this problem. It is our hope and
prayer that the Council will respond to that offer by
ensuring its acceptance by the Government of South
Africa.
6

won’t fall. This is also like sweeping the floor; as a
rule, where the b,room does not reach, the dust will
not vanish of itself.” As rightly pointed out in a
resolution adopted at the thirteenth summit conference
of the Organization of African Unity, “the only
effective guarantee for the African people of South
Africa against the repetition of massacres is the
launching of armed struggle for the seizure of power
by the people”.

the people of Zimbabwe is expanding ceaselessly and
Is shaking the rule of the Smith racist regime. The
Namibian people have persevered in armed struggle,
and their armed forces are growing steadily, dealing
heavy blows to the racist regime. Defying brute force
snd facing the most difficult conditions, the Azanian
people have, since last June, broken through the
brutal repression by the police and armed forces of the
South African fascist regime and waged powerful mass
struggles against the racist regime. These struggles
wereunprecedented in the number of participants, the
areas affected and their duration.
All this fully
demonstrates the new awakening of the Azanian people
and their strong will to carry the national liberation
struggle through to the end. This shows that the great
African peoples are now launching an offensive against
barbarous racism and that the handful of colonialists
have been cornered in southern Africa,

50. The plan for establishing a so-called multiracial
government in Namibia recently produced by the racist
regime of South Africa is a clumsy scheme designed
to enable it to shirk its responsibility for the nonimplementation
of resolution 385 (1976), to deceive
world opinion and to prolong its illegal rule in Namibia.
It is a refurbished version of the bantustans plan.
SWAP0 and many African countries have categorically rejected this plot of South Africa’s. They point
out unequivocally that this plan concocted by the
South African authorities is aimed at maintaining in a
disguised form their illegal rule in Namibia and is,
therefore, totally unacceptable. Under these circumstances, the Namibian people have expressed their
readiness to continue and strengthen their armed
struggle until Namibia attains genuine independence.
This is the reliable means to ensure victory.

48. The armed struggle of the peoples of Namibia
sad Zimbabwe has opened up a new situation and
deve]oped in depth after having repeatedly frustrated
the various manoeuvres employed by the racists. After
the Portuguese colonial system was shattered by the
armed struggle of the people in southern Africa, the
racist regimes of Vorster and his like, with the support
and abetment of the super-Powers, have intensified
their counter-revolutionary
dual tactics with a
combination of threats and blandishments.
However,
the African people have realized from their own
experience that these are pernicious schemes aimed
at disintegrating the national liberation movement,
disrupting the militant unity of the African countries
and sabotaging the armed struggle of the people in
southern Africa. Hence their determined tit-for-tat
struggles against them. Since then, the Vorster and
Smith racist regimes have stepped up their sanguinary
repression of the national liberation movements of
Namibia and Zimbabwe.
Apart from creating the
shocking Soweto carnage, the South African racist
rCgime has ceaselessly launched military aggression
against Zambia and other neighbouring
independent
African States and seriously encroached upon their
sovereignty and territorial integrity in an attempt to
threaten and bluff the African countries, prevent
them from giving support to the national liberation
movement and extinguish the flames of the armed
struggle of the people of southern Africa for national
Independence. All this has evoked the courageous
resistance of the African countries concerned, and
due punishment has been meted out to the racist
Ggimes.

51. The people of southern Africa are winning continual victories in their struggle. But the situation there
is complicated owing to the super-Powers’ meddling.
Motivated by their strategic need to seek global
hegemony, they have intensified their rivalry over
southern Africa. Their activities of intervention,
expansion, aggression and division constitute a serious
threat to the people of southern Africa. One superPower does its utmost to support the racist regimes,
offers them advice and propagates “peaceful
evolution” in adesperate attempt to preserve its vested
interests in southern Africa, The other super-Power,
which pretends to “support the national liberation
resorts to various means of sowing
movement”,
discord and steps up its infiltration, intervention and
expansion in southern Africa. However, the muchtried African people are clear-headed. They do not
believe the nice words of the super-Powers, nor are
they intimidated by their bluster. They will surely win
their national liberation by relying on their own armed
struggle, strengthening their unity, preventing the tiger
from entering the back door while repulsing the wolf
from the front gate, and persistently carrying on the
struggle to the end.
52. As Chairman Mao Tse-tung pointed out, “the
evil system of colonialism and imperialism arose and
throve with the enslavement of Negroes and the
trade in Negroes, and it will surely come to its end
with the complete emancipation of the black people”.
A just cause enjoys abundant support while an unjust
cause finds little support. The struggle of the people of
Namibia and the rest of southern Africa is just and
therefore enjoys the broad support of the people of
Africa and the whole world.

4% The numerous African countries and their people
have realized from historical experience that one
should not harbour any iilusions about the reactionaries
aad that national independence
and liberation can
never be easily obtained from the enemies’ “favours”
or from negotiations, but can be won only through
unremitting struggles, particularly
armed struggle.
Chairman Mao Tse-tung pointed out long ago: “Everything reactionary is the same; if you don’t hit it, it
7

we have heard the statements made to the Council
by the President of the United Nations Council for
Namibia [ihid.] by the representatives of the Group
of African States and the Organization of African
Unity [19541/T trn~/ 1956th meefin,q.s] and by the President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma [/956rh n?ePting].

53. The last summit conference of the Organization
of African Unity took up the eradication of colonialism
in all its forms and the achievement of the complete
liberation of the African continent as its main theme.
The conference stressed the need for support for the
armed struggle of the South African people and adopted
resolutions extending maximum political, economic
and military assistance to the national liberation
movements of southern Africa. The political declaration adopted by the summit conference of the nonaligned countries last August also reaffirmed its
support for the national liberation struggle carried on
by the Namibian people and called for assistance to
them in all forms.

58. Without giving an elaborate account of the background, I think it is obvious that the Council is faced
with a situation with undeniably serious implications,
which have been referred to by, numerous heads of
delegation during the debate, for this is a question
which has been awaiting a solution for more than
30 years, a solution’commensurate
with the dignity of
the United Nations, and corresponding to the ideals,
purposes and principles which are the rtrisou d’(:trp
of this Organization.

54. The Chinese Government and people have always
firmly supported the just struggle of the Namibian
people against forcible occupation by the South African
authorities and for national independence. We hold that
the Council should adopt a resolution sternly condemning the South African authorities for refusing
to implement resolution 385 (1976), unequivocally
calling on the South African authorities to terminate
immediately their illegal occupation of Namibia and
withdraw their administration and all their military
and p,olice forces therefrom, to guarantee the national
unity and territorial integrity of Namibia and to release
immediately
all the detained political prisoners.
Furthermore, we support the legitimate demand of
many African countries that the Council should
consider the adoption of all necessary measures,
including
sanctions, against the South African
authorities in accordance with the relevant provisions
of the Charter.

59. We also know, as has been mentioned here
repeatedly, that an advisory opinion handed down by
the International
Court of Justice on 21 June 1971’
declared that South Africa was under the obligation
to withdraw from the Territory of Namibia. Another
indisputable
element is the responsibility
of the
United Nations with regard to Namibia. All these
circumstances indicate that, from the very day the
United Nations was established, the mandate of what
was then the Union of South Africa should have been
terminated. Since then, therefore, Namibia has been
illegally occupied. Moreover, South Africa has displayed an attitude of rebellion and open defiance of the
will of the international
community,
manifest disregard of the resolutions and decisions of the General
Assembly and the Security Council, as well as of the
advisory opinion of the Court which I have just
mentioned.

55.

Mr. ILLUECA
(Panama) (interpretation from
Mr. President, first I should like to extend
my warmest congratulations to you on your accession
to the presidency and to wish you every success in
your task. I also wish to express appreciation to your
distinguished predecessor, Ambassador Kikhia of
Libya, for his outstanding performance during the
month of September. I also wish to be allowed, since
I was absent from Headquarters during most of August,
to extend very warm congratulations to Ambassador
Abe of Japan, who discharged his duties during August
most competently.
Spanish):

60. In addition to flouting both law and morality-an
attitude wholly deserving of censure-South
Africa
constitutes an element of unrest of disturbance’of the
peace, of invitation to conflict, of violation of human
rights and of the most basic principles of the dignity
of the peoples of southern Africa, and is how seeking
to destroy the national unity of those peoples, and the
territorial integrity of Namibia and therefore intensifying its repression. In other words, instead of
repenting or showing any desire to make amends,
South Africa has chosen open defiance of the international Organization. This is a situation that creates
serious problems for the Organization,
a situation
that cannot be allowed to continue.

56. With regard to the question of Namibia, it is
obvious that so far South Africa has not complied with
the provisions of resolution 385 (1976), adopted
unanimously on 30 January 1976. As a co-sponsor of
that resolution, my delegation is very interested in
having the situation in Namibia examined in the most
decisive and thorough manner, so that the prestige of
the Council may be enhanced as it deserves.

61. At this time South Africa is carrying on a veritable
colonial war against the people of Namibia. It is using
armed force against the civilian population, the most
abominable methods of torture, and intimidation.
It
has instituted a reign of terror-the only way in which
repudiated regimes can maintain themselves against
the will of the people. But that is not all South Africa
also attacks its neighbours harasses them and subjects them to violence, particularly
Zambia and
Angola, and it disturbs the peace in the entire region.

57. Given this attitude of obvious recalcitrance, and
in the light of the provisions of resolution 385 (1976),
the Council has been holding meetings since 31 August
to study what measures it would be appropriate to
take under the Charter. In the course of the debate
8

62, SOme statesmen who are used to Seeing

peoples
patiently insist that this debate should be
conducted very CallnlY, without arousing heated
situations, without stirring LIP passions, but it is very
difficult for any responsible
statesman to remain
indifferent to a situation of this nature.

enlighten the spirit of mankind, not expressions of
what used to be called manifest destiny, according to
which the United States had a civilizing mission and
could dominate the continent. No, we expect a loftier
type of action in a world no longer beset by the cold
war. The cold war ended in Latin America approximately a year ago, I wquld say. So that now we,
too, must put an end to those vestiges of the stranglehold of manifest destiny and of that civilizing mission.
The same is true of Africa because these concepts are
indivisible.

suffering

63. The problem of Namibia
is not an isolated
problem, as the spokesman for the African States and
the President of SWAP0 have rightly said here. We
agree, the problems of Namibia, of Southern Rhodesia and South Africa have a common basis: there is
no way for the African majority to come into power.
We are faced with a well-planned
transnational
conspiracy to prevent the indigenous people from
benefiting from the exploitation of their resources.

67. The generosity of the United States cannot be
denied when problems of aid have to be solved
throughout the world. Now that country promises that
if $2 billion would solve the problem of Zimbabwe, the
United States is willing to give $1 billion to resettle
the minority that is now exploiting the people of
Zimbabwe. A similar solution to the problem of the
Canal Zone would cost much less, for there are only
3,000 to be resettled,

64. It is said that peace is indivisible; but we know
that the concept of peace of the great Powers is not
the same concept of peace as that of the non-aligned
countries, and since there can be no peace without
justice, there has to be peace with justice.

68. I would like to conclude by saying that, like some
of its colleagues in the Council, Panama hopes that the
situation in southern Africa will soon come to an end.
But to achieve this there must be vigorous. and
decisive action on the part of the Council.

65. In considering this problem of southern Africa,
we must see to it that the principles and the basic
declarations-which
the
Secretary-General
has
described as part of the spirit of the contemporary
world-can be summarized in two major pronouncements of the United Nations: the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, and the resolution on the right of peoples
and nations to permanent sovereignty over their natural
wealth and resources [Grllrrol
As,scn~l~/~ I.~.SO/IIlio/~ 1803 (XVII)].
And, since Latin America is
awareof the scope of these declarations in the case of
southern Africa, we believe that, like peace, these
pronouncements on decolonization
should be universally applicable-in
Africa, in Asia, and also in
Latin America.

69. Latin America also has a distinguished history.
A moment ago the representative of China appropriately quoted Chairman Mao’s words condemning
the slave trade. It was also censured by the Amphictyonic Congress of Panama in 1826, where theabhorrent traffic of the slavers was likened to the
crime of piracy. We would like to emphasize the fact
that, in 1826, 40 years before the Civil War in the
United States to put an end to slavery,. statements
had been made in my country that represent historic
milestones in the struggle which the non-aligned
countries are now carrying on.

66. Yesterday, for example, reference was made in
a debate between two presidential candidates of one of
the super-Powers to the right of self-determination
of
the Namibian people, the right of self-determination
of
the people of Zimbabwe and, I would say also, the
right of self-determination
in South Africa. President
Ford stated that the United States favours selfdetermination in South Africa with due respect to
minorities. We therefore
wonder whether selfdetermination is to be exercised by majorities 01
minorities. We have, for example, the case of the
Panama Canal Zone. Because some 3,000 United
StateS families there wish to retain their privileges,
they seek to impose a colonial type of rCgime that
Poisons the political, economic and social climate in
Latin America, That is why we say that if decolonization is applicable to Africa it should also be
equally applicable to Latin America; and that is why
we think that the peoples of’ the world expect from the
representatives of the super-Powers-such
as President Ford and Governor Carter-more
noble things,
loftier ideas than wishing to maintain the colonialist
Principles of a bygone age. We need doctrines which

70. I wish to conclude by saying that the delegation
of Panama is in favour of the Council’s reaching a
timely decision, a decision which must be strictly in
accordance with Chapter VII of the Charter, for
mankind cannot be indifferent to these acts. We must
put an end to that inhuman, oppressive and unworthy
situation of colonialism that is a blotch on man’s
escutcheon.

P/cmrr,v
Mrc/i/rSg.s,
14ihmeeting,
4/hit/., Sth meeting. para. S9.

gara. ? I?.

s Special Committee
on the situation
with
mentation
of the Declaration
on the Granting
Colonial Countries
and Peoples.

9

regal
to the Impleof Independence
to
