A

UNITED
NATIONS

General Assembly
Distr.
GENERAL
A/RES/49/52
17 February 1995

Forty-ninth session
Agenda item 137
RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/49/738)]
49/52.

Draft articles on the law of the
non-navigational uses of international
watercourses

The General Assembly,
Having considered chapter III of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its forty-sixth session, which contains final draft
articles of and commentaries on the law of the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses, 1/
Noting that the International Law Commission decided to recommend the
draft articles to the General Assembly, and recommended the elaboration of a
convention by the Assembly or by an international conference of
plenipotentiaries on the basis of the draft articles,
Mindful of Article 13, paragraph 1 (a), of the Charter of the United
Nations, which provides that the General Assembly shall initiate studies and
make recommendations for the purpose of encouraging the progressive
development of international law and its codification,
Believing that successful codification and progressive development of
the rules of international law governing the non-navigational uses of
international watercourses would assist in promoting and implementing the
purposes and principles set forth in Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter,
_______________
1/
Official Records of the General Assembly, Forty-ninth Session,
Supplement No. 10 (A/49/10), para 222.

95-76771

/...

A/RES/49/52
Page 2

Taking into account the existence of bilateral or multilateral
agreements governing the non-navigational uses of international watercourses,
which should not be affected by the adoption of a new international instrument
unless the parties to those agreements have otherwise decided,
Also taking into account the fact that, despite the existence of a
number of bilateral treaties and regional agreements, the use of international
watercourses is still based in part on general principles and rules of
customary law,
1.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for
its valuable work on the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses, and to the successive special rapporteurs for their contribution
to that work;
2.
Invites States to submit, not later than 1 July 1996, written
comments and observations on the draft articles adopted by the International
Law Commission;
3.
Decides that, at the beginning of the fifty-first session of the
General Assembly, the Sixth Committee shall convene as a working group of the
whole, open to States Members of the United Nations or members of specialized
agencies, for three weeks from 7 to 25 October 1996, to elaborate a framework
convention on the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses on the basis of the draft articles adopted by the International
Law Commission in the light of the written comments and observations of States
and views expressed in the debate at the forty-ninth session;
4.
Also decides that the Working Group of the Whole shall, without
prejudice to the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, follow the
methods of work and procedures outlined in the annex to the present
resolution, subject to any modifications which it may deem appropriate;
5.
Requests the Secretary-General to arrange for the presence of the
Special Rapporteur on the law of the non-navigational uses of international
watercourses as an expert during the debates on the topic at its fifty-first
session and to submit at that session all relevant documentation;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its fifty-first
session an item entitled "Convention on the law of the non-navigational uses
of international watercourses".
84th plenary meeting
9 December 1994
ANNEX
Methods of work and procedures
The draft articles prepared by the International Law Commission shall be
the basic proposal before the Working Group of the Whole.
The Working Group of the Whole shall start at once with a discussion of
the draft articles on an article-by-article basis, without prejudice to the
/...

A/RES/49/52
Page 3

possibility of simultaneously considering closely connected articles, the
decisions on article 2 entitled "Use of terms", being reserved for the
concluding stages of the work.
The Working Group of the Whole shall establish a drafting committee.
Once considered by the Working Group of the Whole, each article or group
of articles shall be referred to the drafting committee for examination in the
light of the discussion.
The drafting committee shall make recommendations to the Working Group
of the Whole in relation to each article or group of articles. It shall also
prepare and present to the Working Group of the Whole, for its approval, a
draft preamble and a set of final clauses.
The Working Group of the Whole shall endeavour to adopt all texts by
general agreement. Failing such an agreement within a reasonable period of
time, it will take its decisions in accordance with the rules of procedure of
the General Assembly.
