S/PV.8425

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8425th meeting

Friday, 14 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Elé Ela
Ms. Guadey
Mrs. Gasri
Mr. Temenov
Mr. Almunayekh
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Duclos
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Kuzmin
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mrs. Dickson
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44014 (E)
*1844014*

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I give the floor to Ms. Bensouda.
Ms. Bensouda: Let me begin by congratulating
Côte d’Ivoire on presiding over the Council during the
month of December. I wish you continued success in
that important role, Sir.
I thank you for the opportunity to present my
twenty-eighth report on the situation in Darfur.
Over 13 years ago, on 31 March 2005, at a meeting
also attended by the late Secretary-General Kofi
Annan (see S/PV.5158), members of the Council came
together to adopt resolution 1593 (2005). The Council
considered that the situation in the Sudan constituted a
threat to international peace and security and decided
to refer the situation in Darfur since 1 July 2002 to the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
Following the adoption of resolution 1593 (2005),
members of the Council made statements that noted
allegations of grave crimes and highlighted the need
to ensure accountability and justice in Darfur. The
representative of Benin, for example, stressed the need
to end the reign of impunity and to ensure credible and
timely action against persons charged with atrocities
and serious crimes. Some members of the Council also
emphasized that the Council’s support would be crucial
to ensuring an effective outcome to the referral of the
Darfur situation to my Office. Since the Darfur situation
was referred to my Office, we have consistently striven
to establish the truth and to secure justice for victims
2/18

14/12/2018

by pursuing accountability for the alleged perpetrators
of crimes under the Rome Statute committed in Darfur.
At the request of my Office, the Pre-Trial
Chambers of the Court issued multiple arrest warrants
in the Darfur situation after independently assessing
the evidence. Today, warrants remain outstanding
for five persons, all of whom occupied positions of
responsibility at the time of their alleged crimes,
namely, officials of the Government of the Republic of
the Sudan Mr. Omar Al-Bashir, Mr. Ahmad Harun and
Mr. Abdel Hussein; militia leader Mr. Ali Kushayb; and
rebel leader Mr. Abdallah Banda. Notably, several of
those suspects continue to hold senior positions within
the Government. Combined, those arrest warrants
include over 60 counts of war crimes and over 50
counts of crimes against humanity. The alleged crimes
include extermination, murder, rape, forcible transfer
and torture. Those are crimes that rightly preoccupied
and concerned the Security Council, resulting in the
referral of the Darfur situation to my Office. Yet the
alleged perpetrators of those crimes remain free, while
the victims and affected communities continue to
await justice.
My Office’s investigations in the Darfur situation
continued throughout the current reporting period and
significant progress was achieved. Notwithstanding
the many challenges we face, my investigators remain
dedicated to their mission and continue to identify leads
and to interview new witnesses each month. The body
of evidence is increasing, and my prosecution team
continues to prepare in anticipation of future arrest
warrants and the surrender of any of the Darfur suspects.
My report notes the positive news that levels
of violence against civilians in Darfur continued to
decrease during the reporting period. Nevertheless,
the impunity that resolution 1593 (2005) sought to end
continues in Darfur; regrettably, so does the commission
of serious crimes. Those ongoing crimes include attacks
against personnel of the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). In resolution
2429 (2018) of 13 July, the Council condemned the
ongoing impunity for those who attack peacekeepers
and urged the Government of the Sudan to do its utmost
to bring all perpetrators of such crimes to justice. More
than 11 years after Mr. Banda’s alleged crimes against
African Union peacekeepers, it is a serious indictment
of us all that crimes against peacekeeping personnel
continue to be committed in Darfur.
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Conflict between forces of the Government of the
Sudan and the Sudan Liberation Army-Abdul Wahid
also continues in the Jebel Marra area. My report refers
to information from UNAMID about the destruction
of villages and the killing, injury and displacement of
civilians. I continue to be deeply concerned by reports
of sexual and gender-based violence against women
and girls in Darfur. In resolution 2429 (2018), the
Council expressed concern that UNAMID is unable to
access areas from which it has withdrawn. I call on the
Government of the Sudan to respond affirmatively to
the Council’s request for UNAMID to have unfettered
access throughout Darfur, not least because of the
vital role that the UNAMID plays in monitoring and
reporting violence against civilians in Darfur.
My analysts will continue to assess allegations
of current crimes in Darfur, not for the purpose of
simply monitoring and reporting on the findings of
others, as some assert, but rather to ensure that my
Office is aware of allegations of ongoing grave crimes
committed in Darfur and to feed that information into
our ongoing assessment of the situation of which we
are seized, as well as our independent investigations.
We will continue to make use of reports from reliable
entities and sources operating in Darfur.
I wish to emphasize that, in direct contravention of
resolution 1593 (2005), the Government of the Sudan
continues its policy of antagonism and non-cooperation,
effectively obstructing my Office’s ability to conduct
investigations on the ground in Darfur. The Council
is once again invited to urge the Government of the
Sudan to cooperate with my Office in accordance with
its own resolution.
I now turn to the issue of cooperation more broadly.
Regrettably, as I outline in my latest report, my Office
continues to face multiple obstacles and impediments
in relation to that issue. With regard to the arrest
and surrender of the Darfur suspects, the Council
will recall the litigation before the Appeals Chamber
in relation to Jordan’s failure to arrest and surrender
Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court when he visited Jordan on
29 March 2017. Pre-Trial Chamber II found that Jordan
had failed to comply with its obligations under the
Statute and decided to refer Jordan to the Assembly of
States Parties and the Security Council. As the Council
is aware, Jordan appealed that decision, which resulted
in extensive litigation during the reporting period. That
involved multiple written briefs and culminated in a
five-day hearing before the Court’s Appeals Chamber,

S/PV. 8425

from 10 to 14 September earlier this year. The issues
focused on Head of State immunity, resolution 1593
(2005) and the articles of the Rome Statute relating
to cooperation, consultations with the Court and the
waiver of immunity. In the course of that process,
multiple legal submissions were made, including by
Jordan, the African Union, the League of Arab States,
professors of international law and, of course, my
Office. That comprehensive and inclusive legal process
has now concluded. We await a final determination by
the Appeals Chamber.
During the reporting period, Mr. Al-Bashir
continued to travel internationally, including to
Djibouti and Uganda in July. Both those States parties
were previously referred to the Assembly of States
Parties and to the Security Council for their failure to
arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Bashir to the Court while
on previous trips to their territory in 2016. No action
was taken by the Council in relation to those or, indeed,
any other referrals. It is therefore not surprising that
States parties to the Rome Statute, such as Djibouti
and Uganda, continue to host ICC suspects on their
territory in blatant violation of the Court’s findings. In
the absence of any meaningful consequences for such
instances of non-compliance, we are unlikely to see a
change in such regrettable patterns. That status quo
is hardly conducive to advancing the cause of justice
in Darfur.
Yet again my Office calls on the Council to take
meaningful action to give effect to non-compliance
referrals by the Court. My Office took note of the
declaration of 9 July by the High Representative of the
European Union, which called on all United Nations
Member States to abide by and to implement the
resolutions adopted by the Council, notably resolution
1593 (2005). I remain grateful for the principled support
of members of the Council, international and regional
organizations and, indeed, all States that support the
work of my Office in the Darfur situation.
In that regard, I was particularly encouraged by
the recent Arria Formula meeting on the relationship
between the Court and the Council convened on 6 July.
That timely meeting was helpfully co-sponsored and
organized by ICC States parties that are members of
the Council, and I take this opportunity to once again
express my appreciation to them for the initiative.
The meeting provided a unique opportunity for the
President of the Assembly of States parties, Council
members, State representatives, civil society and my

18-440143/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Office, among others, to exchange views on how to
further enhance coordination and synergies between the
Council and the Court. Notably, numerous participants
at that meeting expressed concern about the Council’s
failure to act in instances in which a State is referred
to the Council pursuant to a finding of non-compliance
by the Court. Several participants proposed concrete,
entirely workable measures that the Council could
adopt. I remain hopeful that the constructive dialogue
and proposals at that meeting will provide further
momentum that results in concrete action being taken
by the Council on this issue.
As we are all aware, in resolution 1593 (2005) the
Council decided that the Government of the Sudan and
all other parties to the conflict in Darfur shall cooperate
fully with, and provide any necessary assistance to,
the Court and my Office. Yet the Government of the
Sudan continues to completely disregard the Council’s
demand for such cooperation. On the occasion of my
previous report to the Council I repeated my offer to
the Government of the Sudan to engage in dialogue in
relation to the situation in Darfur, including with respect
to the issue of the surrender of the Darfur suspects to
the Court. I also note that the Council, in resolution
2429 (2018), urged the Government of the Sudan to
consolidate and expand its efforts to end impunity. Yet,
despite my offer and the fact that the representatives
of the Sudan previously asserted to the Council that
combating impunity is a top priority, the Government
of the Sudan has not engaged with my Office. I also note
that, during the proceedings initiated by Jordan, the
Appeals Chamber invited the Sudan and Mr. Al-Bashir
to file submissions on the issues raised by the appeal.
Yet they chose not to engage with the Court. The Rome
Statute requires my Office to investigate incriminating
and exonerating circumstances equally. If the
Government of the Sudan has such evidence — both
incriminating and exonerating — I invite it to come
forward and share that evidence with my Office.
The Government of the Sudan can rest assured that
the due process rights of any suspects who appear before
the Court will be fully respected. Those include the
right to counsel of their choice and, more important, the
right to a fair, independent and impartial trial. Council
members will recall that, at my previous briefing to the
Council on the Darfur situation, the representative of
Bolivia asked for a report on activities undertaken by the
Court to promote the strengthening of judicial organs in
the Sudan. Consistent with resolution 1593 (2005) and in
4/18

14/12/2018

accordance with the principle of complementarity, my
Office is prepared to support national efforts to combat
impunity in Darfur to the extent that my mandate and
limited financial resources will permit. However, in the
absence of any cooperation from the Sudan, I regret that
I am unable to report any progress in that regard. The
Government of the Sudan can, and must, demonstrate
its stated commitment to ending impunity and to its
respect for the authority of the Council by opening a
new chapter of cooperation with my Office. It should
allow my staff to conduct investigations on the ground
in Darfur and facilitate access to victims, witnesses and
the relevant documentary evidence. I once again invite
the Government of the Sudan to work with my Office
to pursue justice for the victims of the unimaginable
atrocities that have occurred in Darfur.
I will conclude by recalling another statement
made by a Security Council member at the time that the
Council adopted resolution 1593 (2015),
“what the Council said today is that there is no
way, in our times, that anyone, anywhere in the
world, can get away without just retribution for the
commission of serious crimes.” (S/PV.5158, p. 10).
Regrettably, justice and accountability for Rome Statute
crimes remain, for now, unrealized aims in the Darfur
situation. This is undeniably an unacceptable situation,
which must not be permitted to continue. Justice
delayed is justice denied. The judgment of victims and
the critical eyes of history are upon us.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Prosecutor Bensouda for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court for
her briefing.
The United States will always believe that victims
in Darfur deserve justice and that accountability is
essential for achieving a stable and lasting peace in
Darfur. We will continue calling for all those responsible
for the horrific crimes committed in Darfur to be held
accountable for their actions. After 15 years of conflict
and a genocide in Darfur, more than 300,000 people
have been killed, and close to 2 million more have
been internally displaced. Clashes between opposition
and Government forces in Darfur’s Jebel Marra area
continue to exact a toll on the civilian population,
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

including the destruction of villages and the killing,
injury and displacement of civilians.
The United States is encouraged by United Nations
reporting that Darfur’s overall security situation is
improving. However, the security situation for civilians
in Jebel Marra remains precarious due to ongoing
fighting between opposition and Government forces.
That fighting has reportedly included attacks on
civilians. More broadly throughout Darfur, persistent
risks to civilians result from intercommunal violence
between farmers and herders and there is harassment
of internally displaced persons (IDPs) by armed
settlers, among other issues. We urge the Sudanese
Government to cease restrictions on movement in
Darfur, especially within the Jebel Marra region, for
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur (UNAMID) and humanitarian organizations to
support the region’s fragile security gains.
The United States also remains deeply concerned
about the vulnerability of Darfur’s IDPs. The
Independent Expert on the situation of human rights
in the Sudan highlighted land occupation and violence
targeting internally displaced persons as a hindrance
to IDP returns and the consolidation of peace in
Darfur. The Independent Expert specifically noted
sexual violence against displaced girls and women.
Long-term stability in Darfur will depend on resolving
the underlying causes of the protracted conflict. We
welcome the 6 December signing of a pre-negotiations
document by the Justice and Equality Movement, the
Sudan Liberation Movement-Minni Minawi and the
Government of Sudan. With that document signed, both
sides have now agreed to a framework for substantive
negotiations to achieve a cessation of hostilities and
address the root causes of the conflict. We call on both
sides to engage in an inclusive and transparent way in
the pursuit of an outcome that benefits all the people of
Darfur, not just those with weapons. Lastly, we call on
both the Government of the Sudan and Sudan Liberation
Army-Abdul Wahid to immediately cease all hostilities
and engage with the UNAMID Joint Chief Mediator on
ways to begin peace talks.
The United States supports the establishment
of benchmarks and indicators of achievement to
strengthen the rule of law in the Sudan, as proposed
by the Secretary-General in his 12 October report on
the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (S/2018/912). The proposed benchmarks
include, inter alia, the establishment of a truth,

S/PV. 8425

justice, and reconciliation commission, a Sudan police
force presence in all localities and investigations and
prosecutions by Sudan’s judicial system of conflictrelated sexual violence and gender-based violence.
We acknowledge the Government of the Sudan’s
steps to strengthen judicial institutions through the
deployment of judges and prosecutors. We encourage
the Government of the Sudan to continue reinforcing
that process to ensure that victims of human rights
violations and abuses have adequate access to the
judicial system.
As the international community’s support of the
Sudan in Darfur transitions from peacekeeping to
peacebuilding, the United States will remain engaged
on Darfur. We have demonstrated that through the
phase-2 framework for United States-Sudan bilateral
relations, which launched in October 2018, and through
continued support to help meet the needs of more than
3 million people who require humanitarian assistance
in Darfur. The phase-2 framework seeks to expand
our bilateral cooperation and facilitate gradual but
meaningful reforms to enhance stability and strengthen
human rights protections and practices in the Sudan.
That cooperation also aims to support freedom of
religion, freedom of expression, particularly for the
press, humanitarian access, the cessation of internal
hostilities and a more conducive environment for
progress in the Sudan’s peace process.
The United States will use all appropriate tools at
its disposal to press the Sudan to improve human rights
practices and protect fundamental freedoms for the
people of Darfur. We believe that the United Nations
should also make promoting and protecting the human
rights of Darfuris the heart of its efforts in Darfur,
whether through UNAMID or the evolving United
Nations country team presence. The international
community must ensure that human rights monitoring
and reporting continue in Darfur following the drawdown
of UNAMID, ideally through the establishment of a
full-fledged office of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights, as called for
in the special report of the Secretary-General and
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
(S/2018/530). We are eager to hear an update from the
High Commissioner’s Office on steps taken towards the
establishment of a country office.
The people of Darfur are hungry for peace after
15 years of conflict. A Sudan that adheres to the rule
of law, respects human rights, allows unhindered

18-440145/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

humanitarian access to all populations in need and
breaks the cycle of impunity is one that will enjoy a
sustained peace and prosper. We remain committed to
working with the Government of the Sudan to usher in
that future.
In closing, I must reiterate the long-standing
concerns of the United States regarding the International
Criminal Court (ICC). The United States has
consistently rejected any assertion of ICC jurisdiction
over nationals of States that are not parties to the
Rome Statute, absent of a Security Council referral or
the consent of such States. The United States regards
any ICC investigations and other activities concerning
United States or Israeli personnel as illegitimate
and unjustified.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): My delegation is grateful
for the informative briefing delivered by the Prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court (ICC), Ms. Fatou
Bensouda, on her twenty-eighth report pursuant to
resolution 1593 (2005). We also pay tribute to the
hard work carried out by her Office on this case. We
have taken stock of the progress made by the Darfur
investigation team during the reporting period, as well
as the difficulties that the Prosecutor’s Office faces
both in the course of its investigations and in its judicial
activities, hindering the fulfilment of the task entrusted
to it by the Security Council.
The situation in Darfur triggered the first referral
of a case by the Security Council to the International
Criminal Court more than 13 years ago. Since then,
some 28 reports have been submitted and yet the case
continues to languish in the investigation phase, with
serious obstacles to making progress. We reiterate that
the Council cannot remain indifferent to the fact that the
investigation has been prolonged for more than a decade.
It is clear that the time elapsed has not contributed to
shedding light on the crimes committed and has made
it more difficult to attribute accountability, not to
mention the high economic cost, as highlighted by the
Assembly of States Parties to the Rome Statute with
regard to the cases that the Council has referred to the
Court. Fortunately, the Assembly of States Parties has
also provided very concrete indicators regarding the
budget in order to ensure the most efficient, effective
and transparent use of the funds. The Office of the
Prosecutor, which utilizes the largest percentage of
those resources, now faces the challenge of prioritizing
their optimal use.
6/18

14/12/2018

Bolivia believes that those who have committed
war crimes and crimes against humanity or genocide
must be held accountable before the Court. We cannot
deny that that is an important and fundamental element
to consolidating peace in Darfur. However, over the
past few years we have witnessed signs of positive
progress in the Sudan. As indicated in the latest reports
of the African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation
in Darfur (UNAMID), as well as the recent presidential
statement of the Security Council (S/PRST/2018/19)
and even in the most recent report of the Prosecutor,
the general improvement of the situation in Darfur and
the progress achieved in terms of cooperation between
the Government of the Sudan and the United Nations
have facilitated the work of UNAMID on the ground.
We believe that that achievement is principally the
result of the joint work carried out among the African
Union, the United Nations and the Government of the
Sudan. All of those efforts must remain focused on the
consolidation of peace in Darfur.
We are also encouraged to note that the ICC and
the African Union are improving cooperation between
their two institutions. The Court should contribute to
the efforts of the international community, in particular
those of regional organizations, to strengthen the
political processes in the Sudan, especially those
related to the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. We
reiterate that cooperation and coordination between the
ICC and the African Union are critical, as highlighted
in resolution 1593 (2005).
We emphasize that the development and future of
international criminal justice are closely tied to the
concepts of cooperation and complementarity among
States. The International Criminal Court is intended
to complement the primary sovereign capacities of
each State to administer justice within its territory.
Therefore, in addition to ensuring effective and timely
trials, we must also restore local capacities. That
highlights the fact that it is now necessary to grant
special attention to reviewing the case of Darfur, which
the Prosecutor mentions in her report, introduced today.
It also calls on the Office of the Prosecutor to assess the
array of cultural, social and political scenarios in which
it intervenes, the evaluation of which is unavoidable if
progress is to be made in terms of effective cooperation
in the investigation and prosecution of suspects. Bolivia
insists on the importance of an understanding that
transcends traditional approaches that are ineffective,
onerous and obstructive. A restorative justice that
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

promotes peace and reconciliation among peoples
remains possible.
In that regard, in celebrating the twentieth
anniversary of the Rome Statute this year, we should
take the opportunity to reflect on the effectiveness
of the Court and on whether the model as originally
conceived still meets the expectations of cooperation
and universality. The Security Council and the
membership of the United Nations in general should
value the work that the Court undertakes in order
to pursue the investigations and cases referred to
it — even more so when we consider that several States,
including members of the Council, are not yet parties to
the Rome Statute.
For the same reason, the debate on the impunity
of many of those responsible for the commission of
crimes against humanity, war crimes or genocide
has been weakened relative to the capacities of the
Court, serving only to diminish its effectiveness in
fulfilling its duties. We insist on the fact that we cannot
maintain sincere dialogue while there are still countries
demanding the full rigour of justice without complying
with their own international obligations, including by
openly denouncing the Court.
Finally, in respecting its own obligations as a State
party to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court, Bolivia supports efforts to seek justice and fight
impunity. We therefore urge all States that have not yet
done so to ratify the Rome Statute in order to guarantee
its universal jurisdiction. We believe that the value of
the principle of universality of international criminal
justice is critical in that regard.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): I wish to thank
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court (ICC), for her updates to the
Council today.
We welcome the important developments that have
been made in the ongoing investigations, including the
collection of evidence by the Darfur investigation team,
since we last met on this item in June (see S/PV.8290). It
is evident that the Office of the Prosecutor and relevant
partners continue to make progress on this file.
Member States, on the other hand, continue to fail in
upholding their responsibilities. All suspects remain at
large and the President of the Sudan continues to travel
internationally, including to States parties to the Rome
Statute that have an obligation to arrest and surrender

S/PV. 8425

suspects to the Court. The failure to implement
the Court’s orders is not only disappointing — it is
disturbing. Yet again, we call on the Government of the
Sudan and all Member States to cooperate fully with
the ICC, in accordance with resolution 1593 (2005),
and to arrest individuals subject to arrest warrants. The
Government of the Sudan must also take further steps
to ensure justice for the women, men, girls and boys
who have been victims of horrendous crimes during the
conflict in Darfur.
The issue of non-cooperation with the Court
remains challenging. Without its own enforcement
mechanism, the Court relies on States to fulfil its
mandate, including by executing arrest warrants. The
Council should approach cases of non-cooperation
in a structured manner. We support the proposal
made by France at our last briefing with regard to
inviting Member States that have been found to be in
non-compliance with the Court’s orders to address the
Council. The Court’s decisions must be respected.
Turning to the current situation in Darfur, we
welcome that the reported violence against civilians has
declined and that the overall situation has continued to
improve, as noted in the Prosecutor’s report. However,
we remain concerned about the reported sexual and
gender-related violence, which remains a serious
problem. A holistic approach to sustaining peace and
addressing the root causes of instability, including by
building effective rule of law institutions, is essential
to addressing the remaining challenges.
A sustained focus on peacebuilding and development
activities remains critical, and in this regard we
welcome the presidential statement adopted earlier this
week on this very issue (S/PRST/2018/19).
During Sweden’s two years on the Council, we
have followed the work of the ICC and the Prosecutor’s
Office closely. We have seen how the Court, through
dedicated and efficient action, has taken significant
steps to ensure accountability for perpetrators of
the worst crimes known to humanity. The Court
has continually contributed to the advancement of
international criminal law, including by rendering
landmark verdicts on the recruitment and use of
children in armed conflict, which is a matter to which
Sweden has paid particular attention during our time
on the Council.
We have also seen the tireless efforts made by the
Prosecutor to engage the international community,

18-440147/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

not least the African Union and African States, and
inform all Member States about the work of the Court.
We commend the Prosecutor’s outreach efforts. We
are also encouraged by her work on integrating a
gender perspective and analysis into the Office’s work,
including policies on sexual and gender-based crimes,
as well as children.
This year has been a special year, as we celebrated
the twentieth anniversary of the adoption of the Rome
Statute. Only a few days ago, we also celebrated the
seventieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Prevention
and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, which are
both based on the idea of the inherent and inviolable
rights of every individual and the need for individual
criminal responsibility for mass atrocities. The
international community’s recognition of the fact
that upholding human rights and pursuing justice are
fundamental to a just and sustainable peace represents
an acknowledgement, reflected by the actions of the
United Nations and international criminal justice, that
now forms part of the fabric of this Organization.
This year’s anniversaries remind us of how
much we, through joint efforts, have achieved for the
development of the international justice system. We
should be proud, but, regrettably, our achievements
have been clouded by increased pressure on and hostile
rhetoric against the Court. We therefore repeat what we
said during the briefing on the International Residual
Mechanism for Criminal Tribunals earlier this week
(see S/PV.8416): that as regrettable as this situation is,
what it also tells us is that the work of the international
Court and Tribunals has real impact. The courts and the
Tribunals were not established to serve or depend on
any one country’s interests. They were set up to see that
justice is served for victims and to ensure accountability
for perpetrators of the worst crimes known to humanity,
and, naturally, they are uncomfortable for those who
violate international law.
The ICC is not targeted at any particular region
or continent; it is impartial and goes wherever justice
is most in danger. It is a Court of last resort that
complements and does not replace national courts.
Complementarity and cooperation between national
jurisdictions and the Court are essential features of the
Rome Statute.
We wish to conclude by reiterating our steadfast
support for the Court and the Office of the Prosecutor.
8/18

14/12/2018

Ms. Bensouda’s unwavering commitment to justice is
admirable, and we commend her for her continual fight
for accountability, not least in these challenging times.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I thank Prosecutor Fatou
Bensouda for her report and for the work that the Office
of the Prosecutor continues to carry out in this case, in
keeping with its commitment to international criminal
justice. All of this highlights the need for all States
and the regional and other international organizations
concerned to cooperate fully, as urged by the Security
Council, acting under Chapter VII of the Charter of
the United Nations, in resolution 1593 (2005). This
also reminds us of the significance of the Council’s
and other stakeholders’ actions and support for the
work of the Office of the Prosecutor, with a view to
ensuring that the victims and the witnesses eventually
see justice done.
An additional reason for the importance of this
follow-up is the fact that, as Ms. Bensouda observed in
her previous briefing to the Council,
“Sustainable peace and stability can return
to Darfur only once the root causes of conflict
are addressed. That includes ending impunity for
alleged crimes under the Rome Statute in Darfur
and ensuring accountability for the victims of those
serious crimes.” (see S/PV.8290, p. 4)
We call on all stakeholders to work towards that
end and to cooperate with the Office, including, but not
limited to, on facilitating the collection of evidence,
the freezing of assets and assistance in the arrest and
surrender of fugitives.
We welcome the Office’s dedication in pursuing
investigations against suspects in the Darfur situation,
the significant progress achieved and the cooperation
and assistance from some States in furtherance of its
mandate. We encourage it to continue fulfilling its
commitment despite the challenges.
While we acknowledge that the reported violence
against civilians there appears to have decreased, we
are concerned about the clashes between Government
forces and the Sudan Liberation Army/Abdul Wahid
faction in Jebel Marra and their consequences for the
civilian population. We share the Office’s concern
about the high numbers of internally displaced persons
and their fate upon their return to their areas of origin,
including the risk of becoming victims of violence,
including sexual violence, especially for women and
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

girls. Let me stress once again that if we do not address
the root causes of conflict and devise a sustainable
solution allowing millions of internally displaced
persons to safely return to their homes, durable peace
in Darfur may be hard to achieve.
We take note of the Office’s reports on the travel
of some of the suspects to several States, as well as
the failure by Rome Statute States parties to arrest
and surrender fugitives from the Court, both of which
regrettable. We call on all stakeholders to undertake
adequate steps to address these issues.
In that regard, we take note of the fact that the
Prosecutor has urged the Council to consider options
to respond to States parties that invite and host Darfur
suspects on their territory. We also reiterate the proposal
to invite States deemed by the Court to have breached
their obligation to cooperate to address the Council.
Additionally, we support the position that on the
basis of such an exchange, the Council determines the
concrete steps and effective measures to be taken when
it is seized of the issue of States’ non-cooperation with
the Court. We would like to reiterate in this context
our position expressed during the 6 July Arria Formula
meeting on relations between the Court and the Council,
which Poland co-sponsored.
To conclude, we would like to reiterate our appeal to
demonstrate support and cooperate with the Office and
the Court in relation to the Darfur situation. Darfur’s
victims and witnesses, to whom we pay tribute, deserve
no less.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
listened closely to the briefing by Prosecutor Bensouda.
In recent years, the political and security situation in
Darfur has improved. The Sudanese Government signed
an agreement on relaunching the Doha negotiations with
the Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi, the Justice
and Equality Movement and other armed groups. This is
conducive to further improving the situation in Darfur.
China appreciates the efforts made by the Sudanese
Government to maintain peace and stability in Darfur
and to promote the political process.
Developments in Darfur have shown that the
Sudanese Government is fully capable of gradually
taking over the responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and stability in Darfur. It is our
hope that the international community will continue
to respect the ownership of the Sudanese Government

S/PV. 8425

on the question of Darfur and provide constructive
assistance for peace and security in Darfur so as
to achieve lasting peace, stability and sustainable
development there.
China’s position on the International Criminal
Court (ICC) remains unchanged. China hopes that
the Security Council and the ICC will fully respect
the judicial sovereignty of the Sudan, fully heed the
legitimate demands of the African Union and the
Sudanese Government made to the ICC concerning
the Sudan, and fully respect the views of the African
Union and the League of Arab States. China has always
believed that Heads of State enjoy privileges and
immunity under international law. The referral by the
Security Council of the situation to the ICC does not
automatically remove the immunity of Heads of State.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): The
Kingdom of the Netherlands joins others in welcoming
the Prosecutor back to the Security Council. We
thank Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her briefing and
her report.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands wishes to avail
itself of this opportunity to reiterate its full support
for the International Criminal Court. That institution
was created to strengthen the international rule of law
by bringing those responsible for gross human rights
violations and international crimes to justice. The
International Criminal Court is the only permanent
international court that can judge the perpetrators of
the most serious crimes of concern to the international
community. We express our gratitude for the continued
commitment of the Prosecutor and her Office while
working in the most difficult conditions.
Please allow me to focus on three important aspects:
first, the situation in Darfur; secondly, accountability;
and thirdly, cooperation with the Court.
First, the Kingdom of the Netherlands welcomes
the decrease in fighting in Darfur and in the level of
violence against civilians in recent months. However,
we remain deeply concerned about continued human
rights violations committed by several parties to the
conflict, including the Government of the Sudan. We
are also extremely concerned about continued reports
regarding sexual and gender-based violence, arbitrary
arrests and extrajudicial killings.
At the same time, the situation with respect to
the 2.1 million internally displaced persons seems

18-440149/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

14/12/2018

unchanged. We underline that any return should be
safe, voluntary and in accordance with international
law. We remind the Council that charges in the Sudan
case include genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity. The severity of these charges led the Council
to refer the situation in the Sudan to the ICC 13
years ago.

In conclusion, we remind our fellow Council
members that we bear a shared responsibility in the area
of cooperation to ensure that the International Criminal
Court can execute the mandate that the Council decided
to give it 13 years ago. Let me reiterate our great thanks
to the Prosecutor and her Office for their tremendous
efforts under difficult circumstances.

This leads me to my second point, concerning
accountability. Accountability for international crimes
and gross human rights violations is not only vital to
justice, but the only way that leads to sustainable peace.
Ultimately, it is about bringing justice to the victims
by ensuring the accountability of the perpetrators. The
people of Darfur, including those present here today,
deserve this.

Mr. Temenov (Kazakhstan): I would like to thank
the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for her semi-annual
briefing to the Council and her efforts to uphold the
international rule of law, justice, transparency and
accountability. We take note of the twenty-eighth report
of the Office of the Prosecutor and would like to make
the following observations.

Gross human rights violations can also trigger
further conflict and need to be addressed to ensure
any form of sustainable peace. If we do not take this
seriously and act upon this belief, opportunism will
continue to prevail and the international rule of law
will continue to be undermined. We need to end the
climate of impunity. It is the Council’s responsibility to
stop such developments and ensure the effectiveness of
the decisions it has made in the past. That is the only
way to ensure international peace and security.

Kazakhstan welcomes Khartoum’s commitment to
stability in Darfur and its strengthened cooperation with
the United Nations and the African Union (AU). These
efforts have resulted in the continued improvement of
the security situation in Darfur, as well as an overall
reduction in intercommunal clashes, criminal activities
and human rights incidents. We note that Khartoum
has been able to consolidate its authority across the
Darfur area and has demonstrated its political will to
sustainably address the challenges in the region. These
positive results would not have been achieved without
respecting the national ownership, sovereignty and
independence of the Sudan.

My third point concerns cooperation with the
Court. In 2005, the Council unanimously referred the
situation in the Sudan to the International Criminal
Court. Today, over 13 years after the adoption of
resolution 1593 (2005), all suspects in this case remain
at large, while the charges remain in effect. Paragraph 2
of the resolution requires the Government of the Sudan
and all other parties to the conflict to cooperate fully. It
also calls upon all States and regional and international
organizations to cooperate fully with the Court and
the Prosecutor.
The Court is heavily dependent on cooperation to
function effectively. It is unacceptable that fugitives
of the Court continue to travel unhindered. We align
ourselves with the Prosecutor in urging those States
that invite and host suspects on their territory to consult
with the Court. The Kingdom of the Netherlands will
continue to call upon all States to meet their obligations
under resolution 1593 (2005), to cooperate fully with
the Court and to fulfil their international obligations.
We also urge the Council to continue to work on ways
to address cases of non-cooperation with the Court.
10/18

Kazakhstan is confident that constructive and
inclusive dialogue, in accordance with the Doha
Document for Peace in Darfur, is the only way to
establish peace, stability and justice in Darfur. We
therefore welcome the signing of a pre-Doha negotiation
agreement between the Government of the Sudan, the
Sudan Liberation Army-Minni Minawi and the Justice
and Equality Movement on 6 December. We encourage
the Government of the Sudan to maintain this positive
movement and continue to work diligently with all
relevant parties towards advancing the peace process,
addressing the root causes of the conflict and achieving
peace and prosperity for the entire Sudanese population.
We also need to acknowledge the Sudan’s
constructive efforts to address regional peace and
security issues, including terrorism and human
trafficking. It is commendable that the Sudan has been
playing an important role in advancing the peace process
in South Sudan. Kazakhstan underscores the critical
role of regional cooperation in resolving the crisis in
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Darfur and its return to peace, justice and stability. We
therefore suggest that the Court take into consideration
the unified position of the African Union and establish
dialogue with the AU Open-ended Committee of
Ministers of Foreign Affairs on the ICC. We encourage
the Court to join regional and international efforts by
enhancing the Sudan’s capacity to promote the rule of
law and protect human rights.
In conclusion, we believe that only joint efforts and
mutual trust between all parties and institutions will
lead to a stable, peaceful and prosperous Sudan.
Mrs. Gasri (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda, for
her twenty-eighth report and for her briefing, as well as
for the progress made regarding the situation in Darfur.
On behalf of France, I would like to thank the
Prosecutor and her teams for the indispensable work
they are carrying out on behalf of the victims awaiting
recognition and reparations; for the witnesses who truly
believe in international justice; and for the Security
Council, which referred the situation of Darfur to the
International Criminal Court by resolution 1593 (2005)
13 years ago. We are starkly aware of the difficulty of
this task.
The responsibility of the Council is the same as it
was 13 years ago. It must take resolute action to fight
against impunity in the Sudan and to put an end to the
grave crimes committed in Darfur. This is critical to the
achievement of any long-term stabilization in Darfur
and in the Sudan. The International Criminal Court is
essential in that regard.
As others have already said, the overall improvement
in the security situation creates opportunities for
stabilization, which is encouraging. However, there are
still many challenges to address, particularly regarding
the protection of civilians. That is particularly the
case in Jebel Marra, where clashes continue with
consequences in the form of attacks on civilians,
displaced populations and human rights violations. We
are worried about sexual and gender-based violence,
which victimizes women and girls in particular and
does so with complete impunity. We are also concerned
about the plight of the displaced populations. Lasting
solutions must be found for the 2 million displaced
people in Darfur.
It is imperative that the Sudanese authorities and
armed groups make progress in the peace process.

S/PV. 8425

Beyond the cessation of hostilities, it is important to
address the root causes of the conflict, including the
issues of landownership, access to natural resources
and, of course, the restoration of the rule of law. The
ability to effectively combat impunity and strengthen
legal institutions and respect for human rights are
inextricably linked to this.
In all these areas, the African Union-United Nations
Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) must play its
full role. It is particularly essential to ensure that it has
access to the areas where civilians are most vulnerable.
Humanitarian access, which must be guaranteed, is
essential in Jebel Marra and elsewhere. It will also be
important to strengthen the country team by ensuring
that it is adequately equipped, funded and deployed
with a view to UNAMID’s eventual withdrawal. As of
now, both UNAMID and the United Nations country
team must be able to monitor the situation of human
rights, internally displaced persons and sexual violence
closely, including in remote areas.
France would like to once again remind the Council
of States’ obligation to cooperate with the Court,
in accordance with the Council’s resolutions. That
obligation is primarily incumbent on the Sudan, which
must cooperate with the Court in executing arrest
warrants against its nationals for acts committed on
its territory, as required by resolution 1593 (2005). We
must respond to the Court’s legitimate requests so that it
is able to fully carry out its mandate. France will not let
refusals to cooperate be taken lightly, especially when
they come from States parties to the Rome Statute. In
that respect, we were pleased that in her most recent
report the Prosecutor referred to the discussions in our
Arria Formula meeting of 6 July, as well as to France’s
proposal that States that the Court has found to be in
breach of their obligation to cooperate with the Court
be asked to explain themselves to the Council. We
reiterate our proposal.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We have studied the twenty-eighth report
of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court
(ICC) on the investigation of the situation in Darfur.
We discovered two lines in paragraph 22 with a
puzzling sentence about some apparently significant
progress in the investigation. That was all there was
about the investigation. For the remainder of the report,
the Office of the Prosecutor busied itself tracking the
international visits of President Omar Al-Bashir of
the Sudan.

18-4401411/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As I understand it, we are seeing the emergence
of a new and fascinating topic, which is holding States
accountable for violating their obligations to cooperate
with the ICC. That is undoubtedly less time-consuming
and costly than the scrupulous gathering of evidence of
the crimes committed by all the parties to a conflict — I
repeat, by all the parties to a conflict — interviewing
victims and witnesses and so forth. Am I right?
Meanwhile, the President of the Sudan, like
any other president, enjoys immunity from foreign
criminal jurisdiction. That immunity continues to be
in effect after a situation is referred to the ICC. In not
cooperating with the ICC, States, including parties to
the Rome Statute, are acting in accordance with their
international legal obligations, and our position on the
issue has not changed. We urge the ICC to focus on
its main functions and to finally begin an objective,
comprehensive investigation of the situation in Darfur.
Mr. Elé Ela (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): In taking the floor on this particular agenda
item, we would like to once again welcome Ms. Fatou
Bensouda and thank her for her report, which is
virtually the same as the preceding one on the most
recent judicial activities and ongoing investigations of
the Office of the Prosecutor and on the specifics of the
issue of cooperation on the Darfur issue. According
to the document circulated, which we have studied
carefully, there have been no significant changes since
the previous report of the Office of the Prosecutor,
and while it states that the research team has made
significant progress, it does not clarify what that
progress is. I am sure everyone here would be interested
in a clarification about what is new in the report and
the most significant developments that have occurred
in the reporting period.
We are pleased about the gradual improvements in
the security situation, but we deplore the armed clashes
that occurred in southern Jebel Marra in September and
that resulted in further displacements and the killing of
10 civilians in Gubbo. We also condemn the attacks on
civilians, sexual violence against women and internally
displaced persons. In that regard, we appeal to the
international community and the parties to the conflict
to work to improve the living standards and restore
dignity to the people of Darfur.
With regard to the fugitives sought by the
International Criminal Court, the report cites Equatorial
Guinea as one of the countries visited by President
12/18

14/12/2018

Omar Hassan Al-Bashir of the Sudan. Certainly, as
Head of State, he was invited to Malabo along with his
counterparts to celebrate and commemorate the fiftieth
anniversary of the independence of the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea on 12 October. In that regard, I
would like to make it clear that Equatorial Guinea is
not a party to the Rome Statute or to the International
Criminal Court. We therefore do not accept or endorse
the selective prosecution policies applied by the Court,
which do not even take into consideration the respect
and immunity due to Heads of State in the full exercise
of their functions, as in the case of President Al-Bashir.
We believe that such actions and approaches hinder
cooperation with the Court whether by States that are
party to the Rome Statute or those that are not, and that
they cast doubt on the Court’s credibility.
Mrs. Dickson (United Kingdom): I would first like
to thank the Prosecutor for her twenty-eighth report
on the situation in Darfur and for her briefing today.
I would also like to commend the hard work that she
and her staff have done in relation to this investigation
and their commitment to making progress and getting
justice for the victims.
The United Kingdom welcomes the reports that the
level of violence against civilians in Darfur has fallen
over the past six months. As the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID) draws
down, we encourage the Government of the Sudan to
focus its efforts and resources on building the capacity
of the Sudanese police force and judiciary to prevent,
respond to and investigate human rights abuses and
violations. We continue to support the Government of
the Sudan’s stated aim of opening an office for the High
Commissioner for Human Rights before next October.
More broadly, we encourage the Government of the
Sudan to engage constructively with the SecretaryGeneral’s recommended benchmarks in order to ensure
that the transition from peacekeeping to peacebuilding
in Darfur is a success.
While the situation in wider Darfur shows signs
of improvement, the situation in Jebel Marra remains
of serious concern. The ongoing targeting and
displacement of civilian populations is particularly
worrying, with as many as 2 million internally
displaced persons currently in Darfur. The United
Kingdom urges the Government of the Sudan to abide
by its unilateral cessation of hostilities and to facilitate
unfettered access throughout Darfur to UNAMID and
humanitarian actors. We also urge the Sudan Liberation
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Army-Abdul Wahid to extend its unilateral cessation of
hostilities, which is due to expire on 18 December, and
to engage immediately with the peace process.
The United Kingdom welcomes the recent
signing in Berlin of a pre-negotiation agreement for
the resumption of the peace process in Darfur and
the African Union High-level Implementation Panel
meeting in Addis Abba. The people of Darfur have
already waited too long for sustainable peace, justice
and accountability. We therefore urge all parties to
build on the current momentum by swiftly agreeing to
a permanent ceasefire and engaging meaningfully in
negotiations to reach an inclusive political settlement
that addresses the root causes of the conflict.
The United Kingdom was pleased to co-host the
Arria Formula meeting in July that resulted in productive
discussions on the relationship between the Court and
the Council. We encourage further discussion on ideas
generated from that meeting to improve the relationship,
including addressing non-compliance by States parties.
We call on all States parties to cooperate with the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and abide by their
Rome Statute obligations. We note the Government
of the Sudan’s continuing complete disregard for its
obligations under resolution 1593 (2005) to cooperate
with the Court and to fulfil its international obligations.
We yet again urge the Government of the Sudan to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Office of the
Prosecutor and to provide them with assistance.
The United Kingdom continues to be frustrated
about the fact that fugitives of the Court, including
President Al-Bashir, are still travelling overseas
unhindered, including to the territory of States parties to
the Rome Statute. We will continue to raise our concerns
with the relevant Governments and to renew our call on
all States to cooperate with the ICC in relation to the
Darfur situation, as required by the Security Council,
and on States parties to abide by their obligations under
the Rome Statute. We urge any State that feels unable
to cooperate with the Court for any reason to consult
the Court’s authorities. We also support France’s
proposal that States that according to the Court have
not complied with their obligations to cooperate with it
be invited to address the Security Council.
Finally, we acknowledge the Prosecutor’s dedication
to her continuing investigations, and welcome the news
that significant progress has been achieved by the
Darfur investigation team within the reporting period.

S/PV. 8425

We recognize the importance for the victims and their
families, some of whom I understand are with us today,
of hearing regularly from the Prosecutor on progress
in the investigation, and it is important for the Council
to hear from her too. The United Kingdom again
thanks the Prosecutor for her report, and her Office for
its persistent pursuit of justice for victims in Darfur.
We would like to take this opportunity to reaffirm
the United Kingdom’s commitment to supporting the
Court, both as a State party to the Rome Statute and as
a member of the Council.
Mr. Almunayekh (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
We have taken note of the content of her briefing on the
twenty-eighth report of the ICC concerning the Sudan.
The Security Council must deal with the issue of
Darfur in a consistent and comprehensive manner,
particularly in the light of the progress that has been
made there. Darfur province has just emerged from
a phase of conflict and is entering a peacebuilding
phase. In a presidential statement three days ago
(S/PRST/2018/19), among other things the Council
welcomed the improvement of the security situation
in Darfur and the settlement of conflicts between
tribes, thanks to the efforts of the Government of the
Sudan and the African Union-United Nations Hybrid
Operation in Darfur. The Council encouraged States to
contribute to the transition process for peacebuilding
in Darfur. We hope that the ICC’s proceedings will not
hinder peace efforts in the Sudan.
The ICC proceedings attempt to set a legal
precedent for a President who is still in office and
enjoys immunity under international law, and the
Court’s decision concerning the President of the
Sudan does not have the agreement of the international
organizations of which the Sudan is a member, including
the League of Arab States, the African Union and the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation, all of which
belong to international and regional partnerships of the
United Nations under Chapter VIII of the Charter. We
want to once again recall resolution 514 of the twentysecond Arab Summit, adopted in Sirte in 2010, which
represents the Arab position on the ICC proceedings
against the President of the Sudan and which rejects
the politicization of the principles of international
justice and infringements on the sovereignty, unity and
stability of States.

18-4401413/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

In conclusion, we reaffirm our commitment to
respecting the principles of international law, including
the sovereignty of States. We reiterate the importance
of respecting the sovereignty and independence of
the Sudan.
Ms. Guadey (Ethiopia): This is the last time that
Ethiopia will speak on this subject in the Council, and
our position on this issue remains the same. The referral
by the Security Council of the situation in Darfur to the
International Criminal Court (ICC) and the subsequent
developments concerning the President of the Sudan
do more harm than good. To make matters worse, the
way the ICC has liberally interpreted and applied the
Council’s referral is very short-sighted, with grave
implications for the peace and security of the Sudan
and the region.
That also continues to be the position of the African
Union (AU), which should not be surprising. It is well
known that the manner in which the ICC has operated
has left a very bad impression in Africa, and that is
why Africa has been expressing serious reservations
about the ICC that have been reflected in a number of
decisions adopted by the African Union’s policy organs.
The African Union Commission is taking the necessary
legal and other initiatives to address those issues based
on the decision of the African Union Assembly of
Heads of State and Government. However, the intent
of those exercises should not be misunderstood. As
a matter of fact, many of the member States of the
African Union were among the first to ratify the Rome
Statute. Time and again we in Africa have affirmed
our unflinching commitment to fighting impunity
and promoting democracy, the rule of law and good
governance throughout the continent, in accordance
with the Constitutive Act of the African Union, and that
has been empirically validated by bold actions taken by
the AU in recent times.
The AU reiterates that the quest for justice should
be pursued in a manner that is not detrimental to the
quest for peace. The Security Council’s referral of
the situation in Darfur runs counter to that, which is
why the AU has repeatedly asked that the proceedings
against President Omar Al-Bashir be suspended and
urged the Security Council to withdraw its referral to
the ICC. It is indeed regrettable that Africa’s repeated
request has so far been neither heard nor acted on.
What the African leaders have requested is far from
difficult for the Security Council to meet. The Council
has simply been asked to discharge its responsibility
14/18

14/12/2018

under the Charter, and as far as we are concerned, there
is no legitimate reason to reject the request. The issue
of the ICC has remained a nuisance in the partnership
between the United Nations and the African Union, and
the sooner we address it through genuine dialogue based
on trust and understanding, the better it will be for our
ability to address challenges to peace and security in
Africa. That is the kind of opportunity that Africa has
been looking for but has been denied by the Council.
Turning to the situation in Darfur, we are pleased
to note once again that it continues to improve and
can no longer be characterized as an armed conflict
between Government forces and non-State actors. The
problem now is basically the lack of development. It
is in recognition of that that the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission and the Secretary-General
of the United Nations have recommended that the
African Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in
Darfur wind down its operation in Darfur and that the
role and capacity of the United Nations country team be
strengthened in exchange. For its part, the Government
of the Sudan is making significant efforts to find durable
solutions to the suffering of the people of Darfur.
Such efforts require substantial assistance from the
international community to ensure their sustainability.
We are also encouraged by recent developments in
the political process. We welcome the signing of the
pre-negotiation agreement for the resumption of the
peace process in Darfur. We trust that it will serve as
a stepping stone to concluding a comprehensive peace
agreement forthwith. We call on the holdout groups
to join the peace process without conditions and avail
themselves of the positive trends. We have no doubt that
the Council and the African Union Peace and Security
Council will use their comparative advantages to make
refusing the call to join the peace process cost dearly.
Finally, we are witnessing at first-hand the
constructive role the Sudan is playing in dealing with
peace and security issues in the region, including on
fighting terrorism, combating human trafficking
and illicit migration, regional peace and stability and
humanitarian relief. In fact, the Sudan is becoming
increasingly important and indispensable player in the
region and beyond. It would only be appropriate for the
Council and the international community at large to
review their approach towards the Sudan in the light
those developments. It is high time that the undue
politicization that has victimized the President of the
Sudan come to an end.
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Mr. Duclos (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting. We also thank
Prosecutor Fatou Bensouda for her important briefing.
We note the improvements in the security situation
in Darfur and wish to highlight the work of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as
well as the efforts of the Government of the Sudan in
that area. We must also express our regret and concern
about the growing insecurity in the Jebel Marra area,
which has an impact on the delicate humanitarian
situation and leads to serious human rights violations.
We condemn the destruction of villages, killings,
forced displacements and cases of sexual and
gender-based violence, which must all cease. Those
responsible must be brought to justice. In that regard,
we wish to support the work of the Prosecutor and her
team and encourage them to redouble their efforts in
compiling testimonies and other evidence related to the
commission of atrocities.
We reiterate the need for States, including the
Republic of the Sudan and members of the Council, to
cooperate with the International Criminal Court and its
Prosecutor in order to allow access to justice, prevent
impunity and thereby assist in achieving lasting peace
in the Sudan. We deplore the fact that States parties
to the Rome Statute have not complied with arrest
warrants issued by the Court against suspects who have
entered their countries. We remind them that they are
obliged to comply with the Court’s arrest warrants and
provide their timely and effective cooperation.
We recall that the Security Council referred the
situation to the Prosecutor for consideration. The
International Criminal Court has therefore established
its jurisdiction over crimes against humanity committed
in Darfur. In that regard, we believe that the Council
should have specific procedures to respond to cases of
non-compliance and lack of cooperation, with a view
to holding the States concerned accountable for their
inaction. We support France’s initiative in that regard.
Lastly, we recall that, while the Court is
fundamental to preventing the most serious crimes from
going unpunished, its jurisdiction is complementary to
the responsibility of any State to protect its population
and that trust in justice is particularly relevant to a
country affected by the conflict, such as the Sudan. In
that regard, we stress that the mandates and functions
of the Security Council and the International Criminal
Court seek to reach similar objectives, expressly

S/PV. 8425

aimed at achieving the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. The
primary responsibility of the Council for maintaining
international peace and security and the competence
of the Court on the most serious international crimes
must be understood and executed as complementary
and interdependent tasks.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing on the
twenty-eighth report on the work of the Court on the
situation in Darfur, pursuant to resolution 1593 (2005).
Côte d’Ivoire welcomes the gradual improvement
of security conditions in Darfur, after several years
of conflict. We also welcome the decrease in the level
of violence against civilians, as mentioned in the
report presented by the Prosecutor. The improvement
in the situation is the result of the good collaboration
between the Government of the Sudan and the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur.
My delegation therefore encourages the Sudanese
Government to build on those gains and engage
resolutely in finding solutions to the root causes of
the crisis, in order to restore peace and stability to the
region and prevent a recurrence of the conflict.
Despite the considerable progress made, my
country notes with concern the allegations of sexual
and gender-based violence against women, as well
as those related to human rights violations in Darfur.
Driven by its recent experience and firm commitment
to respect for human rights, Côte d’Ivoire maintains that
the fight against impunity provides important leverage
for the national reconciliation process. We also believe
that lasting peace in Darfur remains dependent upon
holding accountable those guilty of serious crimes
and human rights violations. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire reiterates its appreciation to the International
Criminal Court for its efforts to promote justice and
combat impunity for crimes committed in Darfur. My
delegation therefore calls on the Sudanese authorities to
engage in constructive cooperation with the Office of
the Prosecutor in order to address its concerns.
Despite the efforts of the Sudanese Government
to restore State authority throughout Darfur, weak
institutional capacity and the lack of financial resources
have an adverse impact on rule-of-law, justice and

18-4401415/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

security institutions. Therefore, in accordance with
resolution 1593 (2005) and other relevant Security
Council resolutions, Côte d’Ivoire encourages
the international community to support efforts to
establish the rule of law and build the capacity of
the Sudan’s legal and judicial institutions. With the
transition in Darfur from a peacekeeping operation to
a peacebuilding mission now a priority, it is essential
for the Government of the Sudan, the international
community and the various United Nations entities to
work closely and constructively to ensure a successful
transition, in accordance with the recommendations
of the Secretary-General in his report of 12 October
(S/2018/912).
In conclusion, Côte d’Ivoire, a State party to the
Rome Statute, commends the high quality of work
carried out by the International Criminal Court and
reaffirms its unwavering support for the Office of the
Prosecutor in its efforts to combat impunity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Sudan.
Mr. Mohamed (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): I would
like to congratulate you, Mr. President, on assuming
the presidency of the Security Council this month.
As usual, the twenty-eighth report of the
Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (ICC)
reveals nothing new. Like all previous ones, today’s
report did not find anything new to taint its seven
pages except by referring to visits conducted by His
Excellency the President of the Republic of the Sudan
to various countries, as well as by using contradictory,
incomplete and inconsistent information with regard
to the situation in Darfur. The Council adopted two
resolutions on the progressive implementation of the
exit strategy pertaining to the African Union-United
Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur (UNAMID). The
report of the Prosecutor testifies to what was said by
certain permanent Council members, namely, that
the ICC — which the Sudan has nothing to do with
it, like any other State that is not party to the Rome
Statute — has turned its mission into a mechanism
to monitor and evaluate the situation in Darfur. For
example, paragraph 13 of the report before the Council
demonstrates that.
The Office of the Prosecutor has undoubtedly
received intelligence from States regarding the visit of
16/18

14/12/2018

the President of the Republic of the Sudan to a number
of states in Darfur two weeks ago, and the way he
was greeted there as a peacemaker. The Court finds it
difficult to reflect that fact, knowing that it is driving a
wedge between peace and justice.
Given what the Council has heard, the proper
response to the Court is first to work harder in order
to entrench peace and transitional justice systems,
and, secondly, for all States Members of the United
Nations and non-members of the Court to ignore the
ICC. The Council saw that a response by a friendly and
peace-loving country like Jordan was met by attacks
against it and attempts to denounce it. If Jordan had
renounced the Court, it would not have been attacked
by the Court, as it continues to be up until now, as the
Council saw in the presentation by the Prosecutor.
Before 2007, the previous Prosecutor of the ICC,
Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo, believed that article 53 of
the Court’s statute made him committed to consider
peace and amnesty initiatives, as well as mechanisms
of transitional justice and reparations for the conflict
in Darfur. But after March 2007 he completely turned
against those conclusions and convictions. Why?
Because after March 2007 he was subject to extortion
by certain non-governmental organizations and States
that had established the Court, such as the Coalition for
the ICC. He totally gave in to the will of those groups
and threw the weight of the Court behind pressing
charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
and even genocide, against the Government of the
Sudan and its leaders.
As all Council members know, in March 2007
Mr. Ocampo was involved in the rape of an innocent
female journalist in South Africa. He tried to cover that
up by dismissing Mr. Christian Palme, who refused to
remain silent about that flagrant act. We would like to
remind the Council that the Prosecutor of the ICC, who
presented her report today, was the Deputy Prosecutor
of the ICC then. There are renewed accusations against
the Court of corruption, and that was revealed by a media
group called European Investigative Collaborations.
The Prosecutor is trying to halt comments on the
corruption of the Court by saying that she sees no added
value of a further independent inquiry.
What is important in that regard is that since
2005 the ICC, through its judges and prosecutors, and
because of its rampant corruption, has been trying to
make up charges and accusations that appeal to the
18-44014

14/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

States and organizations that founded and finance the
Court. It is trying to mobilize them for its interests to
cover up its evident failures and continuous corruption.
That is what we what we are trying to clarify.
The Court achieved what it wanted through certain
vulnerable African States, but the way will not be paved
for it to totally attain that goal, which has nothing to do
with justice and its natural and legal concept. While
the Court does not have the courage ever to press
charges against a soldier from any of those influential
States, it has spared no effort to press charges against
the President of an African State. All members of the
Council are cognizant of the noble efforts, internally
and at the African level, that the Sudan is making to
consolidate peaceful settlements and enshrine the
peaceful coexistence principle internally and regionally.
What is important to demonstrate to the Council
is the institutional corruption within the ICC, which
transcends individuals. That is our purpose: to expose
the corruption of the ICC. It is a corruption that exceeds
individuals, affecting the institution itself, and it is one
that is underpinned by vote trading. Many examples
of that can be seen at the level of politics and sports.
However, we did not expect to see, even in our worst
nightmares, corruption within a judicial institution, as
is the case now within the ICC.
The Council heard here in the Chamber, on
5 December, His Excellency President Alassane
Ouattara of Côte d’Ivoire (see S/PV.8413) say that,
after 13 years of suffering, measures towards amnesty,
healing wounds and national reconciliation led to the
success in Côte d’Ivoire, something that the African
continent and the whole world are proud of. That
is exactly what we did in the Sudan concerning the
N’Djamena ceasefire agreement of 2004, the peace
accord signed in Nairobi in 2005, the peace agreement
signed in Abuja in 2006 and the 2011 Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur. The only obstacle to peace now is
the Court, which pits parties to conflict against each
other under the guise of justice.
The core of resolution 1593 (2005) is a peaceful
settlement to the conflict in Darfur and the restoration of
lasting peace. However, the resolution falls short on that
objective. The twenty-eighth report of the Prosecutor
is now before the Council. It is pointless to read those
reports because they entrench the international divide,
as can be seen in the statements of Council members,

S/PV. 8425

and they also fall short of the objective of achieving
peace in that important region of the world.
We therefore wonder, as some members of the
Council wonder too, about the significant progress
that has been made in the Prosecutor’s investigations
in Darfur, according to the report of the ICC. Those
institutional contradictions between the principles
of peace and justice must be eliminated. We should
underscore the established principles of international
law regarding the immunity of States and their
representatives. We should also, in a practical manner,
emphasize the principle of equality among States, which
is a well-established and independent legal principle.
We further reiterate that no entity, including the
Security Council, can compel a State Member of the
United Nations to be committed to any treaty that it
has not joined pursuant to its free political will. We
should listen to the voice of the African Union which,
on behalf of all its members, unanimously and without
exception rejected the insult addressed to our continent
and its peoples, and the ruling on its leaders that they
are fugitives.
The delegation of my country stresses once again
the need to fight impunity and achieve justice through
our own national justice and judicial institutions,
which are capable and qualified, and through free
international cooperation. We are constitutionally,
legally, ethically and culturally committed to
prosecuting perpetrators of crimes and violations under
well-established international laws — including the
1948 Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of
the Crime of Genocide, the four Geneva Conventions of
1949 and their two Protocols, and other human rights
conventions — while committed to fight impunity.
Article 3 of the Additional Protocol II to the Geneva
Conventions provides for the following:
“Nothing in this Protocol shall be invoked
for the purpose of affecting the sovereignty of a
State or the responsibility of the government, by
all legitimate means, to maintain or re-establish
law and order in the State or to defend the national
unity and territorial integrity of the State.”
(spoke in English)
The way the Prosecutor’s statement and a few
members of the Council referred to the President of the
Sudan is of course unacceptable. We are not trying to
point the finger at an individual, including the present

18-4401417/18

S/PV.8425

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Prosecutor of the ICC. We are, rather, duty-bound to
prove beyond a doubt the institutional corruption of
the Court itself and, on the same scale, the underlying,
purely political considerations that drive the Court and
reduce it to a mere political tool and remnant of the
defunct polarization of the world.
In this connection, we have to showcase the extent
to which the Office of the Prosecutor and, in fact, the
entire body of the Court are misused and abused. For
example, on 17 October the German magazine Der
Spiegel and other media outlets accused the Chief
Prosecutor of lying with regard to her relationship with
a former Chief Prosecutor, Mr. Luis Moreno Ocampo,
after Ocampo left office in 2012. This is an account of
facts; it is not rhetoric. A series of articles in Der Spiegel
and other European media, partnered with European
investigative collaborators, revealed that Luis Moreno
Ocampo, the predecessor of the incumbent Prosecutor
of the ICC, had owned offshore companies in Caribbean
tax havens.

18/18

14/12/2018

Lastly, it is evidently and naturally incompatible
with the duties of the Prosecutor to take or to be
seen taking sides in an investigation she is allegedly
performing. Article 42 of the Rome Statute provides
that “[t]he Prosecutor and the Deputy Prosecutors shall
be persons of high moral character”. Regrettably, in
the wake of her report before the Security Council in
June (see S/PV.8290), the Prosecutor of the ICC came
forth with former rebels and abusers of refugee status
here in New York and displayed, together with them,
a t-shirt on which was written “Arrest Bashir”. I have
with me a photograph of that event. Would it ever occur
in anybody’s wildest imagination that any legal system
in the world would ever commit such an affront and
act of complete bias, prejudice and partiality? Again, I
say that the Court is riddled with corruption from head
to toe.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18-44014
