A/64/PV.28

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-fourth session

28

th plenary meeting
Wednesday, 28 October 2009, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ali Abdussalam Treki . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya)

The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Terrorist attack in Afghanistan
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I wish to express our deep and
sincerest sympathy and condolences to the family
members of the five United Nations employees who
were killed in the horrific attack that took place in
Kabul, Afghanistan. Let me join the Secretary-General
in condemning this and all threats and acts of violence
against humanitarian workers, United Nations staff and
others. I emphatically state that perpetrators of such
crimes should be brought to justice. I urge all Member
States to fully comply with their obligations under
international law pertaining to the protection of
humanitarian workers and United Nations staff.
Agenda item 20
The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy
and development
Report of the Secretary-General (A/64/370)
Draft resolution (A/64/L.6*)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Guatemala to introduce
draft resolution A/64/L.6*.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
On 10 November a year ago, I had the honour to
explain from this very rostrum the origin of the
International Commission against Impunity in

Guatemala (CICIG) — an initiative that complies with
one of the many commitments of our Peace Accords
signed in December 1996. I explained that we had
inherited a culture of impunity as a sequel to the
conflict and that criminal groups sheltered by the
climate of impunity had also appeared that were
sometimes highly organized and had transnational
connections.
In order to deal with the situation, we turned once
again to the United Nations with a single request for
cooperation between the Organization and the
Government of Guatemala, which led to the creation of
the CICIG and the start of its operations on
4 September 2007.
Last year, this initiative received the collective
support of the General Assembly with the adoption by
consensus of resolution 63/19. We greatly appreciate
that support. As will be recalled, the final paragraph of
that resolution requested the Secretary-General to
report on the work of the Commission to the sixtyfourth session of the General Assembly.
That report, issued on 23 September in document
A/64/370, presents an objective assessment of the
Commission’s important achievements during its first
two years of activities and discusses some of the
challenges it continues to face. We basically agree with
the assessment of the Secretary-General, to whom we
express our sincere appreciation for his constant
support of the work of the Commission.
As our President, Álvaro Colom Caballeros,
pointed out in his statement delivered to the General

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

09-57994 (E)

*0957994*

A/64/PV.28

Assembly barely a month ago, the Commission “has
the solid support not only of my Government, but of all
of civil society”. For this reason, we have renewed the
agreement between the Government of Guatemala and
the United Nations to extend the mandate of the
Commission for an additional two years.
The draft resolution I am introducing to the
Assembly this afternoon, contained in document
A/64/L.6*, is sponsored by over 70 nations, beginning
with our partners from the Central American
Integration System. The draft follows up on resolution
63/19, adopted last year, with some updating in the
language to reflect the observations in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We trust that this draft resolution will
be adopted by consensus, and we thank you in advance
for your support.
There are three final points I would like to make.
First, the Commission is a response to a Guatemalan
initiative. It reflects our deep conviction that in order
to respond to organized groups that operate in
impunity, international cooperation is needed. Such
cooperation would not replace national institutions, but
would support and strengthen them.
We approached the United Nations because we
see it as an objective and independent Organization,
without its own agenda. We looked for creative
modalities of partnership with the United Nations,
without renouncing our own responsibilities as a
sovereign nation, as set out in our Constitution.
Secondly, the Commission is fully funded
through voluntary contributions from the donor
community, and I take this opportunity to extend our
special gratitude to the many Governments that have
worked with our country on that initiative. At the same
time, I would like to emphasize that the draft resolution
involves no additional financial or budgetary
implications for the United Nations.
Thirdly, I would like to publicly and warmly
recognize the work of the Commissioner, Carlos
Castresana, for his selfless and excellent work. The
important progress achieved by the Commission is, in
large part, due to the leadership he has exercised in
heading his team of national and international experts.
Before concluding, permit me to read out the list
of countries that are sponsoring this draft resolution in
addition to those that are already listed in document
A/64/L.6*. Albania, Argentina, Australia, Brazil,

2

Bolivia, Colombia, Cypress, Costa Rice, Slovakia, the
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Fiji, Greece,
Haiti, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Iraq, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Norway, New Zealand, Paraguay, Czech Republic,
Republic of Korea, Romania, Rwanda, Senegal,
Jamaica, Switzerland, Trinidad and Tobago and Turkey.
I have confined myself to introducing the draft
resolution contained in A/64/L.6*. However, I feel I
must state that this very broad agenda item relates to
the situation in Central America. Here, we have a
pending issue. In this very Hall, resolution 63/301 was
adopted on 30 June 2009 on strengthening democracy
in Honduras.
I would like to say that Guatemala will stand
together with a legitimate Government of President
Manuel Zelaya and we call for the immediate
implementation of the provisions in that resolution.
That is not only a situation concerning Honduras, but
rather one involving our entire region.
Mr. Lidén (Sweden): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU).
Turkey, Croatia, the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Montenegro, Norway, Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
The European Union welcomes the SecretaryGeneral’s report on the activities of the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG),
and the draft resolution contained in document
A/64/L.6*, just introduced by the Ambassador of
Guatemala.
CICIG continues to be a positive force in
Guatemala with its efforts to combat the prevailing
situation of impunity in the country. Through highly
professional work, CICIG is now accepted as a key
player in security and justice matters in Guatemala.
CICIG has entered a phase where high-impact cases
are in the process of being presented to the national
courts, and a number of legal proceedings have been
initiated. The EU fully supports the work of the
Commission.
In spite of the positive results during the
reporting period, where the Commission has made
significant progress in key areas of its mandate, the EU
would like to express its deep concern about the

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

continued high levels of violence and impunity in
Guatemala. The EU urges the United Nations
Secretariat to do its utmost to ensure that the
operational challenges now faced by the Commission
are appropriately addressed. The safety and security of
the Commission’s staff are matters of particular
concern.
It is important that the work of CICIG be
institutionalized by the Guatemalan State in order to
create long-term sustainability after the end of its
mandate. An independent judicial system is of crucial
importance in combating the high levels of impunity in
the country. We ask all State institutions to take the
decisions necessary to ensure the independence and
effectiveness of Guatemala’s judicial system and to
work in close cooperation with CICIG.
The EU also underlines the importance of
Guatemala’s continued commitment to strengthen its
own institutions, and we reiterate our support for the
Commission’s efforts to assist Guatemala in
maintaining and strengthening its democratic
institutions, which are vital for peace and development
in the country, and to build a State governed by the rule
of law for all Guatemalans.
I would now like to turn to the situation in
Honduras. On 2l July, the EU presidency, on behalf of
its 27 member States, decided to restrict contact with
the representatives of the de facto Government of
Honduras and to suspend bilateral development
cooperation with the institutions of the de facto
Government. The EU stands ready to take further
restrictive measures, including targeting those
members of the de facto Government seen to be
blocking progress on a negotiated solution based on the
San José Accord.
The European Union underlines again the
importance of a rapid and peaceful negotiated solution
to the severe crisis in Honduras and calls on all actors
involved to work on the basis of the San José Accord,
which, in the view of the EU, remains a key reference.
The EU urges the parties to continue negotiations in a
constructive manner in order to achieve restoration of
constitutional order in the country, and particularly
before the elections to be held in November. The
European Union firmly supports the initiatives
undertaken by the Organization of American States and
its Secretary-General, José Miguel Insulza, to facilitate
dialogue with a view to a peaceful negotiated solution.

09-57994

Ms. Grau (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I
warmly thank the representative of Guatemala for his
presentation of draft resolution A/64/L.6*. Switzerland
has supported the establishment of the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG)
since its inception. My delegation is pleased that the
mandate of the Commission has been extended for two
more years. I would also like to endorse the SecretaryGeneral’s remarks in his address of 19 June, in which
he commended the work of CICIG and its
Commissioner, Mr. Carlos Castresana. Together with
his national and international team, Mr. Castresana has
acted with a high degree of professionalism.
The Guatemalan Government has shown courage
in trying to find ways to put an end to impunity.
CICIG’s mandate and institutional structure provide a
solid framework for pursuing this goal and
strengthening State institutions. This is particularly
important in a context where alarming levels of
violence and corruption challenge not just the
institutions of the country itself, but those of the
subregion as a whole.
For these reasons the Commission deserves the
full support of the international community. CICIG can
be considered a pioneering transitional justice
instrument. It bases its activities on national
assessments, national participation, and national needs
and aspirations. Its strategy seeks to support the
political will to reform as much as the technical
capacity to make those reforms. Moreover, its very
existence shows that international mechanisms need
not be costly in order to contribute effectively to
sustainable national capacities for the administration of
justice.
If CICIG is to be able to fulfil its mission
efficiently, it has to deal with several challenges. I
would like to mention two of them. First, as regards the
status of the Commission, the report of the SecretaryGeneral (A/64/370) underscores the dangers and risks
that have become part of the Commission’s daily life.
Enhanced protection and security for its staff is crucial.
Accordingly, Switzerland stands ready to engage in
discussions with other Member States on how to
strengthen existing modalities and, if necessary, to
revise the Commission’s status within the United
Nations. Indeed, given the strategic issue that CICIG
addresses — the dismantling of parallel power
structures linked to international organized crime — it
is crucial to provide it with the means necessary to

3

A/64/PV.28

enable it to function in an optimal manner, while
guaranteeing it adequate protection.
Secondly, regarding CICIG’s need for additional
financial support, Switzerland will continue to provide
such support, as well as expert assistance. Alongside its
specific criminal investigations, CICIG has helped to
strengthen the competencies of the prosecutorial
services in Guatemala. It has also been involved in
updating and improving Guatemala’s national
legislation by making recommendations concerning
vetting and the reorganization of the justice and
security sectors. It is important that the international
community strengthen such measures by adapting the
support it provides to justice and security. The
Commission’s mission goes to the heart of the mandate
of the United Nations to ensure that the rule of law,
justice and lasting peace are mutually reinforcing.
Switzerland hopes that the support of the United
Nations and the international community as a whole
will live up to the needs of CICIG and Guatemala in
their difficult struggle against impunity.
Mr. Gutiérrez (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): As this
is the first time I have taken the floor at the present
session, I would like to congratulate you,
Mr. President, and through you, the other Bureau
members, on your election at the sixty-fourth session
of the General Assembly, and to assure you of my
delegation’s full support in your efforts.
My delegation would like to address two aspects
relating to item 20 on the agenda, “The situation in
Central America: progress in fashioning a region of
peace, freedom, democracy and development”: first,
the draft resolution (A/64/L.6*) on the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG),
and secondly, the situation in our sister republic of
Honduras. Regarding the draft resolution on CICIG, it
must be said that this testifies to the joint endeavours
of the United Nations and Guatemala to ensure that the
rule of law is respected. In this forum we have
repeatedly heard the dictum, “There us no peace
without justice”, and indeed the Commission clearly
shows the international community’s commitment to
achieving that goal and fighting impunity.
This year by mutual agreement it was decided to
extend the mandate of the International Commission
for a period of two years, beginning 4 September 2009.
To that end the Secretary-General’s report in document
A/64/370 has identified significant progress achieved

4

in Guatemala in investigation, prosecution and legal
reforms. However, major operational challenges still
remain, given the sui generis nature of the
Commission, and those have still to be overcome.
A programme of work has been established, and
the Commission must present a consolidation strategy
to ensure that its powers can be transferred to national
institutions. In that way it will be possible to support,
strengthen and assist the work of State institutions in
Guatemala. To that end it is vital that dialogue continue
among the State, political parties, the press and civil
society so that all can join fully in the process.
As the agenda item before us is “The situation in
Central America: progress in fashioning a region of
peace, freedom, democracy and development”, the
delegation of Peru must refer to the current situation
faced by the Republic of Honduras.
Peru is firmly committed to contributing to the
consolidation of democracy in Latin America and the
Caribbean. The maintenance and strengthening of
democratic institutions, with full respect for the rule of
law and the protection and promotion of the political
and social rights of our people, are supreme values that
should not and cannot be subject to any conditions. It
is regrettable that, after a lengthy and successful
process to restore democracy in Central America, we
are witnessing a terrible reversal with the constitutional
breach that occurred in Honduras on 28 June, which,
with no justification whatever, is continuing.
That situation was forcefully condemned by Peru,
and we firmly supported the regional efforts by the
Organization of American States (OAS) to facilitate the
immediate restoration of the constitutional and
legitimate Government of President José Zelaya
Rosales. Likewise, here at the United Nations Peru cosponsored resolution 63/301, which the General
Assembly adopted by consensus, which called for the
immediate and unconditional restoration of President
Zelaya’s Government and expressed firm support for
the regional efforts being undertaken pursuant to
Chapter VIII of the Organization’s Charter to lead to a
just solution to the serious political crisis in Honduras.
Furthermore, the peaceful return of the
constitutional President José Zelaya to Honduras was
supported by the member States of the Rio Group, of
which Peru is one. The Group also condemned the
violent acts and ongoing harassment on the part of the
de facto Government against the Brazilian Embassy,

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

where President Zelaya is. Peru reiterates its vigorous
call to respect and guarantee the physical safety of
President Zelaya’s person, family and associates, as
well as to ensure the inviolability of the Brazilian
Embassy in Tegucigalpa and the personal safety of its
staff, in strict observance of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations.
A few weeks ago my Government welcomed the
developments in Honduras following the second
mission of foreign ministers of various OAS States. We
were hopeful about the progress of negotiations in
Tegucigalpa, which held out the prospect of a
Honduran solution to a Honduran crisis. However,
unfortunately, intransigence and placing differences
before consensus have led to a breakdown in the
negotiations.
Peru trusts that the dialogue process will continue
in Honduras as soon as possible, within the terms of
the San José Accord, as urged by the Permanent
Council of the OAS in its press release of Wednesday,
21 October, to achieve a peaceful solution to the crisis
and that that in turn could lead to the national
reconciliation we all hope for and the restoration of
democracy, legality and the rule of law, to the benefit
of the nation and the Honduran people.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): Brazil has gladly
co-sponsored draft resolution A/64/L.6*, regarding the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala. We fully support the efforts of the
Commission to assist the Government of Guatemala in
its difficult but indispensable fight against impunity.
I take this opportunity to also address the
situation in Honduras. It is an issue of grave concern to
my Government and that of the entire United Nations
membership.
As delegations are aware, since 21 September
2009 the constitutional President of Honduras, Mr. José
Manuel Zelaya, has taken shelter, together with family
members and close advisors, at the Brazilian Embassy
in Tegucigalpa. President Zelaya arrived at the
Embassy peacefully and by his own means. He was
received in the Embassy and remains there as the
constitutional head of State of Honduras and the
legitimate ruler of the country. That is the firm
conviction of all Member States of the United Nations,
in accordance with General Assembly resolution
63/301. It is also the view of all countries of the region.

09-57994

Since the day it first sheltered President Zelaya at
its premises, the Brazilian Embassy has been virtually
under siege. It has been constantly subjected to acts of
harassment and intimidation by the de facto authorities.
The Embassy continues to be surrounded by military
forces; tear gas has been used; basic services were
suspended and later restored; sound and light devices
continue to be employed, especially at night, as tactics
to deprive those sheltered in the building of muchneeded sleep and therefore affect them physically and
psychologically. Scaffolds have been mounted outside
the premises to monitor movement inside. Humiliating
security procedures are used to screen those entering
and leaving the Embassy, and locally engaged
personnel are prevented from entering the building.
Telephones are tapped. Delivery of food is restricted
and perishable food is left under direct sunlight for
hours. Garbage is not collected for days. That
behaviour by the de facto authorities constitutes
flagrant and unacceptable violations of the obligations
of Honduras under the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations and of the human rights of
persons inside the Embassy.
We are encouraged that the international
community has clearly and forcefully repudiated those
aggressions. We are also grateful for the solidarity
shown by organizations and numerous countries or
groups of countries.
The members of the Security Council, at the
Council’s 6192nd meeting, on 25 September,
condemned the acts of intimidation by the de facto
authorities and called upon them to cease harassing the
Brazilian Embassy and to provide all necessary utilities
and services. Council members recalled that respect for
and protection of the inviolability of diplomatic
premises is a universally accepted principle of
international relations. They also stressed the
importance of respecting international law through
preserving the inviolability of the Embassy of Brazil in
Tegucigalpa and other protections afforded it by the
Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, and of
ensuring the safety of individuals on its premises. They
also underlined the need to preserve the inviolability of
the Embassy of Brazil in Tegucigalpa and of its
diplomatic personnel, in accordance with international
law.
The Organization of American States (OAS) has
also deplored the reprehensible behaviour of the de
facto Government of Honduras on several occasions.

5

A/64/PV.28

Most recently, on 21 October, the Permanent Council
of that Organization denounced and strongly
condemned the hostile actions against the Embassy of
Brazil and the harassment of its occupants. It again
called on the de facto regime to put an immediate end
to those actions, to respect the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations and international human rights
instruments and to withdraw all repressive forces
forthwith from the areas surrounding the Embassy,
without neglecting the due security of the mission. The
Council also appealed for guarantees for the right to
life, integrity and security of President Zelaya and of
all persons in and around the Embassy of Brazil, as
well as for the protection of their dignity, and it urged
the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights to
follow up on the situation.

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the report of the Secretary-General on the
activities of the International Commission against
Impunity in Guatemala (A/64/370) and draft resolution
A/64/L.6*, which was introduced by the Guatemalan
delegation.

It is high time for the de facto authorities to heed
the unanimous calls of the international community
and fully abide by Honduras’ international obligations.
Their behaviour is incompatible with the right to
dignity of the Honduran people.

The work of the International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG) is a successful
example of what can be achieved through multilateral
action to benefit the States and peoples of the world.
Since it was founded in August 2007 pursuant to a
request by Guatemala, the Commission has shown that
it is a fundamental tool for combating impunity in
Guatemala and for strengthening the judicial
institutions responsible for investigation and criminal
prosecution of crimes against the people of Guatemala
allegedly committed by illegal security forces and
clandestine groups. Guatemala waged a long struggle
to achieve national reconciliation, strengthen the rule
of law and combat impunity. For that it deserves the
full support of the international community.

On 21 October, the Permanent Council of the
OAS issued a strong appeal for continuation of the
dialogue already under way between the parties, in
accordance with the proposed San José Agreement and
without any attempt to open topics other than those
contained in the proposal. The appeal follows a clear
stagnation in the negotiating process. We call on the de
facto Government to abandon dilatory tactics and
negotiate in good faith.

The positive results of the International
Commission show that it is possible to effectively
combat impunity through creative models of
international cooperation, gradually restoring the
citizens’ trust in their institutions. Progress to date is
truly encouraging, but much remains to be done.
Mexico has thus joined the sponsors of the draft
resolution and will continue supporting the
Commission’s work.

Brazil believes that the return of President Zelaya
is indispensable. Coups d’état are no longer acceptable
in a region that has outgrown - often with blood - years
of instability and violence. Elections alone will not
solve the problem, since their legitimacy would be
seriously
compromised.
Under
the
current
circumstances conditions are simply not in place to
allow the holding of free, fair, transparent and
democratic elections in Honduras.

The situation in Central America has both lights
and shadows. Allow me now to turn to the situation in
Honduras, which represents a marked step backwards
in the life of the region.

Mr. Acharya (Nepal), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
Brazil is ready to continue to support initiatives
aimed at resolving the current crisis. We count on the
support of the international community, especially
those who have a direct influence on the de facto
authorities.

6

After years of political stability, on 28 June the
situation of relative calm that prevailed in Central
America and in Honduras suffered a blow that had
significant regional political repercussions. That day,
the constitutional order of Honduras was smashed by
the illegal expulsion of President José Manuel Zelaya,
who for a time was forced to live outside of his
country. He was able to return to Honduras only by
taking temporary refuge in the Brazilian Embassy in
Tegucigalpa. That situation is in every respect
unacceptable.
Mexico confirms its unambiguous condemnation
of the events of 28 June and demands the restoration of
democracy in Honduras, including the return of

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

President Zelaya, in accordance with the constitution
of the country, the Inter-American Democratic Charter,
the Charter of the Organization of American States
(OAS) and General Assembly resolution 63/301, which
was sponsored by my delegation and adopted by
acclamation on 1 July.
From the beginning of the crisis, the OAS has
worked tirelessly to make possible President Zelaya’s
restoration to power. Mexico has supported and
promoted those actions, within the OAS and through
competent regional bodies, including the declarations
of heads of State and Government of the Rio Group,
the mechanism for consultation and concerted political
action, and the Group’s many ministerial declarations
and communiqués. We will continue to play an active
role in the multilateral regional mechanisms and
necessary mediation efforts in accordance with Chapter
VIII of the United Nations Charter until constitutional
order is restored in Honduras.
I wish to highlight in particular the work of the
OAS special commission of ministers for foreign
affairs, in which Mexico’s Foreign Minister
participated. That commission visited Tegucigalpa
twice and was crucial in starting a dialogue between
representatives of the constitutional president and the
de facto Government to find a way out of the crisis
through dialogue and agreement. At the same time, we
urge the Organization of American States and its
Secretary General, Mr. José Miguel Insulza, to
continue promoting all efforts towards mediation,
negotiation and conciliation in order to encourage
political dialogue between the players involved — the
Hondurans themselves — and to reach a solution to
this political crisis.
Since the June coup d’état we have witnessed
many actions of the de facto Government in Honduras
that violate international law and the human rights of
the Honduran people. On their behalf we call for
respect for the democratic institutions, governance and
protection of the people’s human rights.
We support the mission of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
which, pursuant to a mandate of the Human Rights
Council, was sent to Honduras to collect information
about possible human rights violations.
In addition to violations of human rights, Mexico
is particularly concerned by the de facto regime’s
harassment of President Zelaya, his followers and the

09-57994

diplomatic staff of the Brazilian Embassy in
Tegucigalpa. We repudiate those illegal and inhuman
actions and call for an immediate halt to them.
Similarly, we demand that the diplomatic status and the
privileges and immunities of diplomatic representatives
in Honduras be respected, in line with the Vienna
Convention on Diplomatic Relations. The international
community can no longer tolerate such intimidation of
the diplomatic personnel of the Brazilian Embassy, or
of any other mission that has also been the victim of
such actions, which run counter to international law
and pose a threat to the security and physical integrity
of President Zelaya and his followers.
Mexico will continue to follow developments in
the political situation in Honduras. We will continue to
support every effort aimed at enabling the Hondurans
to find, as soon as possible, a political solution to this
crisis that leads to national reconciliation and promotes
stability in the country and improvement in the living
conditions of its inhabitants.
Mr. Husain (Canada) (spoke in French): Canada
welcomes this important draft resolution in support of
the International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG) (A/64/L.6*). We are pleased to be
part of a long list of like-minded sponsors who
continue to support the Commission through voluntary
contributions. Further, the representatives work closely
with the Commission and United Nations colleagues to
combat corruption and provide an impartial voice in
public debates about security and justice issues in
Guatemala.
The draft resolution comes at a crucial time for
the Commission. That body continues to play a central
role in publicly challenging entrenched interests and
demanding greater justice and accountability on behalf
of all Guatemalans. The recent Supreme Court
nomination process, while controversial, represented a
step forward for Guatemala in terms of transparency
and open debate. In his report of 23 September 2009
(A/64/370), Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon has
highlighted the significant progress made by
Commission.
(spoke in English)
In that report, the Secretary-General calls our
attention to the pressing operational challenges faced
by the Commission as it moves forward into the second
phase of its mandate. Those challenges are the result of
the Commission’s status as a non-United Nations body,

7

A/64/PV.28

as well as a reflection of its success in challenging
powerful criminal networks. Through this draft
resolution, and in response to the Secretary-General’s
report, Canada strongly encourages the United Nations,
with the ongoing support of the Guatemalan State and
Commission’s international allies, to bolster its
assistance to the Commission in order to strengthen its
security, its credibility, its capacity and its stability.
Specifically, Canada strongly supports measures
to provide the CICIG staff with immediate and full
diplomatic privileges and protections. Canada also
encourages the United Nations to act swiftly in
offering much-needed assistance to CICIG in key
areas, including guaranteeing the safety and security of
the Commission’s staff as they undertake their
important and often dangerous work.
The fact that CICIG is facing increasing pressures
against its work suggests that it is having an impact in
Guatemala. As a strong supporter of the Commission
since its inception, Canada hopes that through this
draft resolution, the United Nations system and the
international community can take further tangible steps
toward sustaining and improving our support to CICIG.
Mr. Valero Briceño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): The Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela commends the efforts by
Guatemala and the international community to
establish and operationalize the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG),
which seeks to strengthen the rule of law and respect
for human rights in that fraternal country. We also
commend the Government and people of Guatemala on
the conviction of former military commissioner Felipe
Cusanero, whom the judicial system has just sentenced
for the disappearance of six peasants during the civil
war that assailed that fraternal Central American
country.
Unfortunately, the coup d’état in Honduras could
set the stage for a new wave of dictatorships in Latin
America and the Caribbean, a return to massive
violations of human rights, the heinous practice of
disappearances, mass incarcerations and the death of
innocent civilian. Just when it seemed that Central
America’s tragic history had been overcome, the
worthy and democratic President José Manuel Zelaya
Rosales was overthrown, kidnapped and exiled. At the
same time, the human rights of the Honduran people
are being repeatedly violated. Oligarch elites, who

8

endeavour to secure their obscene privileges, have once
again forcefully intervened against the constitutional
order of one of the continent’s countries.
Just a few years ago, Assembly resolution 58/239,
which was adopted on 23 December 2003 and is
entitled “The situation in Central America: progress in
fashioning a region of peace, freedom, democracy and
development”, took note of the existence throughout
Central America of freely elected Governments. It also
called for the achievement of political, economic and
social changes conducive to the further development of
democratic, just and equitable societies.
However, we can no longer say that all
Governments in Central America have been freely
elected. Instead of making progress towards improving
democracy, the de facto Government that emerged
from the military coup d’état in Honduras has
succeeded in turning back many years of efforts to
strengthen the principles of peace and democracy in
our region. Resolutions seeking a way forward that
have been adopted by the United Nations and the
Organization of American States have been ignored by
the regime established by the coup — an affront to the
international community for which there cannot be
impunity. We would like to underscore that the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela attaches particular
importance to resolution 63/301, which was adopted by
the General Assembly in connection with this issue.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela condemns
the harassment against the Brazilian Embassy in
Tegucigalpa and against President José Manuel Zelaya
Rosales, Honduras’s constitutional leader, as well as
his family and supporters in the Embassy and other
staff of other missions accredited in that country. We
demand full respect for international law, especially the
1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations.
Venezuela condemns the de facto regime’s intention to
legitimize the coup d’état, as well as the mass
violations of the Honduran people’s human rights and
the violations of international law. As Honduran
Foreign Minister Patricia Rodas said recently,
“elections are a right, but not a way to resolve coups
d’états or illegitimate situations”.
In that regard, our delegation would like to point
out the decision by Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon to
suspend the technical and financial assistance provided
by the United Nations to the Honduran Supreme
Electoral Tribunal because “he does not believe

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

conditions are currently in place for the holding of
credible elections” (Press Release SG/SM/12482).
A new kind of coup d’état is emerging before our
very eyes, one that seeks to legitimize itself through an
opaque and highly contested electoral process. Those
who carried out the coup d’état should be brought
before national or international bodies to pay for their
crimes.
The international community, and in particular
the United Nations, should send a clear message to the
coup regime in Honduras. In that regard, on 17 October
2009 at Cochabamba, Bolivia, we held the seventh
summit of heads of State and Government of the
Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas (ALBA). The
declaration adopted at the meeting included a set of
measures intended to contribute to restoring Mr. José
Manuel Zelaya Rosales to the presidency. The
declaration also emphasized that every ALBA country
had decided not to recognize any electoral process or
result carried out under the coup regime.
Mr. Yáñez-Barnuevo (Spain) (spoke in Spanish):
My delegation fully associates itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representative of Sweden
on behalf of the European Union in connection with
the issue now being considered by the General
Assembly, namely, the situation in Central America.
My delegation is grateful for the report of the
Secretary-General (A/64/370) on the activities of the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (CICIG). We also welcome draft resolution
A/64/L.6*, which was introduced by the Permanent
Representative of Guatemala.
With Commissioner Carlos Castresana at its
helm, CICIG continues to be a positive force in
Guatemala that is having a growing impact on various
areas of Guatemalan society and on other countries of
the region. The Commission is carrying out its work in
especially difficult circumstances, in particular when it
comes to the safety of its members and associates. We
hope that those conditions will improve as much as
possible with the full backing of the United Nations,
thereby ensuring the independence that the
Commission needs to be effective and carry out its
work.
From the very beginning, Spain supported the
establishment
and
operationalization
of
the
Commission by virtue of an agreement between

09-57994

Guatemala and the United Nations. Both parties have
now agreed to extend that agreement for an additional
two years. Spain has also been a main contributor to
the financing of the Commission from the outset. We
are prepared to continue to support the work of CICIG
in the political, technical and financial areas, so as to
strengthen the rule of law in Guatemala.
Spain has been a member of the group of friends
that has supported CICIG since it began its operations.
Of course, we are also a sponsoring country of the draft
resolution that has just been introduced for the
Assembly’s consideration. We hope that the draft will
be adopted by consensus in recognition and support of
the difficult and important work being done by CICIG
and the Government of Guatemala to combat impunity.
I must also refer to the current situation in
another country of the subregion, namely, Honduras.
Spain viewed the events of 28 June 2009 — exactly
four months ago to the day — as a coup d’état. Those
events entailed the illegal overthrow and expulsion
from Honduras of the constitutional President, Mr. José
Manuel Zelaya Rosales. The Spanish Government’s
position has led to our resolute condemnation of those
events, a demand that President Zelaya be restored to
office and the adoption of measures, both nationally
and at the level of the European Union, aimed at
contributing to a return to the democratic order in
Honduras.
Spain has supported the efforts to that end
undertaken by the Organization of American States and
its Secretary General, Mr. José Miguel Insulza. We
have also backed mediation efforts by President Arias
Sánchez of Costa Rica on the basis of the so-called San
José accord for a resolution to the situation. We support
the search for a peaceful and democratic solution to the
crisis that is negotiated by Honduran parties. We
believe the San José accord to be a key term of
reference for any solution.
We regret that dialogue at the table has been
interrupted. We hope that is only a temporary situation.
In that regard, it is necessary to continue to put
maximum pressure on the de facto Government,
especially now that President Zelaya has himself
agreed to the San José accord and the military
establishment, which was materially responsible for
carrying out coup d’état of 28 June, has stated, on more
than one occasion, that it would not stand in the way in
the search for a peaceful negotiated solution to the

9

A/64/PV.28

current crisis. Finding such a solution between the
parties in Honduras, with the backing of the
international community, is more urgent than ever.
Such an agreement would confer on the elections to be
held in a month’s time the national and international
credibility necessary to make the results legitimate,
thereby genuinely making it possible to emerge from
the current situation in Honduras.
At the same time, it is necessary to continue to
send out a strong message of the international
community’s resolute rejection of practices such as
military intervention to subvert the constitutional order.
Such acts are a thing of the past and have no place in
Latin America in the twenty-first century.
Mr. Limeres (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): I
would first of all like to speak about the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG).
In that regard, we welcome the important progress
made by the Commission in the two years that it has
been operational, as indicated in the report of the
Secretary-General contained in document A/64/370.
We also commend the efforts by the Government of
Guatemala to consolidate the achievements and
overcome the challenges before it.
Argentina is committed to the Commission’s
efforts. We have contributed national gendarmerie
personnel, who are part of the teams providing security
for both staff and the Commission’s facilities. My
country hopes that the General Assembly will adopt by
consensus draft resolution A/64/L.4, of which we are a
sponsor.
With regard to the situation in Honduras, from
the very beginning, the Argentine Republic
energetically condemned the coup d’état carried out on
28 June. We have expressed our resolute support for
the constitutional Government of Mr. José Manuel
Zelaya Rosales. We have also called for his
unconditional return to the office to which he was
elected by the Honduran people. And we have urged
the preservation of the rule of law, peace and national
stability, including the stability of democratic
institutions and the observance of human rights.
Argentina deplores the fact that, four months
after the suspension of democratic and constitutional
order in Honduras, and despite the tireless efforts in the
region by the Organization of American States and the
entire international community, the legitimate
Government has not been restored in that country. My

10

country continues to be firmly committed to a return to
democratic normalcy in Honduras. Our commitment is
reflected in the active participation of our country’s
President, Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, in every
effort made by the Organization of American States,
including by accompanying former General Assembly
President Father Miguel d’Escoto Brockmann to El
Salvador, with a view to safeguarding two basic values
that our region has been able to enshrine, namely,
democracy and respect for human rights.
I would like to reiterate the words spoken by
Argentina’s President during the general debate at the
sixty-fourth session on 23 September 2009:
“it is crucial that we realize that we must design
and forge a multilateral strategy which is strong
and specific to return democracy to Honduras. We
need a strategy which would actually allow for
true respect for human rights and ensure free and
democratic elections — which can take place
only with full respect for the constitution. If we
do not do this, we would be setting a harsh
precedent in a region where, for decades during
the national security doctrine, suspensions of
democracy claimed the lives of thousands and
thousands of Latin Americans, led to the exile of
many others and created the region’s most serious
economic and social tragedy in memory.”
(A/64/PV.4)
We therefore once again demand the immediate
and unconditional restoration of the legitimate
Government of President Zelaya, as called for in
paragraph 2 of resolution 63/301. We also reiterate our
resolute support for regional efforts undertaken by the
Organization of American States in accordance with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations to
resolve the political crisis in the Republic of Honduras.
Mrs. Gallardo Hernández (El Salvador) (spoke
in Spanish): Allow me to welcome the initiative to hold
this meeting in order for the General Assembly to take
up agenda item 20, entitled “The situation in Central
America: progress in fashioning a region of peace,
freedom, democracy and development”. I should also
like to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
this issue (A/64/370).
The Government of El Salvador attaches great
importance to the situation in Central America, in line
with the integrationist approach reflected in our foreign
policy towards the region. That focus places priority on

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

promoting and supporting efforts, initiatives and
projects that can contribute to the establishment of the
Central American union and to the strengthening of
both individual and collective efforts by the member
countries of the Central American Integration System
(SICA). The overall purpose is to build a region of
peace, freedom, democracy and development.
In our view, the Central American region has
great potential and strengths that should jointly be
exploited in order to achieve sustainable development
in the region. We also acknowledge that we in the
region face common challenges and threats that call for
ongoing concerted efforts at the national and regional
levels if we are to address them successfully. That
includes efforts to combat threats to public safety, drug
activity, the illicit trade in drugs, the trade in human
beings, illicit gang activity, corruption and the
weakness of democratic institutions.
All that was recently acknowledged by President
Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena during the general
debate at the sixty-fourth session of the General
Assembly, where he said that
“there will be no solution or future for any of our
countries if we act in isolation from each other.
We long ago emerged from the era of
nationalities, and we are now ready to embark on
a new phase, one of greater integration. In this
regard the European Union is perhaps the most
advanced example.” (A/64/PV.4)
The President also stated:
“I appeal to my Central American
colleagues to consider this point. There are many
pending issues that we must address. There are
common challenges that we must face shoulder to
shoulder. We have everything to gain and nothing
to lose in the full integration of our region.”
(Ibid.)
The Government of El Salvador was therefore
especially pleased with the designation of 14 October
as a date on which we will henceforth commemorate
Central American Integration Day. That symbolic date
is a valuable opportunity to renew El Salvador’s
commitment to regional integration by reiterating the
integrationist thrust of our country’s foreign policy.
Among other things, that is a reflection of my
country’s desire to promote regional initiatives aimed
at implementing the Central American strategic social

09-57994

agenda, which should make it possible to bring Central
Americans into the regional integration process, as
well as to create greater awareness of the befits of
regional integration for Central American peoples.
Moreover, El Salvador is committed to taking the
necessary steps to establish the Central American
customs union. That is seen as a prerequisite for
moving towards greater regional integration. In that
regard, my country reaffirms its political resolve to
adopt, as soon as possible, a multi-year SICA plan with
the aim of giving the System a medium- and long-term
regional integration agenda in which priority actions to
ensure the strengthening of the integration process, the
periodic review and the modernization of the System’s
legal and institutional framework can be set in line
with the common desire for a regional integration
process.
We believe it important to reiterate the proposal
of President Funes to convene a summit of heads of
State and Government of SICA to take stock of the
integration in order to analyse, inter alia, a greater
transfer of power to strengthen the supranational
mechanism so as to make it credible and essentially
viable.
The Government of El Salvador supports the
work of the International Commission against Impunity
in Guatemala, to which draft resolution A/64/L.6*
refers. It was set up at the request of Guatemala, as we
know, as a non-United Nations body financed with
voluntary contributions. As has been stated on various
occasions, the prime objective of the Commission is
above all to support, strengthen and assist the
institutions of the State of Guatemala responsible for
the investigation and prosecution of crimes allegedly
committed by illegal security forces and clandestine
security bodies, and any other type of criminal conduct
linked to those operating in that country. The
Commission is also empowered to refer criminal or
administrative charges to the relevant authorities
against officials contributing to impunity by hampering
the Commission’s powers or tasks.
Here, the Government of El Salvador urges the
Government of Guatemala to continue to provide the
necessary support to build on the achievements and
overcome the challenges outlined in the SecretaryGeneral’s report. We also urge it to persevere in its
efforts to strengthen the institutions that underpin the
rule of law and the defence of human rights. At the

11

A/64/PV.28

same time, it welcomes Guatemala’s commitment to
fighting impunity.
My Government reiterates its concern about the
current situation in the sister Republic of Honduras as
a result of the coup d’état of 28 June 2009. We pray
once again that that situation will be resolved as soon
as possible so that joint efforts can resume to form the
region of peace, liberty, democracy and development in
Central America that we all yearn for.
In that respect, we reaffirm the position of the
Government of El Salvador in vehemently condemning
the coup d’état in Honduras and in supporting the
restoration of constitutional order, which indisputably
requires the immediate and unconditional reinstatement
of President José Manuel Zelaya Rosales. We also
support the relevant resolutions of the General
Assembly and the Organization of American States and
the steps taken by the Rio Group to promote a broad
political dialogue that will facilitate a peaceful and
agreed solution to the crisis in Honduras, while fully
respecting the human rights and fundamental freedoms
of the entire Honduran people.
Furthermore, the Government of El Salvador
requests the de facto regime to respect the physical
integrity of President Manuel Zelaya and all members
of the diplomatic and consular representations, and to
guarantee the inviolability of their premises, in
particular that of the Federative Government of Brazil.
Lastly, allow me to reiterate a statement made by
President of the Republic Mauricio Funes Cartagena:
“Until the Constitution is restored in Honduras
through the immediate reinstatement of President
Zelaya and the creation of a government of
national unity in keeping with the San José
Agreement, the electoral process currently being
prepared in our brother country will lack the
legitimacy or transparency necessary to guarantee
reliable results which might help resolve the
crisis” (A/64/PV.4)
in Honduras, as the entire region hopes.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As a
country that believes in law and justice, Costa Rica has
consistently supported the International Commission
against Impunity in Guatemala. It is a significant
achievement in the context of the peace agreements
signed in 1996. We support the extension of the
agreement between the Government of Guatemala and

12

the United Nations system, and we believe that
extending that mandate will make it possible to pursue
additional efforts and initiatives of vital importance to
ensuring the rule of law. Costa Rica welcomes the
complete transparency and the willingness of the
Government of the Republic of Guatemala in fulfilling
the substantive obligations of the Commission. As a
sponsor of draft resolution A/64/L.6*, introduced by
the brother nation of Guatemala, we call for its broad
support.
For many years, Latin America suffered
continuous breakdowns in the democratic order. Our
region was a showcase of dictatorial horrors, fueled by
the existence of repressive military regimes that
abrogated political freedoms. The road to democracy in
Latin America was painful and not without
considerable bloodshed. The small isthmus of Central
America was no exception in those processes to
reclaim political systems.
Exactly four months ago, one of those projects
was tragically disrupted when the democratically
elected President of the sister Republic of Honduras
was driven out of his country and sent to Costa Rica.
On that morning of sad memory, the President of Costa
Rica was the first head of State to demand the
immediate reinstatement of President José Manuel
Zelaya Rosales.
For over 60 years, Costa Rica has founded its
peace on dialogue and the institutional mechanisms of
conflict resolution. With those resources, we were able
to avoid the Central American wars in the 1980s, and
thanks to the moral strength of an unarmed country
believing in negotiated solutions in accordance with
the rule of law, our President was able to mediate the
Honduran conflict. President Óscar Arias wasted no
time or effort in bringing the parties together and in
calling for sensitivity, common sense and the benefits
of dialogue to resolve the political crisis in Honduras.
Although the mediation efforts of our President
have not yet led to the signing of an agreement,
somehow the spirit of the San José agreement has
become the backdrop for the international community’s
efforts, in particular for the parties involved. In
politically realistic terms, the terms of a practical
political solution that is within reach of the parties
remains the basis for achieving national reconciliation,
the restoration of President Zelaya Rosales and the
return to the constitutional order that prevailed before

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

28 June. It is only in that way that the Hondurans will
be able to hold elections leading to a legitimate transfer
of power and a normalization of relations between
Honduras and the international community.
As a member of the Security Council, Costa Rica
condemned the harassment and threats to which the
Brazilian embassy in Tegucigalpa and its diplomatic
personnel have been subject. Today, we reiterate that
condemnation and remind the de facto authorities that
they must comply with the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations. That is an absolutely
fundamental principle. We express our unequivocal
solidarity with the Government of Brazil and our
support for its legitimate demands for full respect for
that international instrument.
Costa Rica supports every regional effort to
resolve this situation and calls on the constitutional
Government and the de facto authorities to resume
dialogue in a constructive spirit, to resume democracybuilding, and to give the Honduran people hope for
better future, free from the specter of militarism and
oppression. We call on them to have the moral integrity
to address the real challenges facing Honduran society:
abolishing poverty, overcoming violence and making
real progress towards sustainable human development
in peaceful coexistence.
Mr. Reina Idiaquez (Honduras) (spoke in
Spanish): I would like to express our warm thanks for
the solidarity of Assembly President Treki with the
constitutional President of the Republic of Honduras,
whom I represent with the greatest honour and pride. I
would also like to congratulate the Bureau on its skilful
conduct of the work of this Assembly.
As members of the Assembly are aware, my
country, Honduras, has been plunged into a serious
political crisis since 28 June, exactly four months ago
today. At that time, I and the Minister for Foreign
Affairs provided the most up-to-date information to the
Assembly on the country’s situation. Subsequently,
following the overthrow of the constitutional President,
new developments have arisen that I wish to elaborate
on now.
The initiative to restore the President of the
Republic to power enjoys the support of all and is
needed now more than ever. The initiative to reach a
negotiated, agreed, peaceful and civil solution to the
internal conflict in Honduras was launched with the
valuable mediation of the President of Costa Rica,

09-57994

Óscar Arias Sánchez, and laid out a certain number of
points that should have served as the basis for
negotiations but have not.
We also enjoyed the clear and determined support
of other movements, entities, persons and countries.
The Organization of American States also made a
decisive contribution to the resolution of this problem
through the dialogue that has been ongoing since the
return of the President. Since he re-entered the country,
he has sought shelter in the Brazilian embassy. That
dialogue, which was recently broken off because of the
lack of an agreement on the issue of restoring the
President of the Republic to power — as demanded by
the people of Honduras and the international
community as a whole — is now in a new phase,
thanks to the intervention of the United States only a
few hours ago through its Department of State. The
parties are meeting to achieve consensus at this very
moment, as we speak in this Hall.
I had hoped to speak here after the conclusion of
that meeting, but alas, it has not yet ended. However,
there is still a good chance of achieving a clear and
appropriate agreement to restore President Zelaya to
the presidency of the country and uphold the rights of
the people of Honduras.
Allow me to express our deepest gratitude to the
countries of all the representatives who have spoken
before me of the serious problem facing Honduras. I
thank them for their brotherhood, their cooperation and
the efforts they have made to help to resolve the
political crisis in my country. I would refer here in
particular to the Government of Costa Rica, which
facilitated the first reconciliation meeting, to the sister
Republic of Brazil, and to all the other efforts exerted
by other countries.
I wish to reiterate that, if members were to decide
at some point in the future that it were necessary, I
would return once again to this Assembly to raise
support for a motion aimed at shielding the elections in
my country, which must be an example of transparency
and clarity, from any threat. The perpetrators of the
coup d’état must not be allowed to manipulate those
elections, a mechanism that the people use to resolve
their problems.
If necessary, I will return to this Assembly, to the
United Nations and to all other such forums to seek a
resolution to the situation and to prevent the coming
elections from being manipulated in such a way that,

13

A/64/PV.28

instead of being a solution to the problem, they serve
as a cover for a coup d’état that has overthrown the
constitutional order of the country. But I will not say
anything more about that for now because the
negotiations have not yet concluded and I do not wish
in any way to interfere with them, in keeping with the
instructions laid out for me by the constitutional
President of the Republic of Honduras.

way that maximizes the ability of the Honduran people
to determine their country’s future and advance
national reconciliation. We have clearly and
consistently expressed our concern about the situation
in Honduras within the OAS and, as appropriate, in the
United Nations, and have worked hard to find a
solution that restores democracy and peace to
Honduras.

I would also like to say that I was informed a few
minutes ago of a statement that runs completely
counter to the principle of friendship among peoples,
made by a person claiming to be an official of the
Government of Honduras at the International Court of
Justice in the Hague, accusing Brazil of interference in
the internal affairs of Honduras. Here, now, in this
Assembly, I wish to say that that official will be
immediately dismissed and that he speaks not on behalf
of the legitimate Government of Honduras but on
behalf of the perpetrators of the coup d’état. To Brazil,
I simply offer my profound thanks for having sheltered
the constitutional President of the Republic of
Honduras and for having supported us, together with
all the countries of the world, in our quest to reestablish legality, democracy and the well-being of the
people in Honduras.

Along with other members of the OAS, we
supported mediation by President Arias of Costa Rica
between representatives of President José Manuel
Zelaya and the de facto regime. President Arias worked
intensively during July and part of August to facilitate
a solution, and we commend his efforts. The proposal
he circulated to both sides, the San José accord, has
been used as the negotiating document during talks
earlier this month launched by an OAS mission of
member State foreign ministers. The United States also
strongly supported that mission’s work.

Mr. Wolff (United States of America): We thank
the Secretariat for the report on the activities of the
International Commission against Impunity in
Guatemala (A/64/370) and express our strong support
for the Commission. We are pleased to be a sponsor of
the draft resolution presented today by the delegation
of Guatemala (A/64/L.6*). We would also like to
recognize the excellent work of Commissioner Carlos
Castresana. Guatemala is indeed well served to have an
official of his calibre leading the efforts of the
Commission.
I would like to address my remarks to the
situation in Honduras. The United States, like other
Member States, is firmly committed to the restoration
of democratic order in Honduras. We believe that the
situation in Honduras needs to be resolved through
peaceful dialogue quickly for the well-being of the
people of Honduras and the stability of the region.
Accordingly, the United States is fully engaged in the
ongoing efforts of the Organization of American States
(OAS), the competent regional body to resolve this
issue. That is also the reason that senior United States
Government officials are in Honduras today to
continue to urge the parties to resolve the situation in a

14

Although currently broken off, the talks launched
by the OAS mission achieved significant progress.
Representatives of the de facto regime and President
Zelaya reached agreement on most of the text of the
Guaymuras accord, the updated version of the San José
accord, to resolve the crisis. Unfortunately, the two
sides have not resolved the most critical issue, namely,
the restoration of President Zelaya.
The United States remains intensively engaged
with representatives from both sides, OAS mediators
and other Member States to bring the parties back to
the table to resolve the remaining outstanding issues.
Our efforts continue to be guided by resolution 63/301,
adopted on 30 June. The Honduran people clearly want
a functioning democracy and the opportunity to
express their will in free and fair elections. That comes
across clearly through the presidential candidates’
actions to support a dialogue to resolve the crisis.
Those democratic candidates were chosen by their
respective political organizations well before the
events that led to the coup of 28 June. The candidates
did not participate in the coup and have earned their
positions thanks to the trust of Honduran voters. We
should continue our efforts to promote a solution to the
crisis in advance of the elections scheduled for
29 November.
We recognize the troubling situation at the
Brazilian embassy. We want to assure our Brazilian
friends that the United States will continue to help in

09-57994

A/64/PV.28

any way possible. Our embassy in Tegucigalpa has
worked closely with the Brazilian embassy to ensure
that it has food, water and electricity and that its
diplomatic rights are respected by the Honduran de
facto regime. We continue to remind the de facto
regime that its behaviour must be consistent with its
obligations under the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations to respect diplomatic premises
and personnel and those under their protection.
The United States will continue to work to
expand opportunities for the people in Honduras, and a
negotiated solution is the best way out of this crisis. In
our view the United Nations should support the efforts
of the OAS and others to reestablish democratic life in
Honduras and help ensure its viability.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate on this item.

09-57994

The Assembly will now take action on draft
resolution
A/64/L.6*,
entitled
“International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala”. May I
inform the Assembly that since the introduction of the
draft resolution, the delegations of Bulgaria and Côte
d’Ivoire have joined in co-sponsoring draft resolution
A/64/L.6*.
May I take it that the Assembly decides to adopt
draft resolution A/64/L.6*?
Draft resolution
(resolution 64/7).

A/64/L.6*

was

adopted

The Acting President: The General Assembly
has thus concluded this stage of its consideration of
agenda item 20.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

15
