S/PV.9094

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9094

th meeting
Thursday, 14 July 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Benaabou
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Mr. Boateng
Mr. Raguttahalli
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Abushahab
Dame Barbara Woodward
Mr. DeLaurentis

Agenda
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the Permanent Representative of
Colombia to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General and the President
of the Security Council (S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/513)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-42588 (E)
*2242588*

Colombia

S/PV.9094

Security Council on the important recent developments
since its publication.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in Spanish)

The agenda was adopted.
Identical letters dated 19 January 2016 from the
Permanent Representative of Colombia to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General
and the President of the Security Council
(S/2016/53)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Verification Mission in
Colombia (S/2022/513)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the representative of Colombia to participate in
this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome Her Excellency
Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, and request the Protocol
Officer to escort her to her seat at the Council table.
Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Colombia, was escorted to a seat at the
Council table.
The President: In accordance with rule 39 of
the Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite
the following briefers to participate in this meeting:
Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia; Mr. Francisco José
de Roux Rengifo, President of the Truth Commission;
and Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba, Nasa indigenous woman,
community leader and human rights defender.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/513, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
I now give the floor to Mr. Ruiz Massieu.
Mr. Ruiz Massieu: I thank you, Sir, for the
opportunity to present the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral on Colombia (S/2022/513) and to update the
2/24

14/07/2022

It is a pleasure to be in the Security Council with
Vice President and Foreign Minister Marta Lucía
Ramírez. I want to take this opportunity to express my
appreciation once again to the Government of Colombia
for supporting and cooperating with the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and the United
Nations in general. I welcome the participation in this
meeting of Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba, a leader of the Nasa
people of the Cauca department and representative of
the Women’s Network of the municipality of Caldono.
As the Council is well aware, indigenous women play a
leading role in peacebuilding in the territories.
I am also very pleased to present this quarterly
report in the presence of Father Francisco de Roux,
President of the Truth Commission. I would like to
take this opportunity to commend him and the other
commissioners on their outstanding work over the past
three years and the recent publication of their final
report. And I want to echo the main message conveyed
to the country through the presentation of this report,
which is that only through truth can we build a better
future for all Colombia.
(spoke in English)
Over the past few months, Colombians took part
in a hard-fought political campaign that resulted in the
election of President Gustavo Petro and Vice-President
Francia Márquez, who will be sworn in on 7 August,
and of a new Congress, which will be installed on
20 July. I would like to echo the Secretary-General’s
encouragement with regard to the mostly peaceful
elections and take this opportunity to once again
highlight the significant contribution that the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace has made to widening and
deepening Colombian democracy.
The electoral outcomes are increasingly reflecting
the diversity of the country’s vibrant society. There
are now more guarantees for the exercise of political
opposition, and the voices of 16 representatives of
victims from conflict-affected regions will be heard in
Congress. Another factor that will make this Congress
an unprecedented one is that it will include the largestever share of women lawmakers, close to 30 per cent of
all of its members. Together with representatives from
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

UN-Women, I recently had an opportunity to meet with
several of the newly elected women lawmakers, who
expressed their clear determination to advance many
issues in Congress, including the gender provisions of
the peace agreement. We hope that the new Congress
will make considerable progress in adopting the more
than 30 pending peace-related norms, including on
key matters such as comprehensive rural reform and
guarantees for political participation.
Despite the reasons for optimism, we are also
constantly reminded of the serious obstacles that remain
on the path to consolidating peace. Chief among them is
the persisting violence against communities, leaders and
former combatants in several departments. It saddens me
to have to inform the Council that another four former
combatants have been killed since the publication of
the Secretary-General´s report two weeks ago. Among
the victims was Ronald Rojas, also known as Ramiro
Durán, a prominent leader of former combatants in the
Huila department. Ramiro stood out for his commitment
to peace since the onset of the process. After the laying
down of arms, he became a leader of the reintegration
process and an advocate for the implementation of
the agreement more broadly, including as an active
member until 2021 of the Commission for the FollowUp, Promotion and Verification of the Implementation
of the Final Agreement. Including those most recent
deaths, the Mission has recorded the killings of 331
former combatants since the signing of the agreement.
The security of living former combatants must be
guaranteed. A priority for any peace agreement must be
to safeguard the lives of those who have laid down their
arms in good faith with assurances that they would
be protected.
Illegal armed actors continue to target local leaders
in conflict-affected areas marked by poverty, illicit
economies and a limited State presence. Indigenous and
Afro-Colombian communities are among those most
seriously affected by the violence and insecurity. And
while the full application of the ethnic provisions of the
Final Agreement could help address the most urgent
concerns, their implementation remains comparatively
weak. The High-level Forum of Ethnic Peoples created
by the agreement has called for a dedicated follow-up
on ethnic matters by international actors, and I fully
endorse those recommendations.
Worrying information has recently come to
light related to the alleged misuse of considerable
resources from royalties from hydrocarbon exploitation

S/PV.9094

allocated for the implementation of projects within
the development programmes with a territorial focus.
Transparency in the use of precious funding for peace
is vital and demands that the authorities thoroughly
investigate any possible acts of corruption, and I trust
that that will be the case.
(spoke in Spanish)
Despite the many challenges to the process, the
developments in this reporting period also include
inspiring progress. A few weeks ago, in a milestone of
the utmost importance for peace in Colombia and the
world, the Truth Commission published its final report,
which is a comprehensive compilation of multiple
voices and sectors throughout Colombian society in
every part of the country. The report’s painful findings
have shed light on the causes and effects of the conflict,
including the heartbreaking statistics reflecting the
lives of hundreds of thousands of Colombians cut
short over decades and the dynamics that explain the
persistence of violence.
The report also leaves us with a wealth of
recommendations for advancing peacebuilding and
reconciliation as a national project, including a call
on State entities to ensure full compliance with the
Final Agreement. The historic first hearings of truth
and acknowledgement of responsibility held by the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace have also given voice
to the representatives of hundreds of victims and their
calls for justice and reparations. In line with its goal
of ensuring reparations, the hearings also opened up
a space for the victims and the world for the leaders
of the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo, former members of the
security forces, including high-ranking officers and
civilian third parties to help acknowledge the truth and
reinforce their commitment to ensuring that the past will
not be repeated. Accordingly, the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace is also moving towards the imposition of its
first sanctions.
For its part, the Unit for the Search for Persons
Deemed Missing has continued its important work.
Only a few days ago it located a father who was
reunited with his two daughters and brought together
two brothers who had been separated for decades. The
Mission will continue to follow up duly on this issue
and other efforts by all parties towards the shared
goal of guaranteeing victims’ rights to truth, justice,
reparation and non-repetition.

22-425883/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

(spoke in English)
As the incoming Administration prepares to take
office, President-elect Petro has called for national
unity and has expressed his intention to deepen the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement,
as well as to seek both political and judicial negotiated
solutions with the remaining illegal armed actors in what
he has called the quest for total peace. When I met with
him two weeks ago, he strongly reaffirmed that peace
would be a cornerstone of his Government and that he
was counting on the support of the United Nations.
I also had the opportunity to meet with
Vice-President-elect Francia Elena Márquez Mina,
the first Afro-Colombian woman to hold that position,
who also reiterated that peace, with a territorial and
ethnic approach, would feature prominently in the
Government’s agenda.
Indeed, the incoming Administration has a
tremendous opportunity and responsibility to accelerate
the implementation of the peace agreement. There are
very good reasons for optimism, and I believe that the
United Nations and the international community at
large should do all they can to lend their support.
The President: I thank Mr. Ruiz Massieu for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. De Roux Rengifo.
Mr. De Roux Rengifo: Allow me to salute three
very significant persons before starting my briefing:
(spoke in Spanish)
Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba, representing the presence
of our victims and our Afro-Colombian peoples;
Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President and Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Colombia; and Mr. Guillermo
Roque Fernandez De Soto Valderrama, our Ambassador
to the United Nations.
A little more than two years ago, I stood before the
members of the Security Council, when there was still
no pandemic. The Security Council had already come
to Colombia. Members had placed their trust in us.
Today I return before the Council on the occasion of
the quarterly report on the peace process in Colombia
(S/2022/513), which the Head of Mission, Mr. Carlos
Ruiz Massieu, just presented. I thank him for all that
he has done to support us and everything he has given
us. I have come to report that the task that the Council
members unanimously supported is complete. Here is
4/24

14/07/2022

the conclusion of that task, and Council members will
receive a summary of that hereon.
On behalf of my colleagues in the Truth
Commission, and reflecting the feelings of millions
of Colombian men and women victims of the war, we
bring a word of gratitude and thanks to all those present,
as peoples gathered at the United Nations. It is a word
of truth from Colombia, a message of pain and, at the
same time, a courageous word, which shows, from the
individual wounded by war and from the wounded
society, a bold and obligatory path to build together a
nation in peace out of our differences and a new world
that fills with joy the children of today and tomorrow,
where there is room for hope.
For four years, we have listened to the suffering
that Colombia’s internal war of more than 50 years
has left behind. We heard more than 30,000 individual
and collective testimonies from all sides in a divided
country, and we read more than 1,000 reports coming
from victim communities and from 24 countries where
there are Colombian exiles. A total of more than
10 million people have been affected in various ways
by that war. Among those victims, the weapons of the
war killed 450,000 people between 1985 and 2018.
Eighty per cent of all those affected, the survivors
and those killed, were not soldiers or guerrillas, but
unarmed civilians. That is war. It is always against the
civilian population.
We heard multiple testimonies of the 50,000
kidnapped and of many of the thousands of children
brought into the war, for which the guerrillas bear
the greatest responsibility. We know about the forced
disappearances and the so-called false positives,
for which the State bears immense and direct
responsibility. We have been to the sites of more than
4,000 massacres, some of more than 100 people, where
entire communities were destroyed and where the
barbarity of the paramilitaries exceeded all possible
imagination. We walked alongside groups of the more
than 8 million displaced persons, alongside hundreds
of women whose bodies were used as battlefields,
alongside peasants whose land was taken from them
and alongside indigenous, Afro-Colombian and Roma
communities, who were targeted more than others in an
armed conflict where there is increasing racism.
It hurts us to see that all that was known in
Colombia. The world knew about it. We saw it on the
television and heard it on the radio, but we let it continue
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

for 50 years as if such barbarity did not concern us.
Except for the struggles of many people who did not
allow themselves to be intimidated by fear, as well as
the efforts of our State, the Colombian Governments,
and most particularly the struggle of mothers, who
continue to shout: stop this war, stop it on all sides,
stop it now. They cry out as the mothers of the young
non-combatants who were killed and portrayed by their
perpetrators as guerrillas who died in combat, and they
continually demand: who gave the order?
But we have not just listened. We have sought
answers to these questions. Why did that happen?
What effects did all that have on the people, society
and democracy? Who caused it and how? What can we
do to prevent it from happening again? The search for
answers to those questions has allowed us to understand
the reason for the damage done to life, democracy
and culture and to understand why the conflict seeks
to persist and continue, as shown by the more than
1,000 leaders assassinated, together with 333 men and
women of the former guerrillas of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia who signed the peace
agreement. One of them was Ramiro Durán, whom
Mr. Ruiz Massieu just mentioned.
We have understood that war is never simple and
that armed actors wage war within a system where
decisions are influenced or determined by cultural,
political, economic, military, bureaucratic and criminal
interests and goals. We have found that, at the origin
and in the continuation of war, there is an ethical
vacuum, a disregard for every human being and for
the incomparable value of each woman and man. War
damages everything that it touches. It harms those who
are attacked and those who attack.
We have understood that, in the case of Colombia,
it is necessary to change the security system. From
the beginning, more than 60 years ago, we decided
that security should be ensured by arms. Our security
became a never-ending armed security because armed
security always asks for more weapons and more
justification in deaths. We established armed security
to provide security for the authorities, the institutions,
the assets and the companies, and even security to
protect the armed bureaucracy itself. But there was not
adequate security to protect the people, the individual.
That is why, in the Colombian war, eight out of every
10 deaths were of civilians and the jungles, rivers and
mountains were victims of anti-personnel mines, as
were the thousands of young Colombians on both sides

S/PV.9094

of the conflict who fought in an always pointless war.
That is why today we are asking that, if there are to be
armed forces, it should be an army and a police force
for peace, not for war, and we ask the international
community not to give us anything for war. We want
to make Colombia a global paradigm of reconciliation
after so much suffering.
In Colombia, the war has been steeped in drug
trafficking. Since we are in war mode, we borrowed
from other drug-consuming countries the idea that
drug trafficking is a matter of national security, and
therefore a matter of war. We united to destroy the
peasants who seek refuge in coca because we have left
them impoverished and dispossessed of land and capital.
The Commission calls for an end to the war
against drug trafficking and asks that efforts be
made to understand how wrong it is to claim that
armed prohibitionism can halt drug trafficking, when
all such an approach does is increase the profits of
drug trafficking.
Colombian victims have made their needs known,
loud and clear, and, hearing them, we ask that drugconsuming nations shoulder their responsibility in
capturing drug barons and ensuring that they are made
subject to transitional justice processes, under which
they must face up to public declarations of the truth about
their political, economic and military partnerships as
well as those with banks as relates to their businesses.
They must also provide monetary redress to victims.
We invite everyone throughout the world to work to
regulate markets and shoulder their responsibilities in
terms of education and public health at a global level on
an issue that affects us all, just as we learned to work
together to care for ourselves during the coronavirus
disease pandemic.
We ask that everyone understand the connection
between drug trafficking and corruption, because
criminal money buys off governors, mayors, judges,
members of the police force, guerrilla members and
military men, and it serves to make corruption at other
levels more widespread.
We have understood that the solution to an armed
conflict involves respecting each and every person
as an equal human individual and that we must give
every boy and girl, whether from indigenous or AfroColombian communities, the same respect as is reserved
for presidents, rich people, doctors, diplomats, eminent

22-425885/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

figures and army generals. All cults of personality
and elites must end, and we must respect and love
one another as holders of that same dignity. We must
contribute to promoting an ethical framework based on
human dignity drawing on all spiritual traditions.
We are optimistic that there are young people in
Colombia that have taken up that legacy — young
people who are working for peace and the protection
of life in all its forms, including indigenous and AfroColombian women, educators and religious leaders,
LGBTI+ persons, new entrepreneurial figures, all
pooling their efforts, as well as judges, justices, artists,
union members and human rights defenders.
Colombia has a long way to go, but it has begun its
journey. It has accepted fearlessly the historical truth
of its own tragedy and is determined to look forward
to the future we will build, accepting our wounds, to
ultimately enrich ourselves as a culture and as a people
driven by creativity, art, freedom and the very creation
of life.
May it be that the lesson of Colombia is to reject war
everywhere for all time and lead us to passionately seek
truth and the dignity of human beings. For Colombia
and for the world, there will be a future if there is truth.
The President: I thank Mr. De Roux Rengifo for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Casso Piamba.
Ms. Casso Piamba (spoke in Spanish): As a leader
of indigenous women in the Cauca department, today
I wish to extend to the Council fraternal greetings,
greetings of resistance, unity and strength. I place
the life of each and every one present in the hands of
Mother Nature, as well as all delegations, the Mission of
Brazil to the United Nations, our Vice-President, Marta
Lucía Ramírez, with particular greetings to Mr. Juan
Carlos Vargas, all of whom gave our municipalities that
experienced armed conflict the opportunity to have
a country that has now embarked upon the journey
to peace.
My name is Jineth Casso Piamba, an indigenous
woman from San Lorenzo de Caldono. In my experience
as a community leader over the past 11 years, I have
made efforts devoted to protecting human rights and the
economic empowerment of women and to promoting
and strengthening the political participation of women
in decision-making arenas, thus making it possible to
6/24

14/07/2022

create spaces that allow equality between women and
men and spaces leading to the building of peace.
When negotiations on the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting
Peace were announced, it was a relief, a cry of hope and
an act of rebirth, a new feeling that arose from the depths
of the souls of women and life-giving families, who
dreamed of dawns full of light and hope and of warm
and calm evenings around the hearth accompanied by
wise words from the elders.
Caldono has a great deal of experience with the
transformation that can take place with the laying down
of arms and the integration of former combatants into
civil society, as two territorial areas for training and
reintegration were established in our town. That was a
deeply significant action that made it possible to rebuild
emotions, lives, spaces and homes that had been torn
apart and abandoned as a result of the armed conflict.
After the signing of the agreement, forums were
revitalized, with the help of the community and people
in the context of a process of reintegration, thus
creating bonds of friendship and renewed trust. We
also had members of the international community visit
our town because we were the second most heavily
affected by the armed conflict — a community that
for 40 years was stigmatized, isolated and excluded by
institutional frameworks, a community that was denied
the opportunity to shine and to draw attention to its
richness and to all its capacities.
For us and the country, it was of utmost importance
to strategically plan cross-cutting policies that allowed
for integral land reform, such as programmes with a
territorial focus, within which long-term decisions were
taken such as the development of a road map for each of
the 16 regions involved. Those included support in the
area of health care, including sexual and reproductive
health care for women, with, inter alia, an increase in
the resources allocated to women, and efforts to make
more visible the fact that in order for families to thrive,
women must have decent homes for them and their
families. That is particularly true for women that have
been affected by the armed conflict and those who are
heads of household.
Unfortunately, as part of the journey that we have
completed in the last few years, 42 young people have
been killed, including authorities and social leaders,
and an average of 82 young people between the ages
of 12 and 22 have been recruited by illegal armed
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

groups unknown in our territories. In the context of
our goal of creating spaces for women and promoting
their leadership in our regions, that caused concern and
worry among our families, affecting women directly
as leaders in their communities, mothers, wives,
sisters, which means that they experience these effects
more intensely, which shows that there is a need to
work harder to defend rights, security and peace for
our women.
We are aware of the engagement of this Government
and of the different entities, and we wish to call on the
country to set its eyes on these lands, so that we can work
as a team and achieve the creation of better conditions
for living with dignity through the comprehensive
implementation of the peace agreement, in particular
its gender provisions and the ethnic chapter.
For this change to occur, it is important to continue
supporting productive and economic empowerment
projects for women; generate spaces and guarantees of
education for women that reduce gender inequalities
and ensure progress in the rights of rural women,
building on programmes where the specific needs and
rights of women are included; guarantee progress in
creating scenarios for women’s political participation
and improve the protection and security situation for
women leaders and human rights defenders; provide
guarantees for the reincorporation of peace signatories,
particularly women; make progress on a communityreincorporation approach that allows us to structure civil
society and reincorporation personnel; keep people who
were victimized on the basis of their gender or ethnicity
at the centre of the follow-up on the recommendations
contained in the Truth Commission’s final report,
keeping in mind that we are a major part of the victims
of the armed conflict; and safeguard transitional
justice’s approach to sexual violence in order to repair
and transform our lives and our territories.
The monitoring of the different approaches is crucial,
taking into account that multiple axes drive progress in
efforts to comply with implementation of the agreement,
and, accordingly, they depend on a large number
of decentralized entities, including departmental,
municipal and local authorities, as well as the allocation
of the necessary technical and financial resources.
This also implies an inter-institutional coordination
effort that must be strengthened to make progress in
the rural victim population’s — and particularly the
rural ethnic population’s — effective enjoyment of
their human rights from the same multidimensional

S/PV.9094

perspective, which allows communities to continue
to be strengthened and ensures a peaceful country for
new generations.
I am grateful to the Security Council for inviting
me to be present in this space. I reiterate with all my
heart that Caldono, the Department of Cauca and
my beloved country, Colombia, are all full of good
people — fighters and dreamers who work tirelessly to
build a peaceful country — and we hope to continue to
have the support of the Council and the international
community as we work to realize this great dream.
From the womb of Mother Nature and Mother Earth
and from all that our life-giving womb represents,
we will keep weaving resistance, joy, sisterhood and
solidarity together to continue to build peace, not
just for Colombia but for the world. From the town of
Caldono, I extend a grateful embrace.
The President: I thank Ms. Casso Piamba for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to those Council members who
wish to make statements.
Dame Barbara Woodward (United Kingdom): I
would like to start by thanking Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu for his briefing
and for the work of his team. I would also like to express
appreciation for and pay tribute to our briefers, Father
de Roux Rengifo and Ms. Casso Piamba, and welcome
Foreign Minister Ramírez to our meeting today. We
appreciate the Foreign Minister’s dedicated engagement
with the Security Council throughout her tenure.
I would like to make three points today. First, I
would like to congratulate the people of Colombia for
making their voices heard in last month’s presidential
election. We commend political stakeholders, officials
and volunteers for their dedication and for helping
to ensure that the election was fair, inclusive and
recognized by all parties.
We commend President-elect Petro’s commitment to
comprehensive implementation of the Final Agreement
and to addressing the challenges that remain. Foremost
among these challenges, as we have heard, will be
ensuring security for vulnerable communities affected
by violence, displacement and confinement. We
welcome the incoming Administration’s commitment
to creating the conditions for sustained and durable
peace in Colombia and hope that a resumption of talks

22-425887/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

with the Ejército de Liberación Nacional will contribute
to this.
Secondly, the United Kingdom welcomes the
publication of the Truth Commission’s final report, a
vital milestone in Colombia’s reconciliation process.
We pay tribute to the Commissioners’ hard work
in this vast undertaking, and to the thousands of
victims who gave evidence, for their courage. The
United Kingdom is committed to helping all parties
implement the Commission’s recommendations and to
supporting the follow-up committee that will supervise
their implementation.
Thirdly, we continue to encourage the acceleration
of rural reform. While significant steps have been taken
so far, accelerated progress on the territorially focused
development programmes and the multipurpose cadastre
should help build confidence in the commitment to
peace and advance rural development to support the
transformation of conflict-affected regions.
In conclusion, the United Kingdom remains fully
committed to supporting Colombia on its path to
lasting peace and to helping the people of Colombia to
overcome the challenges that remain.
Ms. Juul (Norway): We thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ruiz Massieu
for his briefing on important developments in Colombia,
and Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba for her compelling words.
We also thank and warmly welcome Vice-President
Marta Lucía Ramírez, and we offer a special thanks
to Father Francisco de Roux Rengifo for his very
important work.
I would like to congratulate Colombia on its
peaceful and orderly elections and commend the
main political actors for the dignified way they have
behaved after the election results were known. Their
constructive conduct throughout the election and their
openness to further dialogue are encouraging and give
further promise of a prosperous Colombia.
As a guarantor country, Norway finds Presidentelect Petro’s call for national unity, underscoring that
peace will be a central goal of his Administration,
reassuring. Council members may be assured that,
if desired by the parties, we will stand by our
commitments as a guarantor country. That will also
be the case should a dialogue with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional materialize.
8/24

14/07/2022

The Truth Commission released its final report
on 28 June. The Commission has carried out a titanic
task, hearing thousands of testimonies and scrutinizing
countless reports and documents. The result, as we
saw in this Chamber today, is impressive. While
healing will certainly take time, it is our hope that
the report will be instrumental in trying to mend the
wounds after more than 50 years of violent conflict.
We encourage all sectors of Colombian society, and in
particular the incoming Government, to follow up on
the Commission’s recommendations.
We would like to commend the members of the
final secretariat of the former Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
(FARC-EP) for their testimony during the public
hearings in the Special Jurisdiction for Peace regarding
case 01. The way in which the top commanders of the
former FARC-EP assumed personal responsibility,
asked for forgiveness and provided further details
about the crimes committed should serve as an
example to all the other actors and entities whose
cases are being examined by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace. Likewise, we commend the former members
of the military who recognized their responsibility
and acknowledged that civilian victims were falsely
reported as guerrilla members killed in combat during
the first public hearing in case 03. I would again like
to express Norway’s appreciation and admiration
for all who have provided truthful testimony to the
Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace,
including, of course, the victims.
As we have said on numerous occasions, the
Comprehensive System of Truth, Justice, Reparation
and Non-Repetition is a crucial instrument for
delivering justice after the violent internal conflict. It
puts the victims at the centre and is perhaps the most
sophisticated system of its kind globally. Colombians
can be proud of it, as it can serve as an inspiration and
model for transitional justice systems elsewhere. The
Commission’s report and the way in which the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace is carrying out its mandate are
also evidence of the system’s virtues.
Nonetheless, Norway remains concerned about
the security situation for former combatants and local
leaders working to implement the peace agreement. We
urge the incoming Government to take the necessary
steps to improve the situation and encourage the new
Administration to step up the implementation of
the accord’s provisions with regard to rural reform,
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

political participation and ethnic and gender issues. In
other words, we encourage the Government to work
strategically to continue to overcome the root causes of
Colombia’s conflict.
Let me end by thanking Vice-President Marta
Lucía Ramírez and her Government for the cooperation
extended to us over the past four years and by reiterating
that Norway remains committed to supporting her
country in its efforts to ensure peace and prosperity for
the Colombian people.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome the personal participation
of Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Foreign Minister of
Colombia, and Francisco José de Roux Rengifo in
today’s meeting, as well as the briefing by Ms. Jineth
Casso Piamba. We thank Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Head of
the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia,
for his briefing on the situation in the country.
At our last meeting (see S/PV.9015), the mood was
one of anxiety as we considered the outcomes of the
five years that had elapsed since the signing of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable
and Lasting Peace. Today we have definite reasons
for taking a more positive view of the prospects for
seeing that historic document implemented. Colombia’s
recent elections demonstrated that the existential need
for a lasting peace process is supported by millions
of Colombians from various political camps. It was
affirmed by the election victory for the forces calling
for an end to the many years of conflict, which have left
the country with countless victims and tragedies. We
will never tire of repeating that the agreement has not
only brought about a long-awaited end to a half-century
of internal armed conflict, but it has also provided the
peace process with the support of the international
community as represented by the Security Council.
There is no question that there is a great deal of
work facing the Government in implementing its
obligations. The traditional challenges are still there
in the form of issues such as agrarian reform, crop
substitution, the safety of the civilian population
and the economic, political and legal reintegration of
participants into the peace process. We hope that the
leaders of the country will at last begin to relate to
ex-combatants as participants in the peace process,
not former enemies. Between the previous report and
this one the members of the Security Council are now
reading that Colombian society must overcome its

S/PV.9094

entrenched stigmatization and contradictions and learn
to look towards a common future, and we believe that
such a change in the relations among the partners in
the peace process is long overdue. Overcoming this
difficult legacy is also the responsibility of the Truth
Commission, which published its comprehensive
report on 28 June, an event we can only applaud. It is
yet another example of Colombian society’s desire for
genuine reconciliation and confirms the viability of the
peace agreement, which has remained relevant despite
the attempts that have been made over the past four
years to torpedo its implementation.
We agree with the conclusions of the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/513) that the election of
Gustavo Petro Urrego as President and Francia Márquez
as Vice-President, the first Afro-Colombian to hold
that position, allows us to hope for a new impetus in
the Government’s implementation of its commitments
under the Final Agreement. We are hearing appropriate
assurances and hope that we will see palpable positive
change. Russia is firmly committed to continuing to
help Colombia, a country that is a friend to us, to a
thorough restoration of peace. In that context, we
welcome the remarks by the President-elect and the
head of the National Liberation Army concerning their
efforts to begin negotiations without the deliberately
unacceptable preconditions that have previously
hindered the prospects for peace. We hope that the
renewed management team will enable the inclusion
of forces that were previously on the sidelines of the
peacebuilding process.
In every one of our statements we have reiterated
that genuine peace in the country is impossible without
the consensus of all of the main players, and Colombia’s
relations with its neighbours are no less important to
lasting peace. We hope that the Government of Gustavo
Petro will show political acumen and consider the
possibility of re-establishing relations with Venezuela,
beginning with the issue of border security. That would
be a major blow to criminality and could provide some
insurance against any possible misunderstandings or
provocations that might have dangerous consequences.
As a permanent member of the Security Council,
Russia will continue to support the Colombian peace
process to ensure that it is lasting and irreversible.
We express our full support for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia, under the leadership
of Carlos Ruiz Massieu, and to Cuba and Norway, the
guarantors of the Final Agreement.

22-425889/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu and President of the Truth
Commission Francisco José de Roux Rengifo for their
briefings. I also listened carefully to the statement by
the representative of civil society. And I welcome the
presence of Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President
and Foreign Minister of Colombia, at today’s meeting.
China welcomed the successful holding of the
second set of presidential elections in Colombia since
the signing in 2016 of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
and appreciates the commitment of President-elect
Petro to implementing the peace agreement, as well as
his call for national unity and his focus on achieving
peace as the new Government’s core goal. We hope that
his Government will build on the achievements that
have already been made, actively promote the peace
process in Colombia, work to address the challenges in
implementing the peace agreement and consolidate the
hard-won peace gains.
The spread of violence by illegal armed groups in
some areas of Colombia has seriously threatened the
safety of civilians, especially women and children,
and has been disrupting the peace process. China is
pleased that President-elect Petro has expressed a
willingness to resume peace talks with the Fuerzas
Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del
Pueblo and begin dialogue with other armed groups
that have yet to join the peace process. We hope that
the new Government will commit to improving the
security situation in the conflict-affected areas through
dialogue and negotiations to end the armed conflict
once and for all, and by strengthening the deployment
of security forces in conflict-affected areas where
the Government lacks effective control with a view
to protecting civilians, especially women, children,
minorities and former combatants.
Development is key to eradicating the root causes of
violence and conflict. As the Secretary-General pointed
out in his report (S/2022/513), the provisions of the
peace agreement are closely interlinked, and security
and development are inseparable. Fully implementing
the key provisions of the peace agreement, such as
rural reform, the reintegration of former combatants
and the substitution of illicit crops, requires sustained
Government investment in order to accelerate the
distribution of land and housing, which will provide
the necessary conditions for the reintegration of former
10/24

14/07/2022

combatants and ensure balanced development in every
region of the country. We hope that the Peacebuilding
Commission and the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime will play an active role in that regard and
provide additional support.
The ultimate goal of transitional justice is to achieve
lasting peace. The Special Jurisdiction for Peace
recently held the first public hearings on the voluntary
acknowledgement of responsibility for war crimes and
crimes against humanity during the conflict. The Truth
Commission also released its final report on the causes
of the conflict and its recommendations for preventing
further conflict. These are important developments
in the transitional justice process. Lasting peace and
reconciliation require justice processes in which all
crimes committed during the conflict are made public
and the perpetrators acknowledge their responsibility
and are held to account. At the same time, lasting peace
requires strengthening social inclusion and cohesion
so that everyone can enjoy the peace dividends and
development opportunities on an equal footing,
embodying the concept that peace is rooted in people’s
hearts. That is the only way that the transitional
justice process can effectively play its central role in
eliminating the potential for conflict.
The peace process in Colombia is a success story
in which we are seeing an end brought to the conflict
and peace restored through dialogue and negotiations.
China appreciates the important role played by the
United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia in
supporting the peace process on the ground. We hope
that the Mission will maintain cooperation with the
new Government and strengthen coordination with
the United Nations country team in order to expand
its contribution to the achievement of lasting peace,
stability and sustainable development in Columbia as
soon as possible.
China firmly supports Colombia in its efforts to
fully implement the peace agreement. We stand ready
to work with the rest of the international community to
continue to support the Colombian-led and Colombianowned peace process. I look forward to seeing the
Colombian people make additional progress in
reconstruction and peacebuilding.
Mr. DeLaurentis (United States of America): I
thank Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1
Ruiz Massieu for his briefing and presentation of the
report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/513) and for
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

his and his team’s work. The role of the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia in supporting
peace and reconciliation in Colombia continues to be
essential. As always, we welcome the presence of Vice
President and Foreign Minister Marta Lucía Ramírez
in the Security Council today. And I want to thank
Father de Roux Rengifo for joining us and for the vital
work of the Truth Commission. I have to say honestly
that I found myself moved and inspired by his words.
His remark that there is a future if there is truth has
universal application and will stay with me for a long
time. I also thank Ms. Casso Piamba for her remarks
and insight into her work, experiences, aspirations and
those of her community.
The United States congratulates the people of
Colombia, President-elect Gustavo Petro and Vice
President-elect Francia Márquez on a free and fair
elections process. We welcome the incoming Petro
Administration’s early efforts to promote a dialogue of
national unity. That is an essential step in overcoming
entrenched polarization and ushering in a Colombia
that is at peace. We also congratulate those elected
to Congress and note that their numbers include 85
women, or 30 per cent, as the Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genera1 noted in his statement — an
increase of 10 per cent. We commend the inclusion of 16
new representatives of rural conflict victims who will
serve in peace seats in the House. They have a vital role
to play in expanding the State presence in neglected
rural areas that have been a focus for violence and in
increasing attention to them.
While the successful democratic elections have
taken centre-stage over the past three months, the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace has also been carrying
out its first public hearings on the acknowledgement of
truth and responsibility. We are encouraged that indicted
individuals voluntarily acknowledged responsibility for
their actions during the conflict and apologized to their
victims. We call for the process to continue peacefully
as the Judicial Panel for Acknowledgement of Truth
and Responsibility weighs those acknowledgements
against information provided by investigators and
victims. We should also note the release on 28 June
of the Truth Commission’s final report. The report
and its recommendations symbolize the end of an
important listening process and the beginning of a
period of reflection on the past and future. Through the
diverse voices represented in the report, we hope that
reconciliation becomes an enduring reality.

S/PV.9094

Much has already been achieved since the signing
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace, and Colombia has
made notable progress in becoming a more peaceful
and inclusive society. However, as we all know, there
are concerns still to be addressed, including ongoing
insecurity. We are seeing a growing number of forced
disappearances and large-scale killings in Colombia,
including of human rights and environmental defenders,
and the security of former combatants is increasingly
threatened by illegal armed groups. Indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities continue to be
disproportionately victimized by illegal armed groups,
an issue compounded by the absence of a State presence
in rural areas. In order to achieve rural land reform and
reintegration, a safe environment must be established
in long-neglected areas.
It is crucial that the United Nations Verification
Mission be able to continue its work and that all chapters
of the peace accord move forward. We welcome the new
Administration’s commitment to the comprehensive
implementation of the agreement, particularly its ethnic
chapter, where progress has lagged behind that of other
chapters. We encourage Colombia to fully meet its
commitments to ethnic communities and improve their
security, rights and opportunities. Colombia should
take pride in its recent elections and commitment to the
democratic process. Although achieving a lasting peace
is no easy task, we know that the people of Colombia
are up to the challenge.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Let me thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 Ruiz Massieu
for his valuable briefing and the remarkable work that
he and his team are doing in Colombia. We welcome the
participation of Father de Roux Rengifo and thank him
for informing the Council about the historic final report
of the Truth Commission. It represents the voice and the
testimony of millions of victims and all who endured
so much suffering during all the years of conflict. As
he rightly said, establishing the truth is the first step
to ensuring justice and accountability, giving hope and
proceeding on a path leading towards sustained peace
and reconciliation in his country. I thank Ms. Casso
Piamba for her briefing. Information from civil
society on the ground always contributes to providing
a meaningful and inclusive discussion in the Security
Council. I also welcome the presence of Vice President
and Foreign Minister Ramírez at this meeting.

22-4258811/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

I would like to congratulate the people of Colombia
on their election of a new President. The high electoral
turnout demonstrates the commitment of the Colombian
people to democracy and stability and attests to
Colombians’ solid anchorage in and true commitment
to democracy and stability. We sincerely commend the
outgoing Government of Colombia for its engagement
in ensuring a free and fair electoral process by creating
peaceful and conducive conditions. We are reassured
that the transitional period will be conducted in a
similar constructive manner.
We welcome the commitment of the Presidentelect to advancing the implementation of the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace, bringing the country together
and initiating a national dialogue with all political
forces, marginalized ethnic groups, civil society and
other important stakeholders, with a strong focus on
the full, equal and meaningful participation of women.
It is very encouraging that, for the first time in the
history of Colombia, a woman representing the AfroColombian community, an environmentalist and a
human rights activist, who herself was a victim of the
conflict, was elected to the high office of Vice-President.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace, created by
the peace agreement to ensure accountability for
the atrocities committed in Colombia, has made
significant progress with the public hearings on the
acknowledgement of truth and responsibility, which is
an important step towards the issuance of restorative
sentences, contributing to victims’ rights to justice
and reconciliation.

14/07/2022

It is our hope that the report of the Truth
Commission will serve as a basis for the long-needed
reconciliation, non-repetition and peacebuilding of the
country, including taking into account victims’ rights
and gender perspective. It is only once all the facts have
been established that the country might be given a real
chance to move beyond the suffering of the past.
Yet, as we know and as we heard, many challenges
and obstacles remain. Civilians in various parts of the
country continue to suffer serious abuses at the hands
of guerrillas of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional,
dissidents of the Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia and paramilitary successor groups. Human
rights defenders, journalists, indigenous and AfroColombian leaders and other community activists face
death threats and violence.
For that reason, the State needs to establish
its authority and consolidate its presence in areas
historically affected by the conflict. Criminal gangs
and armed groups need to be dismantled once and
for all. The Government needs to take adequate
steps to address all those issues and, most important,
protect civilians.
We encourage the incoming Government and the
people of Colombia to keep up such momentum with the
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement
and to advance with reforms on the key issues that are
lagging behind, such as land reform and ethnic and
gender provisions.

We welcome the long-awaited final report
presented by the Truth Commission after years of and
extensive dialogue — an important milestone in the
healing process for the people of Colombia. It will shed
full light on nearly six decades of conflict, atrocities
and human rights violations committed during the
country’s armed conflict.

The progress achieved in Colombia is, by all
accounts, strong and promising. The presidential
election opens a new chapter for the country, which we
want to see as a continuation of the consolidation of
peace, democracy and social justice. Inclusive dialogue,
genuine reconciliation and justice are the key words
that will, in our view, define the future of Colombia.
That is what the people voted for last month, and we
look forward to seeing them implemented to the benefit
of the country and its people.

The account in the report is heartbreaking. The
civilian population has suffered unimaginable hardship
and suffering, such as families not knowing the fate
of their loved ones and women, used as a weapon of
war, testifying to brutal sexual violence during their
captivity — a despicable expression of power to
intimidate and spread terror.

Mr. Benaabou (France) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Carlos Ruiz Massieu, Mr. Francisco José
de Roux Rengifo and Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba for
their briefings. I welcome the presence among us of
the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Colombia, Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez.

12/24

22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

Colombia is a model for the international
community. The Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace
is a historic achievement, and its implementation
is essential to building peace on a daily basis, while
facing the reality of half a century of conflict.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, it is positive that the presidential elections
were held peacefully and without major disruption.
That election and the changeover that it marked show
the strength of Colombian democracy. We welcome
the commitment of the Colombian President-elect to
implementing the Final Agreement in its entirety.
Secondly, France welcomes the publication of the
Truth Commission’s report. It is a remarkable piece of
work and an essential step on the path to reconciliation.
The Special Jurisdiction for Peace is making progress,
placing the victims at the heart of the process, as
evidenced by the first public truth hearings. They pave
the way for the first restorative sentences, which will be
a turning point. All parties to the conflict must engage
in those justice and truth efforts as a necessary step
towards the return of lasting peace in the country.
Thirdly, the continuing violence in Colombia
threatens the peace agreement. Security guarantees are
insufficient. In every report of the Secretary-General,
we hear of the killings of ex-combatants, human rights
defenders and social leaders. The Colombian State
must put an end to that. That means strengthening
the State presence in the areas historically overlooked
by the Final Agreement. We also call on all parties
concerned to fully implement the Secretary-General’s
recommendations to end the recruitment, use and
abduction of children by armed groups.
Viable socioeconomic opportunities must be
provided to the populations that have suffered from the
conflict. To achieve permanent peace, even more needs
to be done with regard to rural reform, access to land
and access to housing. The chapters of the agreement
that deal with inclusiveness and the situation of women
and young people are also essential.
France welcomes the progress made by Colombia
since 2016, but challenges remain. We call on the
Colombian authorities to continue and expedite the full
implementation of the agreement and to allocate the
necessary resources. That is the surest way to entrench
peace in Colombia.

S/PV.9094

Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates): At the
outset, we thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ruiz Massieu and Mr. Francisco José de Roux
Rengifo for their valuable briefings and all their work
in Colombia. We also thank Ms. Casso Piamba for her
valuable insights. We welcome the participation of Her
Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez, Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, in
this meeting.
The United Arab Emirates will focus on three main
points today: the political situation, transitional justice
and the security situation.
First, we congratulate Colombia on the successful
presidential elections in June. Colombia is starting
a new chapter in its history, and the United Arab
Emirates supports its path towards peace and stability.
We thank the current Administration for its efforts
in implementing the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace,
and we wish the incoming Administration success
in building on such efforts going forward. At this
critical stage, it is important to prioritize the full and
comprehensive implementation of the peace agreement,
particularly the provisions on gender and protecting the
most vulnerable. The Special Forum on Gender and
the formation of the peace and victims’ caucus can
support and strengthen the implementation of the Final
Agreement’s provisions.
Secondly, on transitional justice, we support the
survivor-centred approach to reconciliation and the
progress made by the Comprehensive System for Truth,
Justice, Reparations and Non-Repetition, including
the Truth Commission’s recent publication of its
final report. While that publication is an opportunity
for the Colombian people to reflect on their past, its
recommendations point the way to a future of hope for
the generations to come. In that context, we support
the Commission’s efforts to establish a committee to
monitor the implementation of its recommendations.
Along with the other components of the
Comprehensive System, those mechanisms will
contribute to strengthening accountability. Moreover,
the Commission’s efforts to include young women and
young men in those processes is critical and reinforces
the fundamental role of youth in peace efforts.
Thirdly, we remain concerned about the security
situation and the continued attacks against civilians,
former combatants and security forces. Swift and

22-4258813/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

decisive steps must be taken to address the violence and
ensure that it does not undermine the implementation of
the peace agreement. Any efforts for dialogue will make
sustainable progress only if they are complemented
by other elements of the agreement, including to
fully implement security guarantees and disarm,
demobilize and reintegrate armed groups, particularly
the children affected by the conflict. Those efforts
must also be gender-responsive, not least because of the
disproportionate impact that violence has on women
and girls. We encourage the increased deployment of
women officers and the provision of training to address
the particular challenges that women face, including
sexual and gender-based violence.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its commitment to supporting Colombia in its journey
to achieve sustainable peace and stability. We also
reaffirm our full support for the United Nations
Verification Mission in Colombia and its efforts.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): Let me begin by thanking
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos
Ruiz Massieu; the President of the Truth Commission,
Father Francisco José de Roux Rengifo; and civilsociety representative Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba for
their respective briefings. I also welcome the presence
of the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs
of Colombia, Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
at today’s meeting.
The peaceful holding of presidential elections
in Colombia is indeed a significant development. It
is encouraging to see that the people of Colombia
once again have reposed their faith in democracy by
participating in record numbers in the elections for the
second time since the signing of the Final Agreement for
Ending the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting.
That is a clear indication of the trust and commitment of
the people to the agreement. For that, we congratulate
the people and the Government of Colombia. We also
congratulate the President-elect, Mr. Gustavo Petro.
We heard from the President of the Truth
Commission today as to why the release of the final
report of the Truth Commission is a historic moment.
We hope that the findings and recommendations of
the Truth Commission will greatly contribute to the
process of reconciliation and help in moving towards
a more inclusive, peaceful, secure and prosperous
future for all Colombians. We take positive note of the
historic first hearings of truth and acknowledgement
14/24

14/07/2022

of responsibility held by the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace, which is testimony to the significant progress
made by the transitional justice system enshrined in the
peace agreement.
The objectives of the peace agreement are
ambitious, and their realization will require time.
While we need to appreciate the positive developments
that Colombia has witnessed in the last few years, we
also have to be cognizant of the impediments to the
implementation of the peace agreement that remain.
We believe that the solutions to issues such as security,
rural reforms, crop substitution and the rehabilitation
of ex-combatants are intrinsically linked to political
reforms, decentralization, the extension of State
authority and reconciliation.
There have been serious security incidents involving
threats, killings and the subsequent displacement
of cooperative members, impacting reintegration
initiatives. The disputes between illegal armed groups,
including dissident groups of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo
over territorial control, and illegal trafficking routes
remain a concern. Indigenous and Afro-Colombian
communities, including women and children, have
continued to suffer from persistent violence.
We appreciate the fact that despite those
challenges, the Colombian authorities are making
progress in addressing the security, housing and land
guarantees enshrined in the peace agreement. We
believe that the prioritization of rural reforms aimed at
increasing employment and livelihood opportunities is
fundamental to sustaining peace.
The President-elect has also underscored the
importance of the implementation of the peace
agreement. There have been attempts to engage
the Ejército de Liberación Nacional as part of the
reconciliation initiatives. We hope that that positive
trend will continue in the coming months and that the
gains made so far will be consolidated.
India values its bilateral ties with Colombia, with
which we share a relationship spanning six decades.
The increase in the frequency of high-level visits and
engagements, especially over the past year, is testimony
to the strength of our relationship, which is based on
shared democratic values and development goals. Over
the years our bilateral relations have deepened and
diversified in areas such as space, health, science and
technology and biotechnology. There is growing interest
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

among Colombians about India’s culture and heritage.
We are committed to expanding and deepening our
development and trade partnership with Colombia.
In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that while
the peace process in Colombia continues to be a source of
inspiration, the international community must continue
with its responsibility to support the Government and
the people of Colombia in their journey to consolidate
and sustain peace. In that direction, we support the work
of the United Nations Verification Mission in Colombia
and the initiatives of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
assessment today and to offer special thanks to Padre
De Roux for his thoughtful and really inspirational
briefing. I also thank Jineth for her powerful words to
us today as well. I would like to especially welcome
Vice-President Ramírez and thank her for her sincere
and consistent engagement with the Council and
its members.
The past reporting period has borne witness to a
number of historic moments in Colombia. We welcome
the largely peaceful conduct of presidential elections in
May and June and the commitment of all candidates to
upholding the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict
and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We stand
ready to support the incoming Government throughout
the transition period and beyond.
This is an opportunity for actors from
across Colombian society to recommit to the full
implementation of the accord. As a new Congress is
inaugurated next week, the formation of the “peace and
victims’ caucus”, consisting of the 16 representatives
of the special transitional electoral districts for peace,
will further bring the voices of victims and survivors
to the table.
We also welcome efforts to engage Colombian
youth in political participation and peacebuilding,
including by the platform of women’s organizations
Ruta Pacífica de las Mujeres.
The Colombian transitional justice system took
significant steps over the reporting period. The public
acknowledgement of responsibility and truth in Cases 01
and 03 of the Special Jurisdiction for Peace represented
historic progress in addressing legacy injustices in
Colombia. We look forward to continued progress

S/PV.9094

in those and other cases and to the first issuance of
restorative sentences later this year.
The final report of the Truth Commission, as
powerfully shared earlier by Padre de Roux, contains
important recommendations and presents a platform
upon which national reconciliation and healing
can and must be built. The Unit for the Search for
Persons Deemed Missing continues its critical work in
providing deserved closure to grieving families. The
continued safe and meaningful participation of victims
in those processes is essential to the legitimacy of the
institutions and is also fundamental to ensuring dignity
and non-repetition.
I look forward to facilitating an in-depth discussion
on the transitional justice system in Colombia at this
afternoon’s Arria Formula meeting.
While working to acknowledge the injustices
of the past, we must also recognize and address
those that still occur in the present. For communities
across Colombia, particularly indigenous and AfroColombian communities, violence remains an everyday
reality, through victimization by armed groups, sexual
and gender-based violence, forced displacement,
confinement and forced child recruitment.
Those who stand up in support of peace, human
rights and dignity continue to be targeted, threatened,
and, in some cases, they lose their lives. The continued
killing of signatories to the peace agreement, most
recently Ronald Rojas, is a deplorable and unacceptable
price to pay for committing to a peaceful future. In
particular, we know the cost for women who stand up
for themselves and their communities, such as Jesusita
Moreno in Cali: it is often fatal. Accountability for such
crimes must be ensured, and impunity eradicated.
Effective resourcing of the Comprehensive
Programme for Safeguards for Women Leaders and
Human Rights Defenders is absolutely essential. The
full and timely implementation of the gender provisions
of the peace agreement will further aid these efforts.
Progress is also required on the National
Commission on Security Guarantees, including the
adoption and implementation of the public policy to
dismantle illegal armed groups. Those guarantees
are critical to reducing violence and providing safety
and security to those who have committed themselves
to peace.

22-4258815/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

At this moment of political transition, truth and
accountability, Colombia stands at an important
juncture. The support of the Security Council and the
international community for the implementation of
the Colombian peace accord is as vital as ever. Ireland
will continue to stand with the Colombian Government
and the Colombian people. We remain committed to a
shared, equitable, inclusive and peaceful future.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Ghana
and Kenya.
We thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Ms. Jineth Casso
Piamba for their briefings, and we welcome the
powerful testimony of Mr. Francisco José de Roux
Rengifo, the President of the Truth Commission. We
further welcome the participation of the representative
of Colombia, Her Excellency Ms. Marta Lucía Ramírez,
Vice-President and Minister for Foreign Affairs. We
thank her for her positive and illuminating engagement
with the Security Council over the past four years. We
wish her all the best in her future endeavours.
We convey our heartfelt congratulations to
President-elect Gustavo Petro and the Vice-Presidentelect Francia Márquez. Their election by the people
of Colombia offers an opportunity for the accelerated
implementation of the Final Agreement. It also
promises a new era of inclusion in the country’s policies
that would encourage the realization of the provisions
of the ethnic chapter of the peace agreement and the
constitutional requirement to treat all Colombians
fairly and equally.
In line with the African Union’s Constitutive Act,
which recognizes Africa’s diaspora as a sixth region,
we applaud the election of Ms. Francia Márquez as the
first Afro-Colombian to attain such high office. Her
election reflects her powerful talents as a leader and the
Colombian peoples’ embrace of their country’s diversity.
We take this opportunity to send our brotherly regards
to the Afro-Colombian community and to applaud its
resilience and strong spirit of hope over generations of
people who have faced great difficulties and obstacles.
The Colombian peace process has valuable lessons
to teach the world on how to end a protracted war and
embark on the road to lasting peace and reconciliation.
The Colombian Government’s positive and proactive
engagement with the Security Council should be
16/24

14/07/2022

closely studied and utilized by other countries in
serious conflict.
Significant progress has been made in the five years
since the signing of the Final Agreement. However, as
many Colombians will accept, there is still a lot to be
done. We are encouraged by the conciliatory messages
from the President-elect and are optimistic that his
Government will inject the necessary energy, dynamism
and commitment in furthering the peace process. As
the A3, as constituted now, and in future, we will
continue to support and view the implementation of
the ethnic chapter as the clearest proof of commitment
and success.
The full reintegration of former combatants
into society remains key to the success of the peace
process. The A3 commends the positive progress on
the development programmes with territorial focus
and the comprehensive rural reform, as well as the
consolidation of former territorial areas for training and
reintegration. However, the slow progress in gaining
access to land for those living outside the territorial
areas, including former combatants of indigenous and
Afro-Colombian origin, is an undermining factor. We
call on the authorities to resolve any issues surrounding
the full implementation of these provisions.
In order to address problems facing former
combatants of indigenous and Afro-Colombian descent,
we reiterate the need for adequate and reliable resource
allocation for the Special High-Level Forum of Ethnic
Peoples. We further encourage all parties to make
use of the Commission for the Follow-up, Promotion
and Verification of the Final Agreement to resolve
any differences.
Transitional justice remains the cornerstone
of Colombia’s peace process. The A3 applauds the
progress within the Comprehensive System for Truth,
Justice, Reparation and Non-Repetition. In particular,
we welcome the report of the Truth Commission as
a landmark achievement. The A3 salutes the victims
who had the courage to share their stories, painful as
they might have been. We hope that this report and the
implementation of its recommendations will serve as a
vehicle to bring healing and closure to the victims. We
urge all Colombians to build upon the recommendations
to ensure national reconciliation, which will be the
basis for Colombia’s lasting peace and security. In
addition, we recognize the commendable progress
recorded by the Special Jurisdiction for Peace in the
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

pursuit of justice for the victims. We look forward to
the sentencing in Cases 01 and 03 so that the victims
can finally start to heal.
The A3 is cognizant of the link between the illegal
narcotics trade and armed conflict. We reiterate the
importance of the successful resettlement of former
combatants to keep them away from criminality so as
to secure the gains that have been achieved. We laud
the Government’s efforts to eliminate illicit crops
including through the implementation of the National
Comprehensive Programme for Substitution of Illicit
Crops. We encourage the involvement of the affected
communities and the deployment of methods that have
no negative public health or environmental implications.
The A3 is deeply concerned over the persistent
violence targeting former combatants and conflictaffected communities, including the Afro-Colombian
and Indigenous communities, social leaders, women
peacebuilders and human rights activists. We condemn
the horrific crimes, including sexual violence
committed against women and children. We call for
the stepping up of the implementation of the gender
provisions of the Final Agreement, including through
the provision of security and requisite resources for
their productive projects.
We are particularly concerned by reports of
intensified armed confrontations between armed groups,
including the Ejército de Liberación Nacional (ELN).
These confrontations are affecting innocent civilians,
especially in the departments of Chocó and Arauca. We
underscore the need for urgent implementation of the
National Commission security guarantees extended to
the vulnerable, taking into consideration gender needs.
The A3 supports all efforts that seek to consolidate
the peace process, including through the incorporation
of groups that are not parties to the Final Agreement.
We applaud the efforts by stakeholders encouraging the
Government and the ELN to engage in dialogue, and
we welcome the willingness expressed by both the ELN
and the President-elect in this regard. We urge both
parties to pursue constructive dialogue for the greater
good of the country. Furthermore, it is absolutely
essential for the Government of Colombia to creatively
explore avenues for the normalization of relations
with all its neighbours, as that is key to the continued
security and prosperity of the Colombian people and
regional stability.

S/PV.9094

Finally, we extend our sincere appreciation to
President Iván Duque and his Government for their
commitment to the peace process over the past four
years, including the implementation of the peace
agreement. In conclusion, the A3 reaffirms its solidarity
with the Government and the people of Colombia in
their pursuit of peace and prosperity. We also offer our
unwavering support to the United Nations Verification
Mission in Colombia.
Mr. Cisneros Chávez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Carlos Ruiz Massieu and Mr. Francisco José de Roux
Rengifo, President of the Truth Commission, for their
briefings. Mexico also welcomes Ms. Jineth Casso
Piamba and the fact that once again space has been made
for civil society to participate in our discussions on the
situation in Colombia. We hope that healthy practice
will continue. I also welcome the Vice-President and
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, Ms. Marta
Lucía Ramírez, to today’s meeting.
As we heard, Colombia is at a key juncture
in its history following its successful conclusion
of presidential elections. The electoral process
demonstrated the maturity of Colombia’s institutions
and its people’s commitment to democracy. The
turnout in the second round of the presidential elections
reached historic levels and sent a clear message that
the Colombian people rejected any attempt to hinder
the exercise of democracy with violence. My country
welcomes the commitment of President-elect Gustavo
Petro to implementing the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace.
We also welcome his initiative aimed at achieving
total peace, which includes, among other things,
a resumption of negotiations with the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional. During the transitional period it
will be important to ensure that the Security Council
provides the Colombian authorities with unequivocal
support in following up on the major progress achieved
to date and resolving outstanding issues.
With regard to the implementation of the peace
agreement, we agree with the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/513) that much has already been achieved
in Colombia. Despite the remaining challenges, the
country is now more peaceful and inclusive, thanks to
efforts made by all Colombians to address their painful
past. We therefore acknowledge the commitment of
the former combatants who have continued to work to
bring about peace, especially their gradual involvement

22-4258817/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

in productive projects, in which 74 per cent of female
former combatants are already participating. In that
regard, we believe it is now crucial to take steps to
ensure that the reintegration of former combatants
is sustainable, something that will require staunch
political will and predictable and stable funding.
We must also seek solutions that enable women to
assume greater responsibility for project management
and the entire process of implementing the agreement.
That requires greater investment in training and in the
provision of services such as day care that give women
the time and conditions they need to play an active role
in decision-making. In that regard, it is unacceptable
that until now, members of the country’s indigenous
and Afro-Colombian communities have been almost
entirely sidelined from political participation. We
therefore welcome the historic fact that an AfroColombian woman will hold the vice-presidency of
the country for the first time, and we congratulate
Ms. Francia Márquez.
Mexico recognizes the sensitive and complex but
very necessary work being done in the area of transitional
justice. We welcome in particular the comprehensive
report of the Truth Commission and urge the authorities
to consider its recommendations, while engaging
in close dialogue with all the parties involved in the
peace process. The report reaffirms the commitment to
putting victims at the heart of the implementation of the
peace, which is the right approach. We also welcome
the holding of the first public hearings of the Special
Jurisdiction for Peace on cases of abductions, forced
disappearances and executions carried out by the
Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de Colombia. Those
are decisive steps towards genuine reconciliation,
which can ensure that past atrocities are not repeated.
And my country acknowledges the contributions of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
in this area, which were vital to establishing the Truth
Commission and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace.
In conclusion, I would like to express Mexico’s
serious concern about the violence perpetrated against
activists and social leaders. We urge the authorities
to strengthen existing protection mechanisms and to
resolve the structural causes of such violence. The plight
of children who have been victims of forced recruitment
by armed groups also demands the Government’s
full attention. To a large extent the future of peace in
Colombia is in the hands of the younger generations.
18/24

14/07/2022

We believe that they will know how to prevent repeats
of mistakes made in the past.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Brazil.
I would like to express our appreciation to Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Carlos Ruiz
Massieu for his update. I also thank Mr. Francisco José
de Roux Rengifo, President of the Truth Commission,
and Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba for their briefings. And
I welcome Marta Lucía Ramírez, the Vice-President
and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Colombia, to
the Council.
I am glad of the opportunity to once again commend
the Colombian people for the remarkable job they have
been doing. The historic elections concluded in June, in
which Gustavo Petro was elected President, constitute
more proof of the strength of Colombian democracy
and the country’s institutional maturity. President
Duque’s Administration has consistently shown its
commitment to the comprehensive implementation
of the Final Agreement for Ending the Conflict and
Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. We want to take
this opportunity to recognize and applaud the efforts of
his Administration to start addressing the root causes
of the cycles of political violence in Colombia.
Transitional justice is an area that has steadily
advanced in recent years, as the reports of the
Secretary-General have consistently shown. Brazil
welcomes the final report of the Truth Commission and
its recommendations. We believe that the Commission’s
work leaves a solid legacy for strengthening the ongoing
efforts for peace and reconciliation in Colombia. We are
glad that the President-elect has voiced his commitment
to the full implementation of the peace agreement so
as to enhance efforts to guarantee the safety of excombatants and strengthen policies regarding women,
indigenous populations and Afro-descendants. Brazil
is fully cognizant that the implementation of the
peace agreement will depend on continued efforts by
multiple Administrations. Enhancing social policies in
historically neglected areas that have suffered badly
in decades of conflict requires time and incremental
work. In that context, we underline that a smooth
transition of power is key to accelerating progress.
We hope that the new Government will know how to
build on the work of the current Administration and
strengthen policies where needed. But we are confident
that political violence will never return to the fore in
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

Colombia and hope that peace can also be achieved
with active insurgent groups such as the Ejército de
Liberación Nacional.
Finally, I would like to stress once again that peace
in Colombia is an achievement of its society. Colombia’s
voluntary decision to involve the United Nations in
monitoring the implementation of its peace agreement
is testament to Colombia’s commitment to peace and
an opportunity for the Council to play an innovative
role in its mission for peace and security. In the current
challenging geopolitical context, we are glad that the
Council has been instrumental in the consolidation
of peace in Colombia. Its strict adherence to the role
that Colombia asked it to perform, as foreseen in the
mandate, remains essential to fostering trust between
the international community and the parties in
the country.
As a neighbour and close country, Brazil reaffirms
its commitment to working with Colombia to ensure a
prosperous path for both of our societies.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Vice-President and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Colombia.
Ms. Lucía Ramírez (Colombia): I would like to
thank you, Mr. President, and of course SecretaryGeneral António Guterres. I would also like to thank
Carlos Ruiz Massieu for his presentation of the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/513). I am grateful
to Ambassador Fernandez De Soto Valderrama and to
Father De Roux Rengifo for his briefing, as well as to
Alejandra Miller and Saul Alonso Franco, members of
the Truth Commission. It has been a pleasure to see
Ms. Jineth Casso Piamba, and I thank her for attesting
to women’s commitment to peace in Colombia. Let me
say that it is very important to Colombia to express our
gratitude all the members of the international community
and of the Security Council for their commitment and
support to Colombia in its quest for a true and stable
peace, which requires a permanent commitment to the
rule of law, as President Duque Márquez mentioned
in the Security Council in April (see S/PV.9015), and
of course to ending drug trafficking, which is a main
driver of violence in Colombia.
We appreciate the sincere commitment to peace in
Colombia, and the friendship and support that have been
shown to our Ambassador, who like me is attending his

S/PV.9094

last Security Council meeting in his current capacity in
order to listen to the briefing by Carlos Ruiz Massieu,
as Head of the United Nations Verification Mission
in Colombia, for which the Council has approved
our Government’s request for an extension, and for
which I am grateful. I also want to thank Ambassador
Fernandez De Soto Valderrama for his commitment
and his extraordinary performance in his high-level
diplomatic roles. He has honoured Colombian foreign
policy not only as my predecessor as Minister for
Foreign Affairs, but also as our current Ambassador to
the United Nations.
(spoke in Spanish)
As you just said, Sir, Brazil’s presidency of the
Security Council is very significant for us in the context
of this highly important and symbolic meeting. I once
again commend Jineth Casso Piamba on her outstanding
briefing via video-teleconference, underscoring the
bravery of so many women and the contribution they
have made to peacebuilding in Colombia. Indigenous
women, indeed all women, are critical to building a
lasting and stable peace in our country. I also want
to highlight the presence of Father De Roux Rengifo,
President of the Truth Commission, whom we met with
on 29 June to discuss the report he had just presented.
At that meeting, President Duque and I were able
to listen to the details of that important report and
provide our own comments. We know that the work of
the Truth Commission is a great moral responsibility,
involving, as it does, listening to the individual voices
of victims and stakeholders. Lasting peace requires
comprehensive, objective and impartial truth. We are
grateful for Father De Roux’s efforts and those of the
other members of the Commission in that regard.
In April, speaking to the members of the Council,
President Duque committed to ensuring that the
stocktaking exercise of the past four years of his
Government would not end today. On the contrary, our
efforts will continue until the very last moment of our
term. We know that what we were able to achieve over
the past few months has brought much progress and
many challenges while also dealing with completely
unpredictable crises such as the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. However, our Government
maintained its commitment to implementing the Final
Agreement for Ending the Conflict and Building a
Stable and Lasting Peace despite the crisis caused by
COVID-19.

22-4258819/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

I want to emphasize the challenge that achieving
peaceful coexistence has been. Colombia is not the
only country in the world to have gone through a
transitional justice process, involving addressing many
difficulties related to years of social polarization,
gaps and divisions that had gone unresolved thanks
to institutional problems and the enormous challenges
posed by illegal groups and their activities. But what is
clear to everyone is that we are making undeniable and
irreversible progress on a path that will lead us towards
the fair, law-abiding, safe, inclusive, developed,
equitable, solidarity-driven and peaceful society that
we all long for.
The agreement signed in 2016, and the efforts of the
Government as part of its policy of peace with legality,
has demanded sensible planning with deliverable
road maps and budgets, led by President Duque
together with his former Counsellor for Stabilization
and Consolidation, Emilio Archila, and the current
Counsellor, Juan Carlos Vargas, who is here with me
today. And I am grateful for the work of both Counsellors
in terms of stabilizing, building and implementing peace
in Colombia. Over the next 10 years, the deliverable
budgets will undoubtedly need to be increased if we
continue to maintain the extraordinary pace of growth
that the Colombian economy has shown internationally
over the past 18 months, with a view to generating more
resources and additional jobs that can create dignified
living conditions for every Colombian citizen.
We hope that the new Government will continue to
move forward with similar economic growth indicators
and to create jobs and additional budget resources
that, as many Council members have emphasized,
can accelerate the implementation of the agreement
with the former Fuerzas Armadas Revolucionarias de
Colombia-Ejército del Pueblo (FARC-EP) and avoid the
risk of any setbacks.
Today Colombia is closer to peace than ever before,
as we have witnessed the dismantling of the continent’s
longest-standing guerrilla group, the surrender of
weapons and the reintegration of most of its members
into civilian life. I say “most”, because unfortunately
we know that not all have been integrated into civilian
life and many are currently involved in drug-trafficking
based in Venezuela. But the political party made up of
the former FARC-EP, now known as the Comunes party,
undoubtedly represents a success that all Colombians,
and the nations within the multilateral system, especially
the members of the Security Council, have engineered.
20/24

14/07/2022

We have reason to be proud and are thankful for that. At
this point, no obstacle must be seen as insurmountable
if Colombia is to continue advancing towards true and
comprehensive peace with the rule of law. Of course,
obstacles remain, and we must persevere in resolving
every one of them.
The implementation of the agreement has made
steady progress, and both the Secretary-General and his
Special Representative are therefore clearly optimistic
in their respective report and briefing, as are we.
Colombia can tell the world that peace and reconciliation
are possible when an entire country demonstrates
the necessary political will and determination, and
especially when it can rely on the support of the
international community. During the conflict our
society was hard hit by terrorist violence, painful
kidnappings, child recruitment — as was mentioned
today — and sexual crimes against many women, as
Father De Roux Rengifo described. But we are a society
that has suffered so much that it is determined to move
forward to strengthen its institutions and improve
the conditions for economic growth, education and
employment that can ensure a prosperous future for its
children and young people of today and tomorrow.
We feel proud that, as the Head of Mission said,
Colombia elected a President for the second time — not
for the first time, as was pointed out today — since the
signing of the Final Agreement in 2016 in a transparent
and free electoral process, which highlights the
strength and stability of our democracy. The two
final candidates in the second round committed to
continuing the implementation of the agreement. Of
course, as a woman, too, I feel tremendously proud
that, for the first time, there will be an Afro-descendant
Vice-Present — still not a President. However, I agree
with the representative of Mexico that we hope that
Colombia will have the opportunity to elect a female
President very soon. We are at a juncture with the new
Vice-President, and we carried out a decent, respectful,
supportive process with great hope for her success in
that office.
We are also very proud of the fact that the
implementation has not been suspended, but has
advanced steadily despite the challenge of COVID-19,
the disasters of climate change and, of course, the
great concerns regarding price inflation throughout
the world due to the most recent crisis. Amid such
difficult circumstances, the Colombian economy was
one of the fastest-growing economies in 2021, with a
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

gross domestic product growth of 10.7 per cent, and
the second-fastest growing economy in the first four
months of this year. According to yesterday’s report
by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD), it was also the leading economy
where unemployment fell the most in the past four
months out of the 38 OECD member countries.
Colombia’s determination is clear: to overcome
the conflict and irreversibly address the high levels of
poverty and marginalization in some areas that clearly
overlap with illicit crops. Not surprisingly, the 16
prioritized regions and the planning carried out with
a territorial approach allowed for the development
and completion of more than 1,400 infrastructure
works and the design and planning of 3,354 new
housing, transport, energy, aqueduct and drinkingwater projects. Royalties will be allocated to those
projects from non-conventional renewable energy
and green-hydrogen projects, which our Government
has prioritized, with national and foreign investments
that have enabled a 100-fold increase in the existing
capacity of non-conventional energy sources found
at the beginning of our Government, and which will
reach a 200-fold increase of that capacity by the end
of 2023 thanks to the projects that this Government
is already moving forward. Both those sources of
royalties, as well as the national budget, should ensure
the further implementation of the agreement and, of
course, enable faster progress in all aspects related to
the implementation.
I would like to mention that, for us, it is also a
source of pride to have already handed over nearly half
a million hectares of land to farming families, out of
the 3 million mentioned in the agreement.
During the past three months, both members of
the military forces and former FARC combatants have
participated in hearings to acknowledge responsibility
for crimes committed during the conflict and to ask for
forgiveness from the victims. That does not mean that
we have achieved full reconciliation, since the other
source of violence that continues to fuel crime and
instability in the territories, namely, drug trafficking,
remains present, but the progress made should not be
overlooked or underestimated.
The priorities are clear: Colombia must continue to
qualitatively improve conditions for the reintegration
of former combatants, while strengthening both the
ordinary and the transitional justice systems included

S/PV.9094

in the agreement, to which end it is essential that the
Special Jurisdiction for Peace present its conclusions
as soon as possible and, of course, decide the
consequences and penalties, but also, above all, the
opening and prioritization of major cases concerning
the recruitment of children and sexual violence in the
armed conflict. As Father De Roux Rengifo said, the
bodies of women cannot continue to be the battlefields
of war for any armed actor, and neither can the
recruitment of children continue unabated. We recently
learned of the recruitment of 82 children by members
of the Ejército de Liberación Nacional and other armed
actors in Colombia.
With regard to socioeconomic reintegration, it has
been a challenging process. There are more than 13,000
former combatants who continue to make progress in
the various productive projects. Today we have 4,662
collective and individual projects, which link 9,412
people who are part of the reintegration — 7,018 men
and 2,394 women — which, as Ms. Casso Piamba
pointed out in her briefing, is very important. Those
women, with their productive projects, are a source of
livelihood for many families, but they are also a factor
for stability in the territories.
For us, it is essential that such economic integration
continue to progress, with economic guarantees for
former combatants, issued by our Government in 2019,
and increased resources to that end, already benefiting
13,263 people.
In the area of housing, the Government has
continued to increase investments in support of former
combatants who remain in territorial consolidation
areas in an allocation of housing subsidies for a total
of 944 housing units. For those who are outside the
territorial areas, access routes to housing alternatives
have been established.
Today 58 per cent of those in the reintegration
process have access to primary, secondary and higher
education, and 66.8 per cent of them have been linked
to more than 6,500 training programmes for work.
Today 98.9 per cent of those former combatants are
covered by social security and health benefits. That is
an unprecedented model in the world and is based on the
approach implemented by the Council for Stabilization
and Consolidation and the leadership of our President.
Justice is essential. The guarantee of non-repetition
clearly requires that the justice system, both ordinary
and transitional, improve its efficiency and flexibility,

22-4258821/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

in line with Sustainable Development Goal 16, which
refers to fairer and more inclusive societies.
In that regard, we welcome the progress that the
transitional system has made in its various components.
As the report mentions, the Special Jurisdiction for
Peace has made progress in several of the major
cases opened, and we therefore hope that it will soon
hand down its first sentences. As Mr. Ruiz Massieu
mentioned, consultations are under way to determine
the work, tasks and activities with reparation and
restorative elements, which will be part of the
restorative sentences.
It is worth highlighting the recent adoption of
the guidelines for the execution of the penalties and
measures to contribute to reparation, which shows
the importance of setting up a State institutional
arrangement, mainly between the national Government
and the Special Jurisdiction for Peace, while respecting
the competences of all the entities.
Undoubtedly, the visit of the Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court in October 2021 meant
recognition of the entire Colombian jurisdictional
system in terms of the will, the institutional capacity and
the resolve of our judges to comply with international
standards, which guarantee respect for human rights
and the effective and transparent application of justice.
We have therefore managed to close that preliminary
investigation, which lasted 17 years in the International
Criminal Court.
The quest for truth must continue and has
taken a decisive step forward thanks to the Truth
Commission and the leadership of Father De Roux,
in his presentation made on 28 June at an event that
without a doubt was hugely symbolic for our country.
The Commission worked with the full support of the
Government of Ivan Duque; it is a non-judicial body
that discharged its time-bound mandate, which was
focused on investigating the events that occurred
up until the peace agreement was signed. His report
should serve to provide clear answers to the victims,
who have had to wait so many years in the face of the
immutable silence of their aggressors. They now can
know by whom, where and why their loved ones were
abducted, and hope can be returned to thousands of
Colombian families.
That report has a key role to play in ensuring that
all victims, without exception, from peasant families
and from civil society, as well as businesspeople and
22/24

14/07/2022

military and police victims — all victims — have
access to the restorative truth that must serve to ensure
that these horrors never happen again.
It is therefore vital, as we have asked, that all
investigations carried out by the Special Jurisdiction
for Peace continue expeditiously and that all necessary
decisions arising from them be taken.
Father De Roux noted that it has not been possible in
recent years to make progress towards what he termed
a great peace. Such a great peace can be achieved on
solid foundations not only of truth, as he said, but
also of legality, which must go hand in hand with
social progress, which our Government has pursued
relentlessly through the creation of employment. We
know that Colombians do not want paternalism or
condescension; they want employment opportunities,
which are vital to achieving that social peace, that
peace with legality, that great peace.
Regarding security, I would reiterate once again that
for the Government and all the bodies of the Colombian
State, the safety and security of former combatants and
their families is and will remain a priority. The goal is
for there to be zero threats against them and, of course,
zero deaths of former combatants.
We must reiterate that while we are doing everything
necessary to develop the agreement, we should not
delude ourselves into thinking that all other sources
of violence are simply the result of non-compliance
with the peace agreement or the result of Government
indifference. Unfortunately, as we all know, the
agreement did not guarantee the full identification of all
drug trafficking routes or make it possible to deactivate
the cartels that operate in Colombia, and of course in
other countries allied with the Colombian cartels since
before the signing of the agreement. For that reason, so
long as drug trafficking continues, unfortunately, we
must continue to live in the midst of and suffer death,
bloodshed and much pain in Colombia.
Once again we urge the international community
to engage in greater cooperation in the prevention of
drug trafficking and in targeting drug trafficking
revenues through tax havens, real estate assets and
other financial assets. For all our countries without
exception, drug trafficking is a source of instability and
a threat to our citizens.
Colombia has been the primary victim of drug
trafficking enterprises that are linked to transnational
22-42588

14/07/2022

Colombia

organized-crime networks, which are very powerful.
For that reason, 30 years ago drug trafficking became
the primary raison d’être of the Fuerzas Armadas
Revolucionarias de Colombia (FARC) and the Ejército
de Liberación (ELN) in our country.
Many have advocated that the next Government
engage in negotiations with the ELN. My Government
would be in favour of that as well, as were many in the
past, but for those negotiations to take place the ELN
must halt not only abductions but also the recruitment
of children, and Governments must insist that any
negotiations that are undertaken in future plug the
loophole that existed in previous talks with FARC and
demand information on all drug-trafficking routes and
logistics so that future violence can be prevented in
our country.
As such, we continue working every day through
our military operations and through our police force
to clamp down on drug trafficking. In recent military
operations and the subsequent extradition of Otoniel,
the leader of the Gulf Clan cartel, we could feel the
support of the international community and of the
United States. We carried out that extradition with
conviction, but we also know that subsequently, actors
with links to Otoniel waged armed violence affecting
178 municipalities, causing havoc for the civilian
population and claiming the lives of 24 civilians, as well
as countless attacks against our Government forces.
(spoke in English)
This is something I wrote while I was listening to
some members, so I am going to read it out in English.
Of course, the Government must put an end
to violence against social leaders. Obviously, our
Government rejects any type of violence against the
civilian population or ex-combatants. No democratic
Government can remain indifferent to civilians,
military police or any citizen deaths. But let me say that
Colombian territory is vast and its geography diverse
and difficult. Our presence on each square foot of our
territory is just impossible. So any interpretation that
there is a deliberate absence in some parts of the territory
is unfair, as we know that it would also be absolutely
unfair to assume that the deaths that occur in the
schools or streets of large cities in developed countries,
or the deaths of immigrants from Africa, occur as a
result of indolence on the part of Governments. We
know that that is unfair. All Governments have great
challenges. Of course we have to improve State presence

S/PV.9094

throughout the territory, hence the importance of
sincere international cooperation, sharing democratic
values and our experiences and the lessons learned
from our own challenges.
(spoke in Spanish)
The support of the Security Council for the
implementation of the agreement requires greater
cooperation among all nations to prevent the
consumption and, of course, the trafficking of drugs,
and in targeting illicit financial assets that are hidden
not only in rural but also urban areas in developed
countries, and, of course, in less developed countries
such as our own.
On another front, on 27 January the Constitutional
Court adopted a decision that has important
repercussions on the security of former combatants.
The Government filed an appeal against the judgment
before the Court itself, which is currently being
processed. As we await the resolution of that appeal, we
have put together a special action plan that ensures the
necessary inter-institutional coordination and addresses
on an ongoing basis all the points of the Court’s ruling.
It involves also working in the long term with special
police forces to improve conditions for the protection of
all former combatants.
Regarding women, I should refer to one of the
issues that in my view is of the greatest value for the
construction of a peaceful society: ensuring true gender
equality. That involves guaranteeing the presence of
women not only in politics but also, and especially, their
presence in the economy. So I warmly welcome the fact
that Jineth referred to the work of our Government to
guarantee the economic empowerment of women. In
Cauca, Caldono and Caloto, all over Colombia we need
women that have economic autonomy, because that is
vital if we are to achieve greater levels of development,
eradicate violence against women and, of course,
eradicate the violence that prevails in various sectors
of society.
As part of the implementation of the peace
agreement, we are working on various fronts
to guarantee the gender equality enshrined in
the agreement. There are 3,265 women included in
the reincorporation process, and 80 per cent of them
are linked to productive projects, which also include
spaces for caregiving, so that they can be incorporated
into productive life without sacrificing their duties
as mothers.

22-4258823/24

S/PV.9094

Colombia

Of the 51 gender indicators, 26 per cent have already
been completed, and 74 per cent have made significant
progress. The average progress in implementing gender
equity is 56 per cent but let us remember that it has only
been five years; we still have 10 more years to go. This
56 per cent is far higher than what was thought possible
just four years ago.
To promote significant participation of women
in decision-making in organizations, it is necessary
to continue raising awareness and providing
training through different forms of partnership with
cooperatives, which we have been prioritizing not only
in the implementation of the agreement through Social
Communal Economies, also known as ECOMUN,
but also through our conviction that this is the way
to lift rural communities out of poverty. It is through
partnerships. Likewise, it is timely to continue
strengthening all gender measures in the planning of
productive projects and in the statutes of the different
associative forms.
We may have differences in some of the data
or figures reported, as reflected, for example, in
comparisons of figures between time periods that are
not comparable. But beyond any differences, we have
the total conviction that comes with the commitment
to unstintingly implementing the peace agreement so
that we can truly fulfil all the commitments it contains,
including, of course, the commitment to strengthening
efforts aimed at peace, with the understanding that this
work will remain forever part of Colombia’s future.
As some Council members have pointed out, we
Colombians have just elected a new Government, and
of course, this new Administration must continue
along the same path, strengthening institutions and
the economy, providing legal guarantees and effective
and efficient policies for all Colombians, supporting
victims, doing the solid work of reincorporation and
the voluntary substitution of illicit crops, which has
been successful following four years of gigantic efforts
in the development programmes with a territorial

24/24

14/07/2022

focus, comprehensive rural development, the process
of humanitarian demining, and the implementation
of cross-cutting perspectives not only of gender but
also of ethnicity. Afro-Colombian and indigenous
communities have a priority in this implementation.
In the text of our Political Constitution, it is
stated that
“Peace is a right and a mandatory duty”,
which is the true purpose of our society. The road we
are travelling, with the understanding and help of the
Security Council, is set with the intention of making
this fundamental right effective, without which we will
not be able to achieve better conditions of coexistence.
We must continue to move forward through truth
in legality and the conviction that all of us have that
through a better democracy we will achieve permanent
peace for Colombia.
Colombia is pleased to have presented this electoral
result to the world, but more importantly we are pleased
that we have given it to ourselves, with immediacy,
transparency and absolute respect for the democratic
decision of the Colombian people. That is why we have
the moral authority to insist in all multilateral forums
that we must urge for and permanently advocate the
defence of democracy. We also must tell the Council
that on 7 August our Government will turn over a
solid and stable democracy with solid institutions, a
stable democracy with a solid and stable economy to
our successors. It is essential that the Security Council
assist the next Government so that this democratic,
institutional and economic solidity is preserved, so that
Colombia may continue to move towards true peace and
peace with legality.
I thank the Council very much indeed for the
support it has given to our Government, and I thank
its members for their always generous, friendly and
sincere welcome extended to us in these meetings.
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

22-42588
