S/PV.8508

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8508th meeting

Thursday, 11 April 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Von der Leyen/Mr. Heusgen. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Germany)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Indonesia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Asumu Abeme
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Djani
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mrs. Gilmutdinova
Mr. Matjila
Mr. Allen
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Women in peacekeeping
Letter dated 27 March 2019 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2019/275)
Letter dated 4 April 2019 from the Permanent Representative of Germany to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2019/293)
.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-10526 (E)
*1910526*

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Women in peacekeeping
Letter dated 27 March 2019 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2019/275)
Letter dated 4 April 2019 from the
Permanent Representative of Germany
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2019/293)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Armenia, Australia, Bangladesh,
Brazil, Cambodia, Canada, Estonia, Fiji, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ireland, the Islamic
Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Mexico, Montenegro,
Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway,
Pakistan, Paraguay, the Philippines, Portugal, Romania,
Senegal, Slovakia, Spain, Turkey, Ukraine, Uruguay,
the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Viet Nam to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Major General
Kristin Lund, Head of Mission and Chief of Staff,
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization; and
Ms. Lorna Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan
Democratic Engagement Monitoring and Observation
Programme and Women’s Representative to the
National Constitution Amendment Committee.
Ms. Merekaje is joining today’s meeting via videoteleconference from Juba.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I also invite the
following to participate in this meeting: His Excellency
Mr. Gerardus Van Den Akker, observer of the European
Union to the United Nations; and Her Excellency
Ms. Fatima Kyari Mohammed, Permanent Observer of
the African Union to the United Nations.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
2/65

11/04/2019

the United Nations to participate in the meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2019/275, which contains the text of a
letter dated 27 March 2019 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council,
and document S/2019/293, which contains the text
of a letter dated 4 April 2019 from the Permanent
Representative of Germany addressed to the SecretaryGeneral transmitting a concept note on the item
under consideration.
I wish to warmly welcome the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and now give
him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I welcome this debate on
women in peacekeeping as we strive for progress on a
key element in the maintenance of international peace
and security.
With the launch of the system-wide strategy on
gender parity, in 2017, the United Nations embarked
upon an ambitious and essential system-wide effort
to enhance women’s representation at all levels
and in all arenas. A key priority is to increase the
number of women in peacekeeping — both civilian
and uniformed — which is where we need the most
improvement. This is not just a question of numbers,
but also of our effectiveness in fulfilling our mandates.
Evidence shows that greater numbers of women
peacekeepers lead to protection responses that are more
credible and meet the needs of all members of local
communities. Women in patrol units are better able
to reach both men and women in areas of operation,
accessing critical intelligence and providing a more
holistic view of the security challenges. The presence of
women at checkpoints has been credited with promoting
a less confrontational atmosphere, and more women in
troop contingents is credited with higher reporting of
sexual and gender-based violence and lower incidences
of sexual exploitation and abuse.
Equally, access to women’s networks can enable
female peacekeepers to consult with a broader section
of the population, who may have very different
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

requirements and perspectives on sustainable peace.
This lays the ground for another shared goal: more
representative and inclusive peace processes.
As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, we need to do far more to ensure that women’s
rights, women’s voices and women’s participation are
at the centre of peacekeeping decision-making. This is
central to sustainable solutions in all the contexts in
which we work.
Through resolution 2242 (2015), on women and
peace and security, adopted in 2015, the Security
Council called on us to double the numbers of women
in military and police components of United Nations
peacekeeping operations by 2020 and to review the
barriers to their recruitment and advancement. We are
pressing forward on those goals.
The Action for Peacekeeping initiative calls for the
full, equal and meaningful participation of women at
all stages of peace processes, as well as the integration
of a gender perspective into all stages of analysis,
planning, implementation and reporting. I thank the
more than 150 Member States that have signed on to
that commitment. I also thank those Member States
that launched the Elsie Initiative on Women in Peace
Operations at last week’s Peacekeeping Ministerial on
overcoming barriers to increasing women’s meaningful
participation in peace operations.
The Action for Peacekeeping Initiative builds on the
numerous policies and strategies of the United Nations
aimed at strengthening performance, accountability and
the implementation of women and peace and security
mandates. In support of our commitments in those
areas, we have undertaken a range of actions to support
and promote women’s involvement in our operations.
Last year, we launched the gender-responsive
peacekeeping operations policy, which commits us
to promoting leadership and accountability both for
gender equality and for the women and peace and
security agenda. For civilian personnel, each field
mission has developed its own gender-parity strategies,
and our leadership in the field is more than 40 per
cent female. I have also established a working group
on emergency measures for gender parity in peace
operations, to tackle some of the specific challenges
we have identified in recruiting and retaining women
in field environments, including in our rules and
regulations. They include addressing conditions in

S/PV. 8508

missions to provide more suitable accommodation,
facilities, lighting and health facilities.
We must also strive to ensure that the rosters from
which we recruit are gender-balanced and that the gains
we have secured in recruitment in recent years are not
eroded during the downsizing of missions. A set of
proposals in that regard have already been presented to
the Fifth Committee of the General Assembly.
This year we rolled out the uniformed gender-parity
strategy, which builds on the commitment established
in resolution 2242 (2015) and goes further, calling
for more than just a doubling of numbers. Targets
for women’s representation range from 15 per cent to
35 per cent by 2028, inclusive of military, police and
justice and corrections personnel. The achievement of
those targets will represent a significant step towards
parity. Since December 2015, the number of women
in uniform has increased by approximately 1 per cent.
That is clearly not enough. But there are some notable
gains on which we can build.
The number of women staff officers and
military observers has almost doubled since the first
Peacekeeping Ministerial in November 2017, with
women now representing more than 13 per cent of
deployed personnel. Also since that first meeting, 27
countries that had previously not deployed any women
at all now do so. And 30 more countries have deployed
more than 15 per cent women military observers and
staff officers, bringing the total number of countries
to 48.
Among police personnel, the representation of
women has increased by 300 — more than 3 per
cent — since the 2017 Peacekeeping Ministerial. Nine
per cent of personnel in formed police units are now
women. Furthermore, the number of female heads of
United Nations police components in the field has
increased, including in Abyei, Cyprus, Darfur and
South Sudan.
Our uniformed gender-parity strategy also sets
targets for uniformed corrections and justice officers in
the field. However, that area has been more challenging
We in the Secretariat will continue to press ahead
in all those areas. But to keep on track, we need
assistance from Member States: first, through increased
nominations of women officers and, secondly, a sharper
focus on women in battalions and formed police units.
I also appeal to Member States and their capitals to

19-105263/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

do their utmost to meet the targets in the uniformed
gender-parity strategy, not only through pledges but,
more important, through the sustained recruitment and
deployment of women within their national services.

and police components, respectively. I can never forget
that I wondered why other Force Commanders did not
use their influence and power when it comes to gender
equality within the mission and in the local society.

I am pleased that we are very close to gender parity
in the senior leadership of the United Nations for the
first time in the history of the Organization, and well
ahead of my 2021 commitment — but that is an area
where I can decide alone. I am committed to sustaining
that progress, which makes clear that what is needed
ultimately is political will and persistence. We need to
bring the same spirit to our peace operations. This is
crucial for our effectiveness, credibility and reputation.
We count on Member States’ sustained support.

We had 26 positions in UNFICYP, operating
24/7/365. Many of them were not organized to support
both genders. We established a project to change
that, and, by the time I left, all 26 positions could
accommodate both. Generally, armed forces have a
hard time retaining women for a life-long commitment.
There are many reasons that women do not stay, but one
is the male culture within the military organization.
To take just an example — the gym — all camps and
positions have a gym, and in most of them there are
posters showing half-naked women. How many women
go to the gym in a bikini? Instead, the walls should
have posters on how to do exercise, with normal
outfits for gym. Posters demeaning to women vanished
in UNFICYP.

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I now give the floor to Major General Lund.
Major General Lund: I thank you, Madam
President, for inviting me to speak here today. My
special thanks go to Germany for initiating this meeting
on women in peacekeeping.
The momentum on pushing for gender equality
must be maintained. I am very impressed and happy
that the Secretary-General has placed gender high up
our agenda. He is a role model for us Heads of Mission
and Force Commanders.
I will approach my five minutes from a practical
angle, with examples on how I tried to increase the
numbers, facilitate women in missions, promote
mindfulness of gender issues and reach out to the
local community.
When I was appointed Force Commander of
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus
(UNFICYP), in 2014, I was surprised to see how
much power one had as a Force Commander. My first
goal was to team up with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General at that time, Ms. Lisa
Buttenheim. We matched, and for once I did not need
to convince my boss that gender was important. Both
of us had gender equality in our spine. She had full
trust in me and empowered me. When I arrived, the
percentage of military females stood at 4 per cent.
Ms. Buttenheim brought me into all political and troopand police-contributing country (TCC/PCC) visits,
during which we put gender at the top of the agenda.
Just that focus on gender resulted in increasing female
participation to 8 per cent and 25 per cent for military
4/65

I also noticed that our military skills competitions
included only males on the teams. I changed that. All
teams had to have females. Yes, it was a challenge for
the countries that had sent infantry units. But very
often the support component had females, and so they
had to include them. All of our competitions and games
had to have female representation. That led to a more
inclusive environment in all units.
I held weekly sector commander meetings. When
Headquarters sent directives to the mission on sexual
exploitation and abuse and gender, I used them to
underline my responsibilities as well as theirs. I also
had to do research to find out in which countries among
my TCCs and PCCs prostitution was legal, so that I
could focus more on those commanders. When we had
staff training on the code of conduct, HIV, gender and
sexual exploitation and abuse, I was always present,
both to underline the importance of those issues and
to be a good role model for both women and men. I
also initiated a female military network. Those types of
networks can be useful to address different issues. We
have had a female military network in place in Norway
since 1989. That has been important to me.
As a female Force Commander and Head of Mission,
I do everything that men do, but there are many other
doors that open in society because you are a woman. I
went in those doors. That resulted in public speaking
nearly every week and the possibility to engage with
all of society. Lisa Buttenheim and I engaged with the
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

first ladies to become more visible to the women on
the island.
In my present capacity, I try to do a lot of the same. I
am up to 12 per cent female observers and gender is at
the top of my agenda.
My final message is that troop- and
police-contributing countries must do more. The
Secretary-General has given the Security Council a
good example of how it is possible to change within
a short time. Every chief of defence has the power to
change. We out in the field need to be able to reach
out to all of society. The Security Council can make
that happen.
The President: I thank Major General Lund for
her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Merekaje.
Ms. Merekaje: My name is Lorna Merekaje. I address
the Security Council today in my capacity as Secretary
General of South Sudan Democratic Engagement
Monitoring and Observation Programmethat is a national
civil society organization in South Sudan focusing on
good governance and democracy, conflict mitigation
and gender mainstreaming in my beloved country. I
also speak as one of two women representatives in the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee out of
15 members of the Committee, which was established
under the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan.
On behalf of my organization and the women of
South Sudan and on my own behalf, please accept my
humble gratitude, Madam, for inviting me to address
the Council today. With your permission, allow me to
add my voice in emphasizing the importance of this
discussion on women in peacekeeping operations. As
the world has come to realize the significance of the
meaningful involvement of women in decision-making
in all spheres of life, I would like to mention that my
country is still grappling with that fact, and especially
the fulfilment of the 25 per cent affirmative action
target provided by the Constitution, which has now
been increased to 35 per cent, in accordance with
the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, signed in
September 2018.
While we appreciate the efforts that have been made
so far by the United Nations, I would like to argue that
peacekeeping efforts could add more value to the lives

S/PV. 8508

of ordinary citizens in host countries if the number of
women in missions were increased and if they were
engaged in undertaking roles and responsibilities at
both the leadership and the supportive levels within
peacekeeping operations in the host countries.
I would like to reiterate my genuine concerns
regarding the operating environments and facilities
for female peacekeeping personnel while on mission
in host countries, as well as the challenges faced by
troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
in ensuring that female personnel meet the deployment
criteria set out for participation in peacekeeping
operations. However, in my view, these challenges can
be addressed if there exists adequate will on the part
of all actors to address them. I am referring to host
countries, TCCs, PCCs and Council members.
We recognize the significance of ground-breaking
decisions of the Council, such as resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions — specifically resolution
2242 (2015), which calls for doubling the number of
women in peacekeeping operations, and especially
in police contingents, by increasing their number
through 2020 — the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the efforts made by
different countries to develop national action plans for
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Experience has shown that increasing the number of
women in peacekeeping operations is likely to encourage
positive and friendly interaction between mission
personnel and the host country and communities, as is
the case with the all-female contingent of Bangladesh
and female peacekeeping officers deployed in Haiti,
as well as the kind of relationship that UN-Women,
country offices and the Gender Section of the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan continue to build with
South Sudanese women.
My appeal to the Council today is that, first, it ensure
that decisions made with respect to the deployment
of peacekeeping operations reflect the commitments
made to date and demand action from the stakeholders
involved, such as the TCCs, PCCs and host countries.
Secondly, it should impose specific standards
and requirements for missions and peacekeeping
operations in upholding and instituting periodic review
mechanisms in order to create and maintain positive
relationships and the engagement of peacekeeping
personnel with the host communities.

19-105265/65

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV.8508

Thirdly, it should review and improve standards and
working conditions for female personnel on mission so
as to ensure the full integration of women and peace and
security objectives, including mentorship programmes
designed for retention and career development for
female civilian and uniformed personnel.
Fourthly, it should enhance the mandate of United
Nations country missions to include the meaningful
engagement and participation of local civil society,
women and youth organizations in the design and
implementation of United Nations peace operations,
United Nations-led peace processes, political dialogues
and peacebuilding initiatives in the country. I believe
that it is important to engage the organizations that exist
in the country so that the community has confidence in
any initiative that is implemented.
Finally, in order to sustain and build upon progress
made to date in the advancement of the women and
peace and security agenda, and while we talk about
increasing numbers of women in peacekeeping
operations, I also want to mention that it is important
for us not to lose track of the need to seek justice and
accountability for sexual and gender-based violence
committed by peacekeeping personnel in different
countries around the world.
The President:
her briefing.

I

thank

Ms.

Merekaje

for

I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Federal Minister of Defence of Germany.
My thanks go once again to Secretary-General
Guterres, Major General Kristin Lund and Ms. Merekaje
for their briefings.
The women and peace and security agenda is one
of Germany’s priorities during its membership of the
Security Council and during our presidency this month.
In this open debate, I should like to focus on women
serving in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
In my five years as Defence Minister, I have met
many female peacekeepers, in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali, for example, and many other missions. I have
always been impressed with their dedication and
diligence. More importantly, it has been obvious that
they are always broadening their mission’s skill set.
Women are not better peacekeepers than men, but
they are different. And this diversity is a strength. Yet,
almost 20 years after the adoption of the landmark
6/65

11/04/2019

resolution 1325 (2000), we are still far from the full,
effective and meaningful participation of women in
peace operations. I would like to present five ideas on
how to change that.
First, in empowering women in all walks of
life, visibility is key. We need role models to stir the
imagination — successful female mentors who tell their
stories to younger women and share their experience.
Therefore, Germany will take the initiative to establish
a global female peacekeepers network. We pledge
substantial support to get it up and running and invite
Member States to contribute ideas of their own.
Secondly, the network will support the Elsie
initiative, which is central to increasing the percentage
of women peacekeepers. We applaud Canada for this
great initiative and intend to provide up to €2 million to
the Elsie trust fund.
Thirdly, we must send more women into
international peacekeeping missions. We need more
women in our national forces. Germany is striving to
increase the share of female soldiers in our armed forces
more rapidly than before, but also, and that is crucial,
the share of female soldiers in leading positions. As
Minister, I understand that this effort requires a constant
pull from the top, a fight against unconscious bias and
real barriers, and constant evaluation. Transparency is
key. That is why my Ministry created a staff element on
equal opportunity, diversity management and inclusion.
This has led, for example, to a benchmarking of the
evaluation of male and female soldiers, to a mentoring
programme for junior female officers and to a regular
exchange on best practices. Once again, transparency
is crucial.
Fourthly, Germany has already been looking at what
keeps women from joining our forces and advancing in
them to top positions. We are seeking to intensify our
analysis by initiating a national barrier assessment. We
will determine what keeps more women from joining
peace operations. We invite the United Nations and
interested Member States to share their experience with
similar assessments.
Fifthly, and finally, Germany has enhanced its
military observer training course to focus specifically
on the role of women in peacekeeping. We have opened
the course to international participants; 22 women from
20 countries were part of the pilot course last year. This
success has encouraged us to offer this course again,
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on a permanent basis. I invite all present to help us
promote this opportunity.
Let me conclude by expressing my gratitude to all
present for their contributions today. The peacekeepers’
Blue Helmet symbolizes protection and security. Let us
ensure that this helmet is worn by more women, for the
sake of peace.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French): On
behalf of the African countries that are members of the
Security Council, that is, Equatorial Guinea and South
Africa, I should like to thank the German presidency
and you yourself, Madam Minister, for having convened
this open debate on the participation of women in
peacekeeping operations. I would also like to commend
and thank His Excellency the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, and the eminent briefers for
their high-quality briefings.
Allow me to note here that the three African
countries members of the Security Council align
themselves with the statement to be delivered later by
Ambassador Fatima Kyari Mohammed on behalf of the
African Union (AU).
For more than 70 years now, as United Nations
peacekeeping operations have been serving the lofty
cause of global peace and security around the world,
their numbers have continued to increase. Estimated
at more than 110,000 personnel, the staff of United
Nations missions now reflects the new types of
threats, asymmetric deployment environments and the
multidimensional demands placed upon peacekeeping.
In contrast to these developments, the participation
of women in peacekeeping operations has remained
marginal and falls far below the parity goals set by
the United Nations. For Africa, which hosts seven
peacekeeping operations and has its own peace
Mission, the African Union Mission in Somalia,
women’s participation remains a major challenge to
be overcome despite the African Union’s commitment
to promoting the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000). Indeed, we are convinced that the deployment
of women peacekeepers not only contributes to gender
equality and the empowerment of women but is also
vital to the transformation of United Nations missions
as well as to security-sector reform.

S/PV. 8508

(spoke in English)
In line with its commitments to the women and
peace and security agenda, the African Union, through
troop- and police-contributing countries, has made
progress in institutionalizing women’s participation
and leadership in peacekeeping missions. The joint
AU-United Nations fact-finding mission on women and
peace and security, conducted in the field in 2017 and
2018 by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security;
the AU Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security; the
Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations;
and the Executive Director of UN-Women, has clearly
established that women victims of war and conflict are
more engaged with military women and police than
men. Failure to take them into account could have an
impact on reconciliation and peacebuilding processes.
(spoke in French)
Although women provide undeniable added value,
many political and cultural factors continue to hold
back their inclusion in peacekeeping operations. These
include cultural obstacles and stereotypes, unsuitable
training policies and recruitment mechanisms that
put women at a disadvantage. We are therefore firmly
convinced that additional efforts must be made to
eliminate these obstacles, including all forms of
violence and intimidation preventing the deployment of
women in peacekeeping operations.
To that end, the African Union adopted a code
of conduct and a zero-tolerance policy that define
the African Union’s position against sexual violence,
abuse and exploitation committed by peacekeepers and
military personnel. The code is shared with all troopcontributing countries and integrated into all related
training programmes.
We must also further combat all the forms of
discrimination that women peacekeepers face. Gender
stereotypes must be combated in allocating strategic
roles in missions, and the United Nations must
continue to improve accommodation and sanitation
infrastructure in order better to meet the specific needs
of women.
The African Union has also established a network
of women mediators, Fem-Wise Africa, so as to ensure
women’s leadership in peace and security, alongside
the African Women Leaders Network. By endorsing
resolution 2457 (2019), the two networks promote the

19-105267/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

role of women in peacekeeping and call for a qualitative
increase in the number of women in peace operations.
The African Union has also assigned gender
officials to the various peacekeeping operations to
ensure that women’s voices are heard and amplified and
that women can participate in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding efforts.
In spite of the many challenges that remain, our
continent has made notable progress, including in the
integration of issues related to women, gender equality
and peace and security into the African Peace and
Security Architecture and general programmes for
peace and security. Currently 25 African countries have
national action plans on women and peace and security,
that is, 31 per cent of the total number of countries
around the world to have such plans.
(spoke in English)
It is undeniable that the inclusion of women in
peacekeeping missions, whether under United Nations
mandates or regional organizations, is a shared
responsibility between troop-contributing countries
and the United Nations. Troop- and police-contributing
countries must therefore work to overcome cultural
barriers and stereotypes and mainstream the gender
dimension into the training and recruitment of the
military and police personnel of their contingents.
With regard to the United Nations, it is important
to continue communication and advocacy for women’s
participation in peacekeeping and to provide incentives
for troop-contributing countries that are making
an effort to increase the participation of women in
peacekeeping missions. It is also necessary to provide
peacekeeping personnel with all of the appropriate
resources to carry out their mandate effectively.
Targeted training, capacity development and appropriate
predeployment training and equipment are essential to
advancing the Secretary-General’s vision for his Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
(spoke in French)
Africa’s commitment to take ownership of its
collective security through African peace operations
remains firms, as does its commitment to increase
women’s participation pursuant to resolution 1325
(2000). Meeting that noble goal also requires resolving
the issue of financing African peace support operations,
the effectiveness of which depends upon predictable
and sustainable funding.
8/65

11/04/2019

The three African members of the Security Council
appreciate the constructive cooperation that exists
between the Security Council and the African Union
Peace and Security Council in seeking solutions to the
current challenges to peace and security in Africa. Our
countries sincerely hope that their joint efforts will lead
to a sustainable response to that major concern.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): Allow me to warmly
welcome you among us, Madame President. Your
presence and participation in this open debate in the
Security Council underline the importance of the
subject that we are discussing. Let me also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their very
informative and valuable contributions.
In my intervention I would like to touch upon
three main topics: first, the operational significance
of women peacekeepers; secondly, the challenges and
opportunities related to mandate implementation; and,
thirdly, the Polish Government’s implementation of the
framework for the United Nations women and peace
and security agenda in my country.
Today’s debate is timely as it follows the United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial on uniformed
capabilities, performance and protection held
on 29 March. During that event, we heard many
encouraging examples of how women’s participation
in peacekeeping operations can bring added value and
increase missions’ effectiveness. I would like to mention
one particular female peacekeeper — Lieutenant
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga — who was
awarded the annual United Nations Military Gender
Advocate Award, by the Secretary-General. Her
outstanding performance demonstrates the significant
role that the gender perspective plays in increasing
operational performance and improving the protection
of civilians.
In that context, we call for the increased participation
of women peacekeepers, particularly in front-line
roles engaging with the local population and setting
an example for local women leaders, as they act as the
key initiators of change, starting with the households,
schools and institutions in which they work. In that
vein. I would like to stress the need for the United
Nations and its peacekeeping missions to appoint more
women to leadership roles. We can follow the examples
provided by the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in
Cyprus with its female Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head, Force Commander and
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Senior Police Adviser and the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization, which is represented here
today by Major General Kristin Lund, Head of Mission
and Chief of Staff. Increasing women’s participation in
missions still remains a challenge for all of us. That is
why Member States should strive towards nominating
more female candidates for leadership positions at
every level of command, from the top of the mission to
platoon leaders.
I would like to reiterate our strong support for
the obligations set out in the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, while underlining that the participation of
women at all phases of the peace process should be full,
equal and meaningful. That also refers to the challenges
and opportunities facing mandate implementation.
Poland believes that only by strengthening adherence to
the women and peace and security principles can a longlasting and sustainable solution to any given conflict
be achieved. In that context, we must mention the
significant role of women peacekeepers in addressing
charges of sexual exploitation and abuse. We recognize
their profound role in prevention and raising awareness
during predeployment training, as well as in conducting
proper investigations when allegations arise.
As we all know, words can make a difference
only when they are translated into action. Therefore,
we are glad that, in 2018, Poland introduced its first
national action plan on women and peace and security
for the period from 2018 to 2021. That strategic
approach was jointly developed by different ministries
with the special role of the Government advocating
for equal treatment. It also widely consulted with
non-governmental organizations promoting the role of
women in the security sector. The action plan will allow
for systematizing efforts and assessing progress made
by Polish institutions to implement the women and
peace and security agenda and to set further priorities
in that area.
I would like to conclude by expressing our strong
support for, and gratitude to, all women peacekeepers.
Their sacrifice and dedication help bring hope to
millions of people facing daily threats. It is crucial in
that it sets an example for thousands of women in their
households, local communities and Governments. The
work that they carry out is unique, irreplaceable and
invaluable. We all owe those brave women our greatest
recognition, reassurance and appreciation.

S/PV. 8508

Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I thank
the Secretary-General, Major General Kristin Lund and
Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their informative briefings.
The State of Kuwait aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the representative of the Bolivarian
Republic of Venezuela on behalf of the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries.
I should like to address three issues within the
framework of our discussion today, namely, the
protection of civilians, increasing the participation of
women, and reforms.
First, with regard to the protection of civilians,
most peacekeepers work within missions where the
protection of civilians is at the core of their mandate.
In many missions, including the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan, women constitute a significant
percentage of those civilians who seek the protection of
peacekeepers, as Ms. Merekaje mentioned. Hence the
active participation of women peacekeepers in all the
components of any mission is a response to the actual
requirements and is needed to engage and communicate
with local communities while focusing first and foremost
on the population as part of a people-centred approach,
without interfering in the primary responsibility of
countries to protect their citizens.
Secondly, with regard to increasing the participation
of women, troop-contributing countries make tireless
efforts to ensure the deployment of peacekeeping
forces, including women, after adequate training so
that we can guarantee their safety, as we have pledged
to do in various United Nations forums. Improving
performance therefore is an important factor in
increasing the participation of women in peacekeeping
at all levels, including leading positions such as Force
Commanders and Police Commissioners. Our ambition
of achieving 15 per cent women’s participation might
seem modest. However, the percentage of women
participating in peacekeeping varies from one country
to another, and we cannot apply one model on every
individual country.
Thirdly, with regard to reforms, the Declaration of
Shared Commitments is the result of the efforts by the
Secretariat and Member States to advance the reform
process. Kuwait and more than 150 countries have
pledged, inter alia, to ensure women’s participation in
all phases of a peace operation, including peacekeeping.

19-105269/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In conclusion, we hope that this discussion in
the Council, as well as that in its Working Group on
Peacekeeping Operations, will contribute to increasing
the participation of women in peacekeeping by using
various means, including highlighting women as
role models in peacekeeping operations, such as in
the United Nations Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus,
where three women are in command of the Force as
well as its military and police components. Since the
presidency has encouraged us to cite few examples, I
would mention and commend Major General Kristin
Lund, who is present with us today. She is a role model
for many women in peacekeeping operations, not only
because she is the first woman to hold the position
of Force Commander but also because in Kuwait we
have also recognized her: she has received the Order of
Liberation from my country as a token of appreciation
to her and to tens of thousands of other women who
contributed to the liberation of Kuwait.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
We thank you, for convening of this meeting and
for your participation, Madam German Minister
of Defence. We also thank the briefers for their
informative presentations.
We consider it essential that the Security
Council remain united with regard to the progressive
development and implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda, since the contribution
of women to conflict resolution, peacekeeping
and peacebuilding is no longer merely a useful
recommendation, but has become a paradigm for its
efficient and necessary implementation.
From that perspective, the increase in the number
of female personnel in military and police contingents,
as a central part of the Organization’s reform process,
contributes directly to promoting and crystallizing
such participation. Therefore, integrating the gender
perspective established by resolution 1325 (2000)
makes it possible not only to develop policies that
recognize the specific effects of conflict on women, but
also to recognize the need to involve women as positive
agents in peace processes. We must also express our
satisfaction about the organization of joint field visits
by United Nations and African Union representatives
to observe in detail the relationship among women,
peace, security and development, including generating
appropriate responses to the scourge of sexual violence
in conflict, with a view to continuing to implement
10/65

11/04/2019

tangible measures to promote women’s participation in
those processes.
At the same time, the empowerment of women’s
leadership and enabling them to make proposals are also
prerequisites for conflict prevention and a powerful tool
for achieving the Sustainable Development Goals. That
belief is more than just a theory for us. It is currently
embodied in the following commitments: first, in
our firm support for systematically incorporating a
gender perspective in the mandates of peacekeeping
operations, based on specialized training aimed at
providing specialized responses to, and protecting
the human rights of, women and girls in conflict
situations, while promoting their active participation,
and, secondly, through a gradual increase, as a troopcontributing country, of women’s participation in peace
operations, such that the percentage of women staff
officers is 30 per cent, of mission experts it is 33 per
cent and of military contingents it is 10 per cent of the
total number of deployed troops. We have committed
to increasing that participation to reach the target of
15 per cent in the category of contingents by 2020. For
Peru, that commitment is binding and is complemented
by the incorporation of a gender perspective in
predeployment training programmes for our troops and
military observers. We are pleased that the National
Training Centre for Peace Operations in our country
has established guidelines for action in that area as a
central part of the training of our troops.
We would like to conclude by reiterating our
commitment to continuing to work in the Informal
Expert Group on Women and Peace and Security,
which we co-chair with Germany, to promote the
implementation of this agenda by the Council, in
particular as established in the historic resolution 1325
(2000).
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): I would like to thank the SecretaryGeneral, Major General Kristin Lund and Ms. Lorna
Merekaje for their succinct briefings on the role of
women in peacekeeping.
Just days after the 2019 Peacekeeping Ministerial
and as we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are meeting in the Chamber
today to admit that more Security Council action
is required to support the objectives set out in the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations of the Action for Peacekeeping
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

initiative and to advance the women and peace and
security agenda. Peacekeeping operations are one of
the United Nations most effective tools in promoting
and maintaining international peace and security, yet
only 4 per cent of uniformed personnel and 22 per cent
of civilian personnel are women. That tool will not be
effective enough as long as gender inequality persists,
and to such a disproportionate degree.
We recognize that significant progress has been
made, especially with regard to the decisions set out
in Security Council resolutions, which have deployed
more gender advisers in United Nations missions,
increased the number of women participating in
peacekeeping and incorporated a gender perspective
into peacekeeping operations, but that is not
sufficient. There is still a demand for deliberate and
sustainable efforts by the Security Council and for
the necessary resources to support those efforts. It is
very regrettable that initiatives to promote the women
and peace and security policy framework, primarily
on the ground, continue to be threatened by budget
cuts and depend disproportionately upon voluntary
extrabudgetary resources.
We vehemently defend the need to link women’s
rights with peacebuilding, always in line with the
Beijing Platform for Action. That is why it is important
to train peacekeepers on gender issues and ensure that
gender issues are taken into account in the design,
planning, implementation and evaluation of peace
operations. At the same time, there is still a need to
include gender-disaggregated data in all mission
reports, to deploy gender and women’s protection
advisers, and to strengthen zero-tolerance policies for
acts of sexual and gender-based violence committed
by peacekeepers.
Increasing the presence of women among deployed
troops opens channels for communication for women
and girls in conflict situations, addresses their protection
concerns and immediate needs and encourages them to
participate and lead. There is no doubt that the presence
of women raises awareness about their problems, but
it is also a critical factor in increasing the operational
effectiveness of all tasks and improving the image,
accessibility and credibility of the missions among
the local population. The women deployed in missions
are familiar with the local protection strategies that
affect them; they are able to act as an early-warning
mechanism; they interact more effectively with the
people; and they have a comparative advantage in

S/PV. 8508

interacting with survivors of sexual and gender-based
violence and in the process of demobilization and
reintegration into civilian life.
In order to achieve gender parity in missions,
it is essential to work closely with troopcontributing countries. Although in recent decades
an increasing number of countries have raised the
percentage of women in their armed forces and adopted
measures in their national military institutions on
gender policies, at the same time various constraints
remain, such as the persistent abuse and discrimination
suffered by women within national military institutions
in many countries. In that regard, we understand that
troop-contributing countries should take measures
aimed at increasing the level of female representation,
such as implementing specific legislative reforms
to encourage the participation of women and combat
harassment and sexual abuse within the military;
eliminating barriers and the exclusion of women from
some categories of military personnel; making changes
to family policy, as well as ensuring the proper training
of personnel on gender issues before deployment, in
accordance with United Nations standards.
It is also imperative that United Nations missions
prioritize visible and tangible respect for women’s
physical well-being and safety. It is therefore essential
to review the planning and budget of all missions to
make life in them more suitable for women, such as
by incorporating health facilities, specialized medical
care, including access to sexual and reproductive
health services, special licensing arrangements and
investment in the internal security of bases.
We commend the work being done by the
Department of Peace Operations, primarily its gender
unit, to ensure that women’s priorities are central to
peace and security decisions at all levels. We call for
the continued use of gender-based analysis to better
assess progress against the goals and commitments
of the women and peace and security agenda and, in
doing so, improve the design, conduct and performance
of United Nations missions. We believe that the United
Nations Military Gender Advocate of the Year Award
is a recognition of the efforts of peacekeepers in
promoting the principles of resolution 1325 (2000).
We take this opportunity to congratulate Brazilian
Lieutenant Commander Marcia Andrade Braga for
having received that award as a result of her work
with the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic.

19-1052611/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

Nonetheless, earlier this year we are also pleased to
have witnessed a milestone in the history of the United
Nations, in the peace mission in Cyprus, which is being
led by three women — a special representative, a force
commander and a senior police adviser — overseeing a
contingent of more than 1,000 people including police,
military and civilians monitoring the ceasefire line and
working to find a political solution between Greece and
the Turkish Cypriots.

In South Sudan, more than 10 female soldiers of
the Chinese infantry battalion perform tasks such as
security, long-distance patrols and joint search. They
also impart knowledge on hygiene and on preventing
epidemics in local communities. They engage with
school children and actively conduct civil-military
cooperation. A local orphan boy named James still
remembers, even today, that the name of the helpful
Chinese female peacekeeper is Yian.

Investing in gender equity and the empowerment of
women is the crucial way to prevent and end conflicts,
as well as to build peace and prosperity in the world.
Without a doubt, the face of peace is a woman.

In Haiti, a Chinese female police officer was
tragically killed in the line of duty, leaving a 4-year-old
child and an elderly parent. In her diary, she wrote,

Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I welcome you, Madam President, to New York.
It is good to see you presiding over today’s meeting.
I would like to thank Secretary-General Guterres,
Major General Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje, the
representative of South Sudanese civil society, for
their briefings.
Since its inception 71 years ago, United Nations
peacekeeping has played an important role in the
maintenance of international peace and security. Female
peacekeepers have always played an active role. They
serve in various mission areas, conducting patrols,
standing guard and treating patients. They bring hope
for peace to local people, in particular women and
children. I would like to pay tribute all of the women in
United Nations peacekeeping.
Chinese women have never been absent from
United Nations peacekeeping. I have a few photos
to share with members. The first one is of doctors in
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, working and
fulfilling the mission’s mandate. The second photo is of
female police officers in Liberia. The third photo shows
female medical workers treating patients in Libya.
There are several moving examples and stories in that
regard. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, at the
Chinese level 2 peacekeeping hospital there are three
Chinese female peacekeepers on their second tour in
the country. In the eyes of fellow peacekeepers and the
local people, they are truly like angels. They have treated
fellow peacekeepers in urgent need of care late at night.
They provide humanitarian assistance to local women
and children. Their outstanding medical skills, high
sense of responsibility and spirit of internationalism
have won them trust and acclaim.
12/65

“In this vast world, I may be as insignificant as a
feather. Nevertheless, in my small and humble way,
I wish to carry forward the aspiration for peace”.
It is with that same aspiration that over the past 30 years
close to 1,000 Chinese female peacekeepers have left
for mission areas, without hesitation, to implement the
mandate for peace.
The main goal of United Nations peacekeeping is
to promote political settlement to conflicts and achieve
early peace and stability in mission areas. Therefore, all
our activities must serve that main goal. Strengthening
the effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping
requires joint efforts from the Security Council,
the Secretariat, the troop- and police-contributing
countries and host countries. The corresponding efforts
should be guided by the Charter of the United Nations
and the basic principles of peacekeeping. It requires a
holistic approach with efforts in various areas, such as
political settlement, logistical support, personnel safety
and partnership.
Conditions must be created to facilitate
broader women’s participation in peacekeeping.
The international community should strengthen
communication to increase support for women’s
participation in peacekeeping. In terms of the training
of peacekeepers, deployment and field operations, a
favourable environment should be created for women’s
participation. Attention should be given to the national
conditions and situations in troop-contributing
countries (TCCs) so as to gradually increase women’s
participation in peacekeeping. Such efforts can
begin with a trial to determine best practices before
such practices can be replicated on a broader scale.
Expanding women’s participation in peacekeeping
requires the concerted efforts of all parties. Developed
countries should increase their participation in United
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations peacekeeping and demonstrate their support
for women’s participation with genuine action. The
Secretariat should increase its cooperation with TCCs
and develop targeted training plans to help TCCs
strengthen the relevant capacity-building. China
supports the Action for Peacekeeping initiative of
Secretary-General Guterres.
China is a major supporter of, and participant in,
peacekeeping. We are also a main TCC and financial
contributor to eight mission areas with Chinese
peacekeepers, of which Chinese female peacekeepers
serve in six, including in South Sudan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and Mali. China is working not
only to expand the participation of Chinese female
peacekeepers but also to help other countries in that
regard. In recent years the Chinese Minister of Defence
and UN-Women have jointly organized international
training seminars for female peacekeeping officers
in Beijing to help increase women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations. Together with the broader
international community, we will continue to actively
participate in United Nations peacekeeping operations
in order to make a greater contribution to world peace.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): It is an
honour to have you, the German Federal Minister of
Defence, among us today, Madam President, presiding
over the Security Council during the joint presidencies
of the Council. France and Germany have made the
women and peace and security agenda a top priority, as
demonstrated by our open debate with you as President
today. We are particularly grateful to you for that. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General, Major
General Kristin Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their
very insightful briefings and their commitment to the
women and peace and security agenda, which are a
source of inspiration for us. I would like to reiterate our
full support to the Secretary-General and his team for
the ambitious and effective strategy that he has put in
place to achieve parity within the United Nations.
I also associate myself with the statements to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union and
the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women and Peace and Security. The Security
Council should step up its efforts to still further
integrate the women and peace and security agenda into
peacekeeping operations. Significant progress has been
made but we must do more to truly place that agenda at
the centre of peacekeeping operations.

S/PV. 8508

In mandates, that integration covers several
realities: from prevention and protection against sexual
violence in times of conflict to women’s participation
in political processes. We must continue to promote that
comprehensive approach in particular by ensuring the
deployment of gender and women protection advisers.
We all know that that is an ongoing task both in the
Council and the Fifth Committee. During a ministerial
meeting on the margins of the General Assembly, the
Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs, Mr. JeanYves Le Drian, recalled that peacekeepers “engage
in situations in which no nation is ready to engage
alone”. We must therefore ensure that the necessary
training and logistical support are provided not only to
those men but also increasingly to the women who are
committed to peace.
Secondly, the increasing participation of women in
peacekeeping operations is essential to the success of
our agenda and to peacekeeping operations themselves.
As is clearly documented, the increased participation of
women directly helps to strengthen the effectiveness of
operations. It is true that in all fields, across the board,
the added value is particularly strong in areas such as
access to local communities and victims’ access to care
and justice, to take just two examples among many
others. More generally, no position should be reserved
only for men.
Progress has been made but it is still insufficient.
That must be said. There are still 27 units without
women, compared to 49 last year. Women represent
5 per cent of the troops and 8 per cent of the police
contingents, which is still far from the goals set by
the Council. It is primarily the troop-contributing
countries that should fully assume that responsibility.
The feminization rate of French troops in peacekeeping
operations was 5.5 per cent in 2018, which is already a
higher rate than the United Nations target of 5.25 per
cent for 2019. In February, the rate was 8.4 per cent.
That is significant progress but, of course, much
remains to be done. We are the first to say it, including
with regard to us. We must in particular increase the
number of women appointed to staff officer positions.
For States to assume that responsibility, as you,
Madam President, said, they must lead a real paradigm
shift in their national armies. That is what France is
firmly doing, with conditions and in a voluntary way.
The French army now has one of the highest levels of
women’s participation in the world, with a rate of 20 per
cent overall and 15.5 per cent for military personnel.

19-1052613/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

France wants to go further. On 7 March, the eve of
International Women’s Rights Day, the Minister of
the Armed Forces, your colleague Florence Parly,
announced a gender-equity plan to support France’s
operational performance, which has three main
objectives: to recruit women, to retain them throughout
their careers and to promote gender diversity in the
armed forces. Those goals will be achieved through
very concrete measures, such as women’s participation
in military leadership or a new approach to access to
ranks and responsibilities.
As our Minister for Europe and Foreign Affairs,
Mr. Le Drian, recalled, the involvement of women
in our national army and peace operations will be
integrated into our third national plan to implement
resolution 1325 (2000), which is currently being
drafted, and specific cooperation actions will be
undertaken in that direction. France also supports the
participation of women in police and military training
schools in several African countries, including courses
on violence against women and girls and on the role of
women in mediation.

11/04/2019

Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank you,
Madam President, for convening today’s open debate
and for being with us in the Council this morning. I
would also like to thank our briefers today.
I reaffirm the United States commitment to the
full, effective and meaningful participation of women
in the United Nations peacekeeping operations. With
its Women, Peace, and Security Act of 2017, the United
States became the first country to translate resolution
1325 (2000) into national law. That historic milestone
demonstrates the commitment and leadership of
the United States regarding the agenda on women
and peace and security. We are also advocates for
improving peacekeeping performance in general, and
increasing the meaningful participation of women in
peacekeeping is at the heart of performance. Security
Council resolutions 2242 (2015) and 2436 (2018), as well
as the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
initiative, charge us to expand opportunities for women
in peacekeeping.

Member States can count on France to continue
to actively promote women’s participation in
peacekeeping operations and in the overall women
and peace and security agenda. The President of the
Republic, Mr. Emmanuel Macron, expressed the wish
that equality between women and men, a major national
cause of the five-year period, would also become a
major international cause. That was a priority goal of
our presidency of the Security Council in March. It is
also a priority of our current presidency of the Group
of Seven. The anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000) in
2020 and the Beijing + 25 forum, which will take place
in France the same year, provide a unique opportunity
to give a fresh impetus to that agenda, despite the odds,
and to ultimately enable its full implementation.

As many previous speakers have affirmed, women
improve the operational effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions and can be important role models, both in
the communities where they are deployed and within
their own national systems, but we still have much
work to do in overcoming their sparse participation in
military contingents, police units and civilian support
forces, let alone in addressing the paucity of uniformed
women in the higher ranks of peacekeeping operations.
The United States continues to work with troop- and
police-contributing countries through its Global
Peace Operations Initiative and International Police
Peacekeeping Operations Support programme, which
strengthen international capacity and capabilities for
executing United Nations and regional peace operations.
More than 11,000 female military and police personnel
have already participated in United States peacekeeping
training events.

To echo the words of Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie,
we should all be feminists, including those on the
Security Council. The agenda that we are discussing
today is at the heart of the revolution currently under
way within the United Nations to promote the role of
women and parity on every front. That revolution is
of course essential in itself, but also for the success of
multilateralism, to which we are committed now more
than ever. That is to say how much France intends to
continue to be a driver of this revolution, which nothing
and no one can stop.

In our Global Peace Operations Initiative partner
countries, we are also investing in infrastructure,
among other things by building women’s barracks and
latrines and removing barriers to women’s effective
participation and peacekeeping training. Our partner
countries have increased the number of women military
peacekeepers deployed to United Nations peace
operations by 89 per cent since 2010, compared to a
7 per cent increase among countries that are not partners
in the Initiative. The International Police Peacekeeping
Operations Support programme has funded United

14/65

19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nations-led workshops for women peacekeeping police
candidates, with a focus on improving communications,
investigating and report-writing, driving and firearms
skills. Since 2014 we have increased the number
of francophone women police eligible to deploy to
United Nations missions, almost doubling the number
recommended for deployment from 36 per cent to more
than 50 per cent.
We encourage all Member States to adopt and revise,
where appropriate, national action plans and strategies
on women and peace and security. These important
tools serve to catalyse commitments to increase the
number of women in peacekeeping and enhance their
recruitment, retention and deployment. We welcome
the uniformed gender-parity strategy of the Department
of Peace Operations for increasing the number of
women in the military and police contingents of United
Nations peacekeeping operations. We urge troop- and
police-contributing countries and all other stakeholders
in peacekeeping to support the strategy’s objectives.
Individually, we should all be taking steps to address
the persistent barriers facing women peacekeepers
and to overcome those impediments in our systems.
Collectively, we should remove those barriers and
advance the meaningful participation of women in
peacekeeping through our resolutions and programmes.
Success depends on our determined, coordinated
efforts to improve peacekeepers’ performance by
championing women’s participation in all aspects of
our peacekeeping efforts.
Mr. Djani (Indonesia): I would like to join other
members, Madam President, in thanking you for
convening this important meeting. I would also like
to thank the briefers, and particularly Major General
Kristin Lund for her championing of the cause of
women peacekeepers. Our women peacekeepers have
been working closely with her and I urge her to continue
that good work.
I also want to commend and welcome the newly
launched gender-parity strategy for uniformed
personnel, which aims to double the number of women
in military and police contingents by 2020 and beyond.
Through resolution 2242 (2015), the Security Council
and the Secretariat have shown us a good example of
how they can work together to improve the meaningful
participation of women in peacekeeping. Building
on that effort, Indonesia would like to highlight the
following points.

S/PV. 8508

The first is about the importance of a strong national
regulatory framework. At the national level, in 2015
our Government issued a ministerial decree on a road
map vision for the period from 2015 to 2019 of 4,000
peacekeepers that established the legal framework
for our aspiration to deploy up to 4,000 Indonesian
personnel in peacekeeping operations. It was updated
in 2017 to include a more comprehensive strategy
aimed at increasing women’s meaningful participation
in peacekeeping. The road map outlined detailed steps
and checklists for action to be taken on a yearly basis
from 2015 to 2019. For this year in particular, we are
deepening our focus on the required skill sets, in
accordance with the missions’ needs in the field, and
we are intensifying our efforts to increase the numbers
of female peacekeepers at United Nations Headquarters
and in missions.
The second is about the political will to build
capacity and pledge more women for deployment. More
than 3,000 Indonesian peacekeepers, including 86
female personnel, are currently serving in eight United
Nations peacekeeping missions. That figure puts
Indonesia in the top eight contributing countries and
makes it the number-one troop-contributing country
among Security Council members. We also hope it will
increase our ranking in terms of women peacekeepers
deployed. To encourage and prepare more of its able
female peacekeepers, Indonesia has incorporated
the issue of gender in United Nations peacekeeping
as part of the regular curriculum at its peacekeeping
training centre in West Java. In order to increase our
contribution, we are currently in the process of sending
one formed police unit of 140 personnel, including
14 women police officers, to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic, as well as 81 individual
police officers vetted by the United Nations Selection
Assistance and Assessment Team process, 26 of whom
are women police officers, who will be deployed to
various missions. We are also exploring the possibility
of including more female personnel in other recently
pledged units, such as military police companies,
explosive-ordnance-disposal and counter-improvisedexplosive-device teams, aeromedical evacuation teams
and transportation companies. In short, there are no
fields that should be closed to women, because they can
do everything.
The third is that a sound strategy is imperative.
We are mindful of the challenges. More often than not,

19-1052615/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

missions’ infrastructure renders peacekeeping less
attractive to female personnel. In addition, we also face
the reality of structural and sociocultural challenges that
should be minimized or removed altogether, whether
at the United Nations, in missions or in contributing
countries. Adequate resources should be made
available. Troop costs should be adequate to meeting
the specific needs of female peacekeepers, supporting
much-needed predeployment training, the provision
of advanced gender-sensitive equipment and facilities
and the creation of a receptive environment for women
personnel in missions. I heard all of that in talking to
our women peacekeepers in the field. That is what they
need, as I think Major General Lund knows very well.
Indonesia will work to incorporate those perspectives
into the cost data to be collected and considered in the
context of the next troop-costs review.
We also welcome new initiatives to enhance
training and capacity-building in order to improve and
build the capacity of female personnel. As was already
mentioned, on 8 and 9 April Mrs. Retno Marsudi,
Indonesia’s Minister for Foreign Affairs, hosted a
regional meeting in Djakarta on women and peace and
security with the intention of creating a global network
of peacekeepers, starting from a regional base. The
understanding is that women as agents of peace have
an important role to play in peacekeeping operations.
Female peacekeepers possess better situational
awareness, provide a sense of comfort and protection
for civilians in dealing with sexual and gender-based
violence, and are able to communicate with children
harmed by conflicts. In short, they can win the
hearts and minds of local communities and civilians.
Mrs. Marsudi has also floated the idea of establishing a
global coalition of women for peace and tolerance made
up of female peacekeepers and women negotiators and
mediators. It is high time for women to be more visible
and in the forefront in carrying the banners of peace.
In conclusion, we agree with the SecretaryGeneral’s point that there is clear evidence showing
that a greater number of women peacekeepers
leads to better protection responses and can make
significant differences. Indonesia believes that women
peacekeepers can do anything, anytime, anywhere
for the cause of peace. Moreover, with reference to
what my brother the Ambassador of the Dominican
Republic mentioned, when he remarked that peace has
a woman’s face, I should like to add that peace also has
a woman’s touch.
16/65

11/04/2019

Mr. Pecsteen de Buytswerve (Belgium) (spoke
in French): I would like first to thank Germany for
organizing this debate, Madam President.
Belgium welcomes the uniformed gender-parity
strategy of January 2019 adopted in accordance with
resolution 2242 (2015). The number of women serving
under the United Nations flag is growing, but as the
Secretary-General has said, we must do more. In 2019,
4 per cent of peacekeepers and 8 per cent of female
police officers in United Nations operations are women.
We must indeed do more, and do better, at every level
of the hierarchy and in every function. Targeting the
hiring process is not enough. Women must be able to
pursue their careers with the same opportunities as men.
I would like to briefly discuss some possible solutions.
First, we must overcome the obstacles related to
deployment. Deployment conditions must be adapted
to female candidates’ professional and personal needs.
Among measures to be taken on the ground, I especially
have in mind infrastructure and medical services
that are appropriate for women. That also applies to
deployment periods. In that regard, the role of gender
advisers is crucial.
Secondly, we must encourage troop contributors
to deploy more women to operations. Troop- and
police-contributing countries should deploy more
women, in line with the commitments made under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, but we realize that
this is still a big challenge. Belgium is above average
in terms of the percentage of women it deploys to
United Nations operations, but at the national level we
are aware that we still need to make progress. Women
make up only 8 per cent of the 27,000 active military
personnel in the Belgian armed forces. The image of a
world of men in this regard is a tenacious one. We have
begun recruitment campaigns to attract more young
women, and I want to highlight a fundamental principle
in our armed forces, which is equality. Women have the
same opportunities as men in the areas of recruitment,
training, compensation, promotions and operational
deployment. This year, for example, the Belgian
armed forces proposed the creation of a mixed-gender
engagement team within the Belgian special forces,
which should be effective beginning in 2020.
Thirdly, it is important to create a healthy
environment for women in operations. A masculine
culture in the military and the police is an obstacle to
women’s participation. Cases of harassment and sexual
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

exploitation and abuse contribute to an environment
that women perceive as toxic or dangerous. Belgium
has been taking action in that regard. We have signed
the voluntary compact with the Secretary-General of
the United Nations on the commitment to eliminate
sexual exploitation and abuse. Our Prime Minister
participates in the Circle of Leadership created by
the Secretary-General. We are funding a centre for
sexual-abuse victims’ rights within the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan. We all have a responsibility
to establish a transparent and accessible accountability
system. We must continue to provide training in the
prevention of harassment and protection. The code of
omertà must be broken, and practical methods must be
put in place to enable people to denounce such actions
in full confidence.
Finally, we must promote the women and peace and
security agenda in the Council generally. The Security
Council should continue to emphasize the essential
role of women throughout the cycles of conflict, from
prevention to peacebuilding. The women and peace and
security agenda is rich and ever-evolving. Women are
agents for change all over the world. The demands are
strong, and civil society often shows us the way. The
Council must be up to the task. We have a responsibility,
particularly in translating those demands into the
mandates of peacekeeping operations, for example by
supporting women’s protection advisers in missions.
Excluding half of humankind from peace efforts
amounts to preparing oneself for failure. Belgium is
convinced that gender equality is an essential element
in achieving lasting peace and security.
Mrs. Gilmutdinova (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I thank you, Madam President, for organizing
today’s open debate devoted to issues related to
women’s participation in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We thank Secretary-General António
Guterres, Major General Kristin Lund, Head of Mission
of the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization,
and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their views.
We firmly believe in the substantial positive
potential of women’s participation in various aspects
of the settlement of armed conflicts and peacebuilding,
including within the framework of United Nations
peacekeeping operations. We would like to point out
that since the Security Council’s adoption in 2000 of
resolution 1325 (2000), the first of a series of resolutions
on women and peace and security, the joint efforts of
the Secretariat and troop-contributing countries have

S/PV. 8508

been fostering a steady increase in the role and number
of women peacekeepers in the military and police
components of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
We agree with the importance of ensuring equal
opportunities for women participating in United
Nations peacekeeping operations and of removing
structural barriers. At the same time, increasing the
number of women in field missions should not be an
end in itself. It is crucial that the process of involving
women in peacekeeping activities be conducted
thoughtfully, based on the actual requirements of a
specific presence on the ground. Professional qualities,
rather than artificial indicators aimed at achieving
a particular ratio of women to men, must also be
taken into account. In that respect, we would like to
caution against the excessive use of temporary special
measures to increase numbers of women peacekeepers,
since lowering the bar, for instance in the area of rank,
can also discriminate against men. What sort of gender
equality or equal opportunities can we talk about in
such circumstances? The specifics for each country’s
presence also have to be taken into account, including
the security conditions for conducting operations.
It goes without saying that both women and men
bring their own particular advantages that should be
used rationally. For example, women peacekeepers may
be more effective in establishing contacts with the local
population, especially women and children, because
they elicit a greater sense of trust and protection. Such
efforts are needed when investigating cases of sexual
violence where the victims may be more open with
women peacekeepers. However, we must not forget that
peacekeeping is also related to military action and its
concomitant risks, particularly when it involves tasks
that require physical strength. In order to increase
women’s involvement in peacekeeping, it is important
to create favourable conditions that take into account
their particular requirements. We know that at one
stage or another women are often forced to give up
peacekeeping work in order to deal with family concerns
and caring for children and relatives. This is generally
related to the impossibility of combining their work
and family life on the ground, and to the insecurity of
their environment. Such factors will have to be taken
into account in the Secretariat’s future implementation
of its gender policy. It is also essential to comply with
the principle of fair geographical representation in
appointing women, including to leadership positions in
the Department of Peace Operations.

19-1052617/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

We should also remember that the primary
responsibility for increasing the number of women
in the military components of peacekeeping forces
belongs to States themselves. It is therefore important
to consider the opinions of the troop-contributing
countries themselves in this regard and each country’s
national approach to staffing. The natural problems
that may arise in achieving one or another indicator
should not be a criterion for making decisions about the
deployment of particular contingents.

to engage with a wider range of people in local
communities, which in turn leads to better situational
awareness. Asking peacekeepers to understand local
conflict dynamics and risks without the ability to
engage effectively with local women is like asking
them to patrol with one eye closed. Having more female
peacekeepers in missions can also make it easier for
women and girls who have survived sexual violence
in conflict, or sexual exploitation and abuse, to come
forward and speak about their experiences.

The Russian Federation has been providing
peacekeepers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations for more than 45 years. Our current
percentage of women is at least 17 per cent, and our
women peacekeepers are working in the United Nations
missions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Kosovo, South Sudan, Western Sahara and Cyprus. We
are pleased that they are highly rated for their service
in the various United Nations peacekeeping missions.
We also have a wealth of experience in training
peacekeepers, including women, at United Nationscertified training centres, particularly the All-Russian
Institute for Advanced Training of Employees of the
Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Russian Federation
in Domodedovo, which has continued to train foreign
law-enforcement officers every year, with the broad
participation of women. We will continue to provide all
possible assistance to building the capacities of United
Nations peacekeeping.

But we do recognize and share the challenges that
most national militaries face in achieving gender parity.
Women still make up only 10.5 per cent of the United
Kingdom’s regular armed forces and only 13 per cent of
military officers. Examples set by trailblazing women
such as Air Marshal Sue Gray, who became the first
three-star female officer in the Royal Air Force this
year, have yet to become the norm. So although we are
proud of the progress we have made in increasing female
participation in the United Kingdom’s armed forces
and, by extension, in our peacekeeping contributions,
we know that there is much more to do. Having said
earlier that this is not about just saying the right thing,
it is about doing things, I would like to set out a few
things that we think should happen.

Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Let me start by
saying how proud I am that the United Kingdom
has already met and exceeded the United Nations
target set in 2015 for doubling female participation
in peacekeeping by 2020. Women currently make up
7 per cent of our contingent peacekeeping troops and
18 per cent of military observers and staff offices. This
is not just a point of principle or about simply saying
the right thing. It is about effectiveness. Just as in our
countries we suffer economically if we do not let all
of our population participate in the workforce, so we
suffer militarily if we exclude women from our armed
forces and from promotion within them. We prevent
ourselves from getting the best people for the job by
limiting the pool available, and we therefore limit our
fighting ability.
On the ground, aside from having the best available
troops, we see real operational benefits from deploying
more gender-balanced forces. As others have, we note
that deploying more peacekeepers enables missions
18/65

We must keep changing mindsets, ensuring that
expanding women’s participation is seen as an essential
operational enabler and part of the core function of a
mission, not as a box-ticking exercise. We must keep
taking concrete action to ensure that women have
equal opportunities to participate in peacekeeping.
That must include equal access to information about
opportunities to deploy, equal opportunities to develop
relevant skills and experience and equal access to
adequate accommodation, facilities, equipment and
medical services in the field. The United Kingdom
supports innovative approaches to tackling those and
other barriers to women’s meaningful participation
in peacekeeping. We are committed to focusing on
practical action, sharing best practices and lessons
learned and continuing to learn from other troopand police-contributing nations. To that end, as we
announced on the margins of the United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, the United Kingdom is
contributing $1.3 million to the newly launched Elsie
Initiative on Women in Peace Operations, and we fully
support the Elsie fund’s focus on incentivizing and
assisting Member States in deploying more trained
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and qualified uniformed women and maximizing the
impact of women’s participation.
It is important that we increase the number
and proportion of women in peacekeeping, but of
course all peacekeepers, male and female, share a
responsibility to conduct peacekeeping operations in
a gender-sensitive manner, and we are determined to
equip our peacekeepers with the skills, knowledge and
understanding that this requires. Since November 2016,
all United Kingdom military personnel deploying on
major international operations have received training
on preventing sexual violence in conflict and on the
women and peace and security agenda. As a training
partner, we are committed to ensuring that the training
that we offer personnel from other countries is gendersensitive.
Incorporating gender perspectives in peacekeeping
does not concern women alone. Gender equality is
everybody’s business. We all stand to gain from more
effective, inclusive peacekeeping if we redouble our
efforts to achieve high-ambition targets for women’s
participation. Flowing from that, I have a question for
our briefers, which is simply to ask, in the spirit of
taking action, what are the most urgent interventions
that they would recommend the United Nations and
Member States adopt to make mission environments
more women-friendly? What are the best examples of
best practices that they have seen in use at the national
level to really enable that agenda to make progress?
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than four minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Delegations with lengthy statements are
kindly requested to circulate the texts in writing and
to deliver a condensed version when speaking in the
Chamber. I also want to inform everyone that we will
be carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour,
as we have a very large number of speakers to hear this
afternoon on this important topic.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Trade of Hungary.
Mr. Szijjártó (Hungary): Thank you, Madam
President, for giving us the opportunity to express our
views about this very important topic, although I have to
be very careful since I represent a small country whose
army is not one of the world’s most powerful. I will
therefore try to make my remarks modest and humble.

S/PV. 8508

Regardless of size, we are a responsible member
of the international community and have always
been committed to contributing to the success of
peacekeeping operations. We recently celebrated the
twentieth anniversary of our accession to NATO, and
when we looked at our track record, we were proud
to see that we have not only received the benefits
of belonging to the Alliance but have been able to
contribute to its success as well. Similarly, when we
look at our track record in United Nations peacekeeping,
I can say that we have contributed and will continue to
contribute to the success of our common efforts, since
we consider peacekeeping one of the most important
functions of the United Nations. We should, of course,
implement reforms, and we are ready to take part in
that, especially since we consider peacekeeping a vital
instrument for tackling the root causes of migration,
which is currently a major challenge all over the world.
We can see that if we can prevent the occurrence of
situations that force people to flee their homes, we may
ultimately succeed not in managing migratory flows
but stopping them altogether.
The Hungarian Government recently decided to
increase the number of our troops serving abroad from
1,000 to 1,200, which will enable us to increase the
numbers of our peacekeepers within the United Nations
framework as well. Since that decision was taken, we
have begun withdrawing from the United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus. I can now announce
that we will be deploying 60 additional peacekeepers
to the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. Our
peacekeepers will serve in sector west in Lebanon
under Italian command. In that regard, I would like
to take this opportunity to express our respect for the
Government and the people of Lebanon in their work of
caring for millions of refugees and making enormous
efforts to ensure their country’s stability and thereby
have a positive impact on the region.
We see great opportunities for the involvement of
police forces in international peacekeeping operations.
Our police forces in the Western Balkans are very well
trained and are helping countries in the region protect
their own borders. Those are not classic peacekeeping
operations, but keeping borders properly protected
definitely helps keep the peace.
We recognize the role of women in those operations.
In Hungary 20 per cent of the staff of the armed forces
and 23 per cent of the police forces are women. Based
on those figures, we are clearly committed to the

19-1052619/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and are interested in understanding best
practices, or, in particular, as the representative of the
United Kingdom said, the best of the best. We have not
so far drafted a national action plan, but I am happy
to announce that our armed forces guidelines on the
matter are already in preparation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me say,
Madam President, that we honoured by your personal
presence here today. In honour of the German presidency
of the Security Council this month, let me also try to
thank you in German: Vielen Dank, Frau Vorsitzende.
We align ourselves with the statement to be delivered
later today by the observer of the European Union.
We express deep appreciation to Germany and
France for making the women and peace and security
agenda a priority of their joint presidencies. We would
also like to thank the German presidency for bringing
more light and transparency to this gathering by
opening the curtains and for its tremendous efforts for
better timekeeping.
We also applaud the Secretary-General for his
statement this morning and for his leadership. We
thank him for giving the issue of equal participation
so much prominence in the important Action for
Peacekeeping initiative.
Having listened to other speakers this morning,
we are pleased that we agree that we are no longer
debating why more women should be involved in
peace operations but are specifically discussing the
question of how we can make that happen. Barriers to
female participation differ across missions and across
individual troop-contributing countries (TCCs). But
the issue itself concerns us all.
In the Kingdom of the Netherlands we have just
celebrated the seventy-fifth anniversary of female
participation in the armed forces. In that light, I am
honoured that two female Dutch officers are members
of my delegation today. We acknowledge that we have
made progress in the past 75 years, but we realize that
in the Kingdom of the Netherlands we still struggle to
get the numbers right. That is an issue I have also heard
my colleagues discussing today. In trying to address
the “how” question, I will to focus on three issues:
first, a full analysis of the existing barriers; secondly,
20/65

11/04/2019

translating our findings into action; and, thirdly,
matching action with training.
On the first point, analysis of the existing barriers,
there was a very good baseline study last year by the
Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed
Forces. The study details the current barriers that
women face in assuming military and police roles
in United Nations peace operations. That itself was
a positive step, but more needs to be done. We need
to listen better to the real experts — women — when
researching the current obstacles to their participation.
All of us have heard stories of women becoming
dehydrated because they stop drinking fluids in order
to avoid a risky night-time trip to the toilet. That is
unacceptable. We must work together to end those kinds
of situations. The recently launched Elsie Initiative
Fund will allow for additional research into TCCand mission-specific barriers. That will enable us to
develop targeted policy and interventions in response.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands is a proud supporter
of the Elsie Initiative Fund, and we encourage other
Member States to follow suit.
That brings me to my second point, translating
research into action. We need to bring down the barriers
to equal participation, both at home and in missions. It
is not rocket science. A lot can be achieved by simple
measures — increasing efforts to recruit more women,
appointing national gender advisers, creating genderresponsive criteria for deployment and providing
adequate camp accommodation and equipment.
Furthermore, it is not only about the hardware; the
software in our minds, the culture, is also important.
We need to create a culture in which we listen and are
responsive to gender-specific needs. The SecretaryGeneral is doing that through his uniformed genderparity strategy, which we welcome, and we call on
everyone to support it.
My third, and last, point is this — in order to achieve
the necessary change in culture we need proper gender
training throughout the military curriculum, including
predeployment and deployment training itself. We need
to instil a gender-responsive attitude across all mission
pillars and personnel. That applies to both women and
men. We do that in the Kingdom of the Netherlands, for
example, by means of a gender-in-operations course.
It is also about the numbers. To get the numbers right
at the United Nations, we support the female military
officers course. We hope that more countries can do
that as well.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In
conclusion,
improving
our
missions’
effectiveness through increased female participation
is crucial for our efforts to modernize United Nations
peacekeeping. Increasing female participation featured
prominently in the Declaration of Shared Commitments
on United Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which we
signed last September. Let us redouble our efforts to
make increased female participation a reality. It is time
for us to walk the talk.
May I also say to Major General Lund that we are
inspired both by her presence in the Chamber today and
by the fact that she is a role model for many of us, and
certainly for the military in my country.
The President: Before we proceed, as our
briefers are leaving soon, I would like to give them
an opportunity to answer a few questions that have
been posed.
I now give the floor to Major General Lund.
Major General Lund: I thank the President for
this opportunity to take the floor again, and I thank
participants for all the good input so far. It is good to
see that there is a lot of momentum on this topic in the
Security Council, even if, as one who is in the field, I
can say that the numbers are saying something else.
In answer to the question from the representative
of the United Kingdom, I think the first and most
important action is to get the numbers up. Numbers
matter when we are out there. Secondly, every camp and
position must be able to accommodate both genders. I
did it myself, within two years. It was possible — and
that was for all 26 positions, or camps. Thirdly, it has
not been mentioned by many people that men need to
be champions in the promotion of gender equality. We
need more men to talk to men, because, most likely,
they have a better way of communicating with each
other than I do. Those are my three points.
The President: I now give the floor to Ms. Merekaje.
Ms. Merekaje: I wish to express my appreciation
for everyone’s comments. We are making progress. We
are heading somewhere. I would like to say that, first,
there is a need to improve on the facilities so that we are
able to retain those who are already in peacekeeping
missions. Secondly, we need to strengthen mentorship
programmes so that we are able to prepare more young
women to take up roles in peacekeeping operations.
Thirdly, the troop- and police-contributing countries
need to look at their in-country legislation so that they

S/PV. 8508

are able to create environments that encourage young
women to join the service.
The standards for joining the service should be set
out for young women so that they are prepared to meet
the required standards for service. We have seen cases
where young women have encountered an obstacle to
serving in a mission because they do not know how
to drive a manual vehicle. If that requirement were to
be made clear in advance, then young women would
be able to prepare themselves to qualify and join the
service. In that way we will be able to get more women
in the service and they can then qualify to go on
peacekeeping missions.
I would like to excuse myself because I have to
catch up with the curfew outside.
The President: I thank both our briefers for their
concrete proposals drawn from their broad experience.
I would now like to proceed by giving the floor to
the representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Hoai Trung (Viet Nam): Viet Nam
commends the German presidency for having convened
today’s debate on women in peacekeeping operations.
We would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his insightful briefing.
Viet Nam is convinced that women are active,
key players and agents of peace who make unique and
substantive contributions to lasting peace in conflict
areas. Their important roles can be strongly felt in a
number of aspects.
Female peacekeepers can have access to parts of
populations and areas that are usually closed off to men.
They can provide a presence within local communities
that empowers women and girls in host communities,
giving opportunities for United Nations missions
to address the gender-specific issues and needs that
women and girls face. They can act as role models
for women and girls in male-dominated societies to
further push for their rights and participation in peace
processes, including joining national security sectors,
thus in turn potentially increasing the number of women
participating in peace operations.
Greater gender parity can also lead to a reduction
in sexual exploitation and abuse, crimes that have
weakened support for peacekeeping operations.
According to a recent study, a small increase in the
number of women in military peacekeeping units can

19-1052621/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

reduce abuse allegations by more than half. Viet Nam
is also of the view that women participating in peace
operations continue to face many obstacles that can
bar them from reaching their full potential while in
missions and even prevent them from joining in the
first place. Viet Nam therefore wishes to make the
following recommendations.
First, resolution 2242 (2015) should be further
effectively implemented.
Secondly, we propose that the Secretary-General
conduct thorough research on country-specific barriers
to women’s participation in security forces and their
deployment as peacekeepers, and we recommend an
overarching framework of solutions for troop- and
police-contributing Member States that could be based
on the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy 2018-2028
submitted by the Department of Peace Operations.
Thirdly, we encourage developed countries to
increase their support to the Elsie Initiative Fund to help
accelerate progress towards achieving the targets to
increase the proportion of women serving in uniformed
military and police units.
And last but not least, it is important to underline
the need for United Nations peacekeeping missions
to abide by the principles of non-interference in the
internal affairs of sovereign States, consent of the
parties, impartiality and the non-use of force except in
self-defence and defence of the mandate.
Since 2014, Viet Nam has been sending its
military officers to United Nations peacekeeping
operations in South Sudan and the Central African
Republic. Vietnamese women are committed to greater
participation in peacekeeping at all levels and in key
positions. Throughout Viet Nam’s history, Vietnamese
women have played an important role in both national
defence and national construction. In October 2017, the
first female Vietnamese peacekeeper, a major, joined
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS).
One year later, in October 2018, Viet Nam deployed
its first level-2 field hospital to South Sudan, with
10 women among its staff. We strive to continue this
positive trend.
I wish to thank you, Madam President, and I also
wish to pay tribute to all peacekeepers around the world
for their contributions to and sacrifices for international
peace, security and prosperity.
22/65

11/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Guatemala.
Mr. Castañeda Solares (Guatemala) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the German presidency of the
Security Council for having convened this open debate
and for having circulated the concept note (S/2018/293,
annex) that will serve as a basis for our discussions.
We also appreciate the briefings delivered on this very
important topic.
The full and significant participation by female
military and police personnel and civilian experts in
United Nations peacekeeping operations contributes to
the greater credibility and more effective implementation
of the mandates handed down by the Security Council.
It also represents an important message about the
progress made towards achieving gender equality
and the empowerment of women in host-country
communities, encouraging their participation in the
process of the establishment and building of peace.
Resolution 1325 (2000) set a precedent in
recognizing the crucial role of women in the promotion
of international peace and security. As Member States,
our focus in the context of this resolution should not be
limited only to setting a baseline in reference points
but also include practical ways of promoting women’s
participation in conflict prevention, peace negotiations
and post-conflict recovery.
Experience has shown that women have made
invaluable contributions to peacebuilding, particularly
in the recovery of local economies, post-conflict
planning and the restoration of governance. For these
reasons, we believe in the need to continue joining
forces within the United Nations system to continue
giving fresh impetus to resolution 1325 (2000),
particularly as regards prevention, under the concept
of sustaining peace, based on those resolutions that
reaffirm the peacebuilding architecture.
It is clear that if women are not involved in the
drawing up of national policies, societies will not
move forward. It is therefore necessary to eliminate
inequalities and ensure that woman’s abilities are no
longer excluded. In this regard, we reiterate the fact
that actions to ensure the empowerment of women are
instruments that promote the development of States
and that public policies must therefore ensure the
mainstreaming of a gender parity and equality focus.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

As a United Nations troop-contributing country,
Guatemala is honoured to participate by deploying
troops in areas of armed conflict. Over recent years,
we have deployed more than 300 women officers to
posts that include military observers, staff officers,
assistant staff officers, logistical support staff, platoon
commanders, doctors, interpreters, office workers
and investigation specialists, which attests to the
commitment and the potential of Guatemalan women to
seek peaceful and comprehensive solutions to conflicts.
Many of these women promoted projects that had a
positive impact in Haiti and in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
To that crucial end, Guatemala, through its
regional peacekeeping operations training centre, has
provided training that focuses on protection, special
needs and human rights, specifically regarding women
and children in conflict and post-conflict situations.
We have also promoted the participation of women in
international courses offered by the Organization.
To conclude, I would like to underscore the fact
that Guatemala is closing the inequality gap in the firm
belief that women contribute added value to this noble
task. We therefore will continue to promote actions
through our national action plan on resolution 1325
(2000), with the goal of increasing and strengthening
women’s participation, particularly in key and
decision-making posts. It is a source of pride and an
honour for Guatemala to contribute women staff; we
will continue to do so because we are a country that is
committed to peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Mexico.
Ms. Vasquez Muñoz (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, Mr. President, I wish to express our
gratitude to Germany for having convened this debate
and for giving such high priority to the women and
peace and security agenda during your presidency.
Women and girls make up more than half of the
world’s population, and their vital contribution to
inclusive societies is very important and means that
they have a real role to play in conflict prevention and
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding.
The absence of women in peace processes and
negotiations has exacerbated economic, social and
gender inequalities, as well as the political and social
discrimination that already exist in post-conflict

S/PV. 8508

societies. That can no longer be tolerated. It is fitting
that the Security Council reaffirm the important role
that women play in the prevention and resolution of
conflicts and peacebuilding and that it emphasize
repeatedly the importance of their equal participation
and full involvement in all initiatives for maintaining
and promoting peace and security.
Almost 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), we have strengthened a relevant legal and
political framework in the form of the women and peace
and security agenda. It is nevertheless necessary to make
greater efforts to ensure the effective, coherent and
cross-cutting implementation of the gender perspective
throughout the United Nations system and to address
the practical and political marginalization that persists
with regard to the meaningful participation of women in
all areas and at all levels of decision-making, including
the maintenance of international peace and security.
The number of women participating in peace
operations continues to remain at unacceptably low
levels — they account for only 4 per cent of military
personnel and 10 per cent of police personnel. We
therefore commend the efforts of the Secretary-General
to implement his gender parity strategy throughout the
United Nations system, as well as the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations, which Mexico endorses, so as to increase
the number of civilian and uniformed women at all
levels and in key positions in peacekeeping and to
integrate the gender perspective into all phases of
analysis, planning, implementation and reporting.
We hope that the revised strategy to increase the
participation of women in peace operations, to be
presented by the Secretary-General for the Security
Council’s consideration pursuant to resolution 2436
(2018), will be able contribute to the full, meaningful
and effective participation of women in all aspects of
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustainable peace.
Mexico supports and encourages the full
participation of women in all areas of public life. Gender
equality and the empowerment of women and girls
is one of the guiding principles of the transformative
multilateral foreign policy of the new Government
of Mexico. In that regard, I am pleased to announce
that, since the resumption of its participation in United
Nations peace operations in 2015, Mexico has deployed
a total of nine women from its armed forces to peace
missions in Colombia, Western Sahara and Mali.

19-1052623/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In addition, we have succeeded in meeting
the target of 15 per cent of women participating
in peacekeeping missions required of contributing
countries in those operations by the United Nations. As
we recently announced at the 29 March United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial on uniformed capabilities,
performance and protection, Mexico will deploy a
greater number of women in peace operations. They
will be trained in accordance with United Nations
standards in fulfilment of Mexico’s commitment to
ensuring the Organization’s efforts to strengthen the
meaningful participation of women in such operations.
Similarly, earlier this month, the first course on gender
and the women and peace and security agenda for
female personnel began as part of the predeployment
training that the Joint Training Centre for Peacekeeping
Operations of Mexico has been providing since 2018.
In conclusion, we must continue to question how
we perceive the use of force, conflicts, weapons and
their relation to the social constructs of masculinity and
femininity. Only in that way will we be able to continue
advancing the women and peace and security agenda
and achieve gender equality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Canada.
Mr. Arbeiter (Canada): I am pleased to speak
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security — an informal network of 57 interested
Member States, chaired by Canada, representing all
five regional groups at the United Nations.
Including women in United Nations peace
operations is both the right and the smart thing to do.
Resolution 1325 (2000) recognizes the importance of
women’s equal participation and full involvement in
all efforts for the maintenance and promotion of peace
and security. The Security Council has been resolute
in affirming the indispensable role of women in
peacekeeping and continues to highlight the imperative
of increasing the number of civilian and uniformed
women in peace operations, including in resolutions
2242 (2015), 2378 (2017), 2382 (2017) and 2436 (2018).
Troop and police contributors have echoed those
calls, including through the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative of the Secretary-General. Overall, increasing
the participation of women in peace operations
contributes to the effective implementation of the
2030 Agenda for Sustaining Development, including
24/65

11/04/2019

Sustainable Development Goal 5, on gender equality,
and Goal 16, on peace, justice and strong institutions.
Evidence and experience demonstrate that women’s
participation leads to outcomes that make peace
operations more effective. Women bring valuable
perspectives, improve situational awareness, increase
the protection-reach of missions, enhance the access
of populations to critical services and help build trust
with local communities. That enhances the safety
and security of peacekeepers and the communities
they serve, as well as the operational effectiveness
of missions.
Despite facing persistent barriers, women have
repeatedly demonstrated their ability to perform the
same tasks, to the same standards and under the same
difficult conditions, as their male counterparts. The
Group of Friends applauds the efforts undertaken by
the Secretariat, in particular the uniformed gender
parity strategy of the Department of Peace Operations,
to increase the number of uniformed women personnel.
We are committed to helping achieve its targets.
However, we stress that this is not a numbers
game. Women must be able to participate fully and
meaningfully in peace operations at all levels and in
all positions — whether serving in civilian, police or
military roles and whether in leadership or as part of
integrated mission teams.
In addition, efforts to reduce barriers to women’s
participation and develop institutional standards
to promote their safety, such as training on sexual
harassment and on abuse prevention and response, are
critical. We also welcome recent progress in achieving
the gender targets under the strategy, including
increasing the deployment of mixed-gender police
and military units and the appointment of women to
command positions in missions.
Yet despite that progress we are still failing to
ensure the full inclusion of women in peace operations.
Less than 5 per cent of military contingents and less than
8 per cent of formed police units are women, and only
22 per cent of civilians in peace operations are women.
The situation is even more dire when examining the
participation of uniformed women in the higher ranks
of peace operations. We must do better.
While a number of efforts have been undertaken by
the United Nations, it is ultimately up to the troop- and
police-contributing countries to recruit, train, support,
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

equip and deploy women peacekeepers. All troop- and
police-contributing countries should comprehensively
review their criteria and procedures for deployment
to United Nations peace operations, including by
addressing persistent barriers facing women, such as
those related to recruitment, training and promotion
initiatives, restrictions on occupations, access to
deployment opportunities, institutional challenges
related to the structure of respective security services
and additional attitudinal constraints.
We simply cannot achieve success in United
Nations peace operations without getting our own
houses in order. To that end, national action plans and
strategies on women and peace and security can serve
as important tools to catalyse commitments on women
in peace operations. We encourage the adoption and
revision of such plans to enhance women’s recruitment,
retention and deployment in security services
supporting peace operations.
Finally, the Group notes that increasing the number
of women in peace operations must be accompanied by
a relentless effort to meet United Nations commitments
to mainstream gender considerations in such operations.
Success depends upon peace operations being equipped
with appropriate gender analysis and expertise at all
levels and all stages of a mission. The role of gender
advisers and women protection advisers in achieving
that cannot be understated, and we emphasize the
importance of ensuring that they have the access to
the resources and training needed to fulfil their critical
tasks. Collectively, we can make peace operations more
effective and reflective of the communities they serve.
(spoke in French)
On behalf of my country, allow me to make a few
additional remarks about women’s participation in
peace operations. I underscore the excellent briefings
by the Secretary-General, Major General Lund and
Ms. Merekaje. As we heard today, the meaningful
participation of women in peace operations is not
merely desirable but is, in all honesty, imperative. That
assessment is neither new nor the subject of dispute.
It has been reiterated by many Member States, the
Secretary-General, the Under-Secretaries-General,
civil-society representatives and the Force Commanders
on the ground. It is a point of consensus, which Canada
welcomes. That consensus must, however, be translated
into operational change. The numbers are nowhere near
where they should be. Something is not working. Most

S/PV. 8508

members of the Council and the General Assembly
agree that progress on the participation of women in
peace operations has been scant, slow and insufficient.
Canada’s Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations seeks to change that. Its concept and
design are informed by the views of women who have
personally participated in peace operations. Together
with our partners, we started by listening to women
peacekeepers about their experiences before, during
and after deployment. We heard directly from them
about the significant structural barriers they continue
to face, including a lack of opportunity for training;
a lack of mentors and support networks; inadequate
accommodations, facilities and equipment in the field;
a lack of information about deployment opportunities
and a lack of leadership. We also heard about their
experiences of unwanted touching, sexual advances and
offensive remarks and the impact of such experiences
on themselves and their missions. They questioned
whether to report such incidents, and if so, to what end.
The fact that such a situation persists is disheartening,
but we can and must address it.
(spoke in English)
What we heard was anecdotal, but accurate. We
need to continue listening. For that reason, Canada
and Norway are funding the development of a barrier
assessment methodology to gather the kind of empirical
evidence that can help to sharpen our understanding of
the systemic barriers confronting women peacekeepers.
The Canadian Armed Forces and the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police are also working alongside our
bilateral partners in the Elsie Initiative, the Ghana
Armed Forces and the Zambia Police Service to use
those barrier assessments to find ways to address the
structural barriers that exist in our own systems. Our
intention is to share what we learn with everyone and
to encourage others to undertake similar efforts. We
were very pleased to hear this morning from several
members addressing the Council that they are also
understanding the barriers in their systems. We realize
that that may not be an easy thing to do and that some
Member States may need some support.
In that context, we congratulate UN-Women for
launching the Elsie Initiative Fund for Uniformed
Women in Peace Operations on the eve of the
Peacekeeping Ministerial. The Elsie Fund offers an
innovative approach by financially incentivizing the
increased deployment of trained and qualified women,

19-1052625/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

including by providing premiums for the deployment
of gender-strong units. Canada has already provided
$15 million to the Fund, and we welcome the additional
contributions recently announced by the Netherlands,
the United Kingdom and Finland and, earlier today,
by Germany. We encourage all Member States to
consider applying for funding to support their own
domestic efforts or, alternatively, to consider providing
contributions to the Fund.

United Nations peace operations. It is only when we
work together that we can make that a reality.

I would also like to commend Germany’s leadership
in establishing a network for women peacekeepers.
We have heard from many Canadian and other women
peacekeepers about the value of such a network. We
heard the same from briefers this morning, and look
forward to working with Germany and other stakeholders
on networking in relation to the Elsie Initiative. The
importance of networking was also raised repeatedly
at the Peacekeeping Ministerial preparatory meeting
on women and peace and security, which Ethiopia and
Canada co-hosted in Addis Ababa in January. With
women and men from over 60 countries participating,
the gathering exemplified the diversity that can improve
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions.

I have the honour to speak on behalf of the five
Nordic countries — Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
Sweden and my own country, Norway.

I was there and I learned a tremendous amount
from the women peacekeepers, civil society leaders,
academics and diplomats who shared their own
personal experiences while on mission. Their message
was clear — women are agents of change and partners
for missions, they are mobilizers and they have deep
connections to local communities. They also said, quite
clearly, that leaders should be held accountable for
being inclusive. Inclusion is easier said than done. It
is a choice in how we act. That choice extends to how
United Nations operations are designed, resourced,
staffed and evaluated.
The Security Council has a choice as well. It can
demonstrate that it is listening in how it formulates
mission mandates, from inception to drawdown and
beyond. Canada is strongly committed to working with
the United Nations on practical ways to overcome the
barriers facing women peacekeepers. We are convinced
that we can achieve those goals by continuing to listen
and continuing to act.
If elected for the 2021-2022 term on the Security
Council, Canada will bring that approach and
commitment to its work. We need to encourage and
push each other and the United Nations. It will be
challenging, but everyone benefits from more inclusive
26/65

The President: Speaking of the candidacy of
Canada for a term on the Security Council, we try to
limit our statements in the Council to five minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Norway.
Ms. Skåre (Norway): I will keep my statement to
less than five minutes.

I would like to commend the Secretary-General for
his focus on gender equality and gender parity. Strong
leadership is fundamental to combating ingrained
prejudice and other obstacles to the full participation
of women in peace operations and peace processes.
We need to identify the barriers that exist in our home
countries and within the United Nations system, and
we need to identify whether they are having an adverse
impact on women’s participation in peacekeeping. We
would like to comment on five issues raised in the
presidency’s concept note (S/2019/293, annex).
First, Security Council mandates should be explicit
about the need to deploy more women and ensure that
women are represented in all categories of personnel and
about the importance of mainstreaming gender issues
throughout the work of missions. Mandates should also
be explicit about the importance of ensuring the full
participation of women in political processes in host
communities. That is vital to the successful resolution
of conflicts and enabling a successful transition from a
peacekeeping presence to other forms of support.
Secondly, as troop- and police-contributing
countries, we all have a responsibility to deploy more
women and address barriers to women’s deployment,
including through national action plans for the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women
and peace and security.
Thirdly, training is key, both for increasing women’s
participation and for enhancing all peacekeepers’
understanding of the gender perspective.
Fourthly, Member States should actively promote
women to leadership positions. That is important both to
tap into the valuable resources that women represent and
to provide role models who can encourage more women
to participate. We are speaking from experience. The
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Nordic countries are proud to provide women leaders to
United Nations peacekeeping operations. One example
is Major General Kristin Lund — the first woman to
be appointed Force Commander of a United Nations
mission and the first woman to head the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization in the Middle East.
Fifthly, there is often strength in numbers. The
establishment of different forms of women’s networks
is a highly effective way of ensuring active outreach
and enabling women peacekeepers to exchange
experiences. The Women Military Network, which was
initiated by Norway and Sweden in New York last year,
is one example. I would encourage all women from
fellow Member States who have a military background
or who work in peacekeeping to join that network.
In conclusion, the Nordic countries stand committed
to continuing to work to increase the number of women
serving in United Nations peacekeeping operations at
all levels and in all categories of personnel.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Japan.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): I would like to start by
thanking Germany for convening today’s meeting and
taking up this very important topic.
The full and meaningful participation of women in
all stages of the peace process has become today an
essential part of sustaining peace, including successful
peace operations. The Security Council has recognized
its importance repeatedly, in resolution 1325 (2000)
and subsequent resolutions. Japan has pursued that goal
under the leadership of Prime Minister Abe.
The participants in the fifth World Assembly for
Women, hosted by Japan last month, reaffirmed the
significance of the greater participation of women
in peacekeeping missions and host countries, the
military, police and justice sectors. The recruitment
of talented and motivated women is key to improving
the performance of any organization, including United
Nations peace operations.
Japan welcomes the efforts undertaken by the
Secretariat, including the new Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy, to increase uniformed women
personnel. Member States can boost such efforts in
two ways. First, troop-contributing countries (TCCs)
and police-contributing countries (PCCs) can ensure
the full and meaningful participation of women in their
national military and police, which would greatly help

S/PV. 8508

increase the number of uniformed women in United
Nations peace operations. After all, how can TCCs
and PCCs help United Nations field missions meet the
uniformed gender parity strategy targets if they do not
meet those targets at home?
Here, I would like to share some of Japan’s
experiences. One recent notable achievement has been
the lifting of all restrictions on women’s postings in the
Self-Defence Forces, except in two units where maternal
protection is required, based on relevant laws. We have
decided to allow women’s participation in infantry,
reconnaissance, engineering, all types of aviation
and even submarine units. That enables talented and
motivated female personnel to pursue careers according
to their interests. That significant policy change was
driven by political leadership. In 2013, at the General
Assembly, Prime Minister Abe called for a society
where women shine (see A/68/PV.12). Since then, he
has urged the Self-Defence Forces to reform themselves
and ensure meaningful participation for women.
A holistic approach is also important, given
that increasing women’s presence requires time
and resources to implement multiple solutions,
from changing mindsets to building facilities for
accommodation. In April 2017, the Ministry of Defence
launched an initiative that aims to address all remaining
obstacles hindering women’s participation.
The second step Member States can take to help
implement the strategy is to utilize pre-deployment
training targeting female uniformed personnel to help
facilitate their deployment. For instance, the women’s
outreach courses of the United Nations Signals
Academy have trained 155 female uniformed personnel
and 19 have already been deployed to missions or are to
be deployed soon. Japan has provided financial support
to those courses, as well as to the female military
officers’ course held by UN-Women.
In conclusion, let me mention our ongoing efforts
on the women and peace and security agenda. Japan
revised its national action plan on women, peace and
security in March. In Tokyo in December 2018, Japan
co-hosted, with the Department of Peace Operations,
the first-ever capacity-building training course for
women’s protection advisers to address conflictrelated sexual violence. The training will make field
missions more responsive to the specific needs of local
women and girls and more accessible to women in
the community.

19-1052627/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

We will continue to implement the women and
peace and security agenda and facilitate women’s
participation at all levels of United Nations peace
operations, including by appointing talented female
officers to peacekeeping missions and dispatching
female trainers to capacity-building programmes.

organization. The Ministry of Defence has a Gender
Adviser, a Joint Council on Gender Perspectives and
an Equal Opportunities and Gender Perspective Unit.
Training curricula for the armed forces, Carabinieri
and Guardia di Finanza include the gender perspective
and its objectives.

Ms. Zappia (Italy): I wish to thank you, Mr. President
and, of course, Germany for having dedicated today’s
open debate to such an important topic.

As announced at the recent Peacekeeping
Ministerial, Italy is offering to all interested troopcontributing
countries
and
police-contributing
countries, for the current year, a new set of courses for
gender advisers, the female engagement team and on
the gender perspective. More can be done. The launch
of the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
as well as the establishment of the Elsie Initiative
Fund, to overcome barriers to increasing women’s
meaningful participation in peacekeeping operations is
an important step in the right direction and we praise
Canada’s leadership in that regard.

I would also like to thank the Secretary-General,
not only for his opening remarks but also, and above
all, for being such a formidable advocate and actor
for gender parity at the United Nations. I would also
like to thank the briefers, Major General Lund and
Ms. Merekaje, for their remarks.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the observer of the European Union.
Italy, the top troop contributor in the Western
European and others Group and one of the most
generous contributors to the peacekeeping budget, is
deeply committed to improving the effectiveness and
efficiency of United Nations peacekeeping. Experience
has proved that women — be they peacekeepers, civilian
staff, gender advisers or gender experts — play a
fundamental role in enhancing the delivery of mandates
and in improving the protection of civilians, as
well as the safety and security of peacekeepers and
humanitarian actors. Therefore, we should redouble our
efforts to make United Nations peacekeeping missions
fit for women and increase their presence.
Similarly, as Minister Von der Leyen mentioned
in her remarks, it is absolutely crucial to ensure that
all efforts to strengthen the presence of women in
armed forces and peacekeeping missions be given the
maximum visibility. A strong public communications
campaign on the contribution of women to peacekeeping
must be a fundamental element of our strategy.
Italy fully supports the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the incentives and measures planned
under the uniformed gender parity strategy, launched
by the Secretariat. During its most recent tenure on the
Security Council, Italy initiated resolution 2382 (2017),
which reaffirms the indispensable role of women
in peacekeeping.
At the national level, in recent years, Italy has put
in place a number of actions to integrate the gender
perspective at all levels and in all branches of its military
28/65

The Security Council has a role to play by calling
on the Secretariat, heads of missions, as well as troopand police-contributing countries to ensure that the
gender perspective is always duly taken into account,
addressing persistent barriers and challenges to the
deployment of women.
As Major General Lund said earlier today, Special
Representatives of the Secretary-General and Force
Commanders should make every effort to promote
the active and meaningful involvement of women in
situation analysis and planning, as well as in activities
in the field, in particular those aimed at building
trust with the local population and strengthening
partnerships with local women’s organizations. Indeed,
women deployed in United Nations missions should be,
first and foremost, interlocutors with the local female
population. Our experience on the ground, especially in
southern Lebanon and Afghanistan, show that whenever
there is interaction between female soldiers and the
local female population, such interaction is fruitful and
successful. In a recent case, one of our most brilliant
female soldiers of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL), building on her experience as
Chief of the Sector West Commander’s close protection
team, decided to go back to Lebanon, after her term in
UNIFIL, to train the Lebanese female soldiers for the
Presidential Guard Brigade, in the framework of our
bilateral assistance to the country.
The creation of uniformed women’s networks,
to be implemented by June 2020, must also be seen
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

as a mechanism by which to foster dialogue with
female organizations present in the host country. It
would benefit the female component of peacekeeping
operations and, at the same time, empower the women
of the host country. That comprehensive approach to
women and peacekeeping must also serve to further
advance the fight against the scourge of sexual
exploitation and abuse. Italy fully supports the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse and, during the United Nations Peacekeeping
Ministerial, announced a new contribution of €160,000
to the Trust Fund in Support of Victims of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse.
Finally, if the result of having this kind debate
can bring to the table, as I see, a majority of Council
members with women representatives, it is already a
very good result.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of India.
Ms. Gambhir (India): We thank you, Madam
President, for convening this open debate on this
important issue. We also thank the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their useful remarks.
The normative and operative frameworks relating
to the women and peace and security agenda have
considerably strengthened across the United Nations
system over the past two decades. Today, there is
greater awareness about the centrality of the meaningful
participation of women in United Nations peace and
security efforts, including peacekeeping.
In the Declaration of Shared Commitments on
United Nations Peacekeeping Operations under the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, Member States
agreed to collectively commit to implement the women
and peace and security agenda and its priorities by
ensuring the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all stages of the peace process and by
systematically integrating a gender perspective into
all stages of analysis, planning, implementation and
reporting. They further recommitted to increasing
the number of civilian and uniformed women in
peacekeeping at all levels and in key positions.
In that context, India welcomes the recently
launched uniformed gender parity strategy and sees
it as a collective commitment towards implementing
Action for Peacekeeping.

S/PV. 8508

India is committed to increasing the number of
women peacekeepers and to meeting targets in that
regard within the specified timelines. The landmark
first-ever deployment by the United Nations of an allfemale formed police unit in Liberia by India became a
role model for the local women to participate in policing
and in the relevant rule-of-law frameworks.
India is fully prepared to deploy a female
engagement team, comprising 22 women officers and
soldiers, as part of a rapidly deployable battalion in
the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo by August.
We will also deploy a women formed police unit in the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan by the end of
this year.
We fully welcome the initiatives by the United
Nations Secretariat in driving the formulation of
policy frameworks to increase the number of women
peacekeepers. However, we perceive that there is
some hesitation to put strong commitments into the
policy framework. In order to achieve the increased
targets under the uniformed gender parity strategy,
we should encourage countries that are willing to
contribute full women units. However, we note that to
accommodate those who cannot fulfil the all-women
unit commitments, the policy frameworks are being
diluted in favour of mixed units over all-women units.
If that is the approach, how can we possibly achieve the
target that we set for increasing women participation
in peacekeeping.
Instead of supporting a policy of mixed units,
we believe that all-women units perhaps need to be
incentivized to encourage greater participation. Priority
should also be given to deploying from the pending
pledges related to women peacekeepers.
For its part, India stands ready to make every
effort to fulfil those goals and strengthen institutional
capacities as well as international cooperation on
this issue.
India partners with UN-Women towards capacitybuilding initiatives at the New Delhi-based Centre for
United Nations Peacekeeping, which conducted the
third United Nations female military officers course for
40 women military officers from 26 countries. India
also provides adequate predeployment training on
gender sensitization to its peacekeeping forces.

19-1052629/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We will continue to engage with partners to
work towards ensuring the meaningful participation
of women and for building inclusive, peaceful and
resilient societies.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Greece.
Mrs. Theofili (Greece): At the outset, I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening this
highly relevant and timely debate. My delegation aligns
itself with the statement to be made by the observer of
the European Union and would like to contribute the
following remarks.
Nearly 20 years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), the achievement of full and equitable
participation of women in peacekeeping operations is
still a work in progress. We believe that this situation
is detrimental not only to the cause of gender parity
but also to the efficiency of peacekeeping missions
themselves. Peacekeeping is a highly complex form
of military operation. It requires skills that often go
beyond traditional military training and it demands a
higher degree of human sensitivity, diplomatic skills,
cultural diversity and professional composure. Against
that background, women peacekeepers are not only
equal but sometimes better equipped. Gender parity
is a question of not just female underrepresentation in
peacekeeping but rather a chronic underutilization of
our greatest asset for achieving its objectives.
In that context, we welcome the commitment,
clear vision and concrete action plan contained in the
uniformed gender parity strategy 2018—2028. I am
glad to report that the troop contribution of my own
country, Greece, to the maritime component of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon includes a
percentage of military personnel that is at least three
times higher than United Nations average. We are well
on track today to achieving the strategy’s objectives
for 2028.
Earlier we heard Major General Lund describing
her experience in United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus (UNFICYP). I am proud that through our
considerable budgetary contribution to UNFICYP, we
support the peacekeeping mission with the highest
record in achieving gender parity at all levels, including
the upper echelons of command.
However, for gender parity to be fully achieved,
further action is needed to promote gender positive
30/65

11/04/2019

training. For our part, we are happy to share our
experiences through the United Nations military
observers course offered by the Multinational Peace
Support Operations Training Centre in Greece. In
addition to that, training can take place in the form of
mentoring programmes in the field, which have an even
greater potential for disseminating gender positive
narratives to the local armed forces and deployed
personnel of troop-contributing countries alike.
Finally, creating an operational environment for
women in uniform that is free from gender bias and
abuse should be a top consideration when prioritizing the
allocation of relevant human and budgetary resources.
To conclude, the Security Council can contribute
to lifting the afore-mentioned internal barriers by
consistently and horizontally following up on the
subject when discussing relevant mandates. By doing
so, it may even mitigate the effects of broader external
barriers, such as the unfavourable distribution of family
responsibilities and professional opportunities with
which women in uniform have to contend.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): I am pleased to
join representatives of States with an outstanding
peacekeeping record in expressing our sincere gratitude
to you, Mr. President, for organizing today’s important
debate and for Germany’s dedication and support of
United Nations peacekeeping. As I am about to deliver
a statement in my national capacity, I would also like to
highlight that Ukraine aligns itself with the statement
to be delivered by the observer of the European Union.
As we are approaching the seventy-fifth anniversary
of the United Nations next year, we should be honest with
ourselves and our peoples: we all know very well the list
of missed opportunities and the scope of unimplemented
potential of the Organization. That is a luxury the world
cannot really afford, as year after year it continues to
face a growing number of challenges to international
peace and security, including those that gave rise to
the very emergence of the Organization — inter-State
conflicts and military aggression.
At the same time, it is also clear that the United
Nations can be and on many occasions has been
efficient in terms of safeguarding international peace
and security. It has at its disposal peacekeeping
operations — a reliable and commonly used instrument
19-10526

11/04/2019

S/PV. 8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

for curbing and preventing conflicts and ensuring
sustaining peace. Therefore, we strongly support
comprehensive and decisive actions aimed at the
improvement of the United Nations peacekeeping
pillar’s efficiency, thereby giving our Organization
appropriate abilities to address contemporary
challenges in the peace and security domain.
It is true also that in order to secure peace and
stability, our Organization must be proactive and
preventive in its actions. We welcome and fully support
the efforts of the Secretary-General to implement
robust United Nations reform aimed at strengthening
its peace and security architecture. My delegation fully
supported the Action for Peace initiative at the highlevel event organized by the Secretary-General on that
initiative in September 2018.
We believe that gender parity must remain an
integral part of such action. In this regard, we would
like to express our gratitude for and satisfaction with
the information provided by the Secretary-General on
practical steps taken to implement the gender parity
strategy for uniformed personnel in peace operations.
My country has always been a strong and reliable
partner of the Organization in peacekeeping activities.
Ukrainian peacekeepers, women and men alike, were
part of a number of United Nations peacekeeping
success stories. Among the most recent was the United
Nations Mission in Liberia, in which the Ukrainian
contingent, equipped with attack and military-transport
helicopters, took active part from the beginning. I
should underline that Ukraine is also incorporating
gender parity positive changes in developing legislation,
planning and budgeting, as well as in integrating the
subject of women, peace and security in the ongoing
security and defence sector reform.
The numbers speak for themselves. Over the course
of past five years the number of female servicemen
reached the mark of 10.6 per cent, which is about
25,000. As of today, there are about 70 women in the
rank of colonel serving in the Ukrainian Armed Forces.
With the entry into force last October of the Law on
Gender Equality Between Men and Women During
Military Service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine
and Other Military Formations, women now have the
opportunity to enter into contract for military service
and to enjoy equal access to military ranks, positions
and equal responsibility during their service.

Moreover, the revised national action plan
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
includes important provisions aimed at increasing
women’s participation in peacebuilding processes
and peacekeeping operations, conducting a gender
assessment and providing gender-responsive services to
people affected by conflict, ensuring human rights and
the protection of women’s rights. I am confident that as
a result of such reforms, we will see more women from
Ukraine in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Nowadays, Ukrainian women contribute greatly
to peace operations in different hotspots, but they
do even more to protect their own land from foreign
aggression, including by serving in the Joint Forces
Operation in the Ukrainian Donbas. It is very symbolic
that Ukraine, exactly like Ukrainian peacekeepers, has
done its best to uphold international peace and security
by participating in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Now, we expect the United Nations and its
peacekeeping operations to do the same by putting an
end to the suffering of Ukraine’s people in the conflict
unleashed against my country.
I should like to recall the statement delivered
by my President at the aforementioned Action for
Peacekeeping high-level event that a multinational
peacekeeping force under Security Council mandate, if
deployed, could become a decisive factor in bringing
peace to Ukraine. Today, we would like to see the
United Nations peacekeeping potential be put to use in
resolving the Russian-Ukrainian conflict. Ukraine, for
its part as a peace-loving nation, will continue to be an
active participant in the United Nations peacekeeping
endeavours, including by widening the geography of its
presence in operations around the world.
The President: I
representative of Spain.

now

give

the

floor

the

Ms. Bassols Delgado (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I
want to begin by thanking the German presidency for
having organized this extremely timely open debate.
For Spain, the women and peace and security
agenda is not a routine matter in the work of the Council.
It is quite the opposite. Ensuring the full participation
of women in peace operations is a collective, complex
and multidimensional responsibility that concerns the
entire international community.
Spain is one of the countries most firmly committed
to the women and peace and security agenda. It was

19-1052631/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

under our presidency of the Council that resolution 2242
(2015), updating the historic resolution 1325 (2000) was
adopted. We are pleased to see that the recommendations
that we made to the Secretariat — such as the
deployment of gender advisers in all the missions, better
coordination between the Secretariat and UN-Women
and the holding of regular consultations between those
responsible for the various missions and women’s civil
society organizations — have been implemented.
Since then, Spain has continued to make progress
with respect to the agenda. In 2016, we established, in
collaboration with the United Kingdom, an informal
group of experts of the Security Council to follow-up
on the implementation of the women and peace and
security agenda in every peacekeeping operation. We
were the third country in the world to draft a national
plan of action for the implementation of the agenda,
and we are successfully implementing a zero-tolerance
policy on sexual abuse and exploitation, supplemented
by a policy of specialized training in this area.
Spain has firmly incorporated the women and
peace and security agenda into its foreign policy, and
we continue to promote the participation of women in
peace missions within the scope of the United Nations,
the European Union, the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe and NATO. Women began to
gain access to military careers in Spain in 1988, more
than 30 years ago. Since then, the gender perspective
has been gradually integrated into our armed forces
until formal equality was reached in 1999 and full
equal equality in 2007.
There are some experiences and good practices
that I would like to share with the Council. The Spanish
system envisages the access of women to combat
positions, in total equality with men. Our system
is fully egalitarian and advanced because it allows
women to choose any position, level and destination,
without quotas or ceilings of any kind. We also have
a permanent body in the Ministry of Defence — the
Gender Equality Observatory — that continuously
monitors the situation within the Spanish armed forces.
We actively participate in various initiatives to
promote gender issues and their mainstreaming in the
area of peace missions. I would like to mention two
examples. We are participating in the Spanish-Dutch
initiative to provide courses to civil and military
personnel for the training of gender advisers. We also
participate in the European Union project in leadership,
32/65

11/04/2019

discipline and military training in the area of gender
Within the framework of that project, Spain has
assumed European leadership for training activities and
discipline for military personnel deployed in missions
outside of the European Union.
There is still much to do. Although the number of
women in our armies and in the navy is higher than the
European average, it is still low. It also remains below
the percentage of women deployed in peacekeeping
operations in which Spain participates. Although
there are almost 15,000 women in our armed forces,
they represent only 12.7 per cent of all troops. The
percentage is slightly lower for our participation in
missions abroad; only 8 per cent of the 2,835 soldiers
that Spain deploys outside its borders today are women.
We are aware that the women and peace and
security agenda is not a question of quotas or numbers.
It is a question of presence, participation and level of
responsibility. Those factors have as much, or more,
importance as the figures. In any event, we are aware
that we must continue working towards improving that
aspect of our public policies.
Our commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda ensures in law the full equality of
access and treatment of women in the armed forces.
Even so, obstacles persist. They are not of a political
or legal dimension; many are within the social realm.
The earliest inclusions of women in the armed forces
and peacekeeping operations required a gradual
transformation. That progressive adaptation must also
occur now in order to continue suppressing sociological,
educational or financial barriers. Only in that way
will we be able to overcome inertia and allow the full
participation of women in peacekeeping operations at
all levels, including in decision-making. To that end, we
must continue responding to some specific challenges,
for example, taking the realities and particular needs
of women into account, adapting rotation periods and
respecting the personal, work and life balance.
To conclude, this is a medium- and long-term effort.
When we updated resolution 1325 (2000) in 2015, we
realized that we had a very rich body of knowledge,
but we also saw that, in practice, we had made little
progress. It has been four years since then. The
necessary and timely reform of the peace and security
pillar must put into practice the Secretary-General’s
vision of a more efficient peacekeeping action. We
fully support its implementation and its approach. That
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

framework provides us with an exceptional opportunity
to give renewed impetus to the full participation of
women in peace missions. I reaffirm that this will
continue to be the objective of my Government, both
nationally and internationally.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Namibia.
Mr. Gertze (Namibia): I thank you, Mr. President,
for convening this important meeting and for Germany’s
strong commitment to the women and peace and
security agenda. I also thank you for the leadership you
have assumed during your membership of the Security
Council as a non-permanent member. I would also
like to thank the various briefers for their detailed and
comprehensive statements.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the Permanent Representation of Canada,
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace
and Security.
In May 2000, the first deliberations of the
women and peace and security agenda took place in
Namibia, giving birth to the Windhoek Declaration.
At the time, Namibia realized that the international
community needed to properly take into account the
role of women as serious stakeholders in peacekeeping,
peacebuilding, decision-making and mediation.
The Windhoek Declaration formed the basis of the
drafting of resolution 1325 (2000). In October 2000,
Namibia was President of the Security Council and
successfully oversaw the unanimous adoption of the
historic resolution 1325 (2000) (see S/PV.4213). Our
desire at the time was, in essence, to see more women
in peacekeeping, decision-making and negotiating
positions at both the national and international levels.
National action plans are the embodiment of
resolution 1325 (2000). Those plans are vital. They
are a tool for States to implement their commitments
to the women and peace and security agenda and
detail their actions and obligations under the Security
Council women and peace and security resolutions.
As of November 2018, 79 Member States had national
action plans. While we recognize that many Member
States are implementing resolution 1325 (2000) without
national actions plans, we encourage them to set up
national action plans, which would help ensure the
structured implementation, follow-up and evaluation of
resolution 1325 (2000).

S/PV. 8508

Namibia’s national action plan is forwardlooking and incorporates emerging issues, trends and
threats to peace and security, such as climate change,
cybersecurity and trafficking in persons, while
also looking at how those issues impact the overall
women and peace and security agenda. The effective
implementation of and accountability for national
action plans requires a monitoring and evaluation plan
and a robust coordination mechanism. The Namibian
Government will ensure that a monitoring and
evaluation plan and regular reporting are undertaken
and documented to realize the objectives of the plan.
In the aftermath of the adoption of resolution 1325
(2000), we saw a shift towards a growing awareness
and a move towards mainstreaming the involvement
of women in areas related to peace and security. The
2018 report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2018/900) noted the increase
in the number of women deployed as contingent
commanders, as well as the fact that several missions
have female police and military peacekeeper networks
and military and police gender advisers. Despite that,
the representation of women among military troops
and police officers remains unacceptably low, at 4
and 10 per cent, respectively. The report also issues a
stark warning that those numbers are at risk of further
decreasing in the coming years through the imminent
downsizing of several peacekeeping missions.
Namibia is playing its part in ensuring that women
play a greater role in peacekeeping operations. Namibian
police officers, correctional officers and military
officers are currently deployed in three peacekeeping
missions — in Darfur, South Sudan and Abyei — with
a number of qualified female officers included. In
December 2018, we achieved the Department of Peace
Operations’ target of 15 per cent of women participating
in peacekeeping missions. We encourage all troop- and
police-contributing Member States to strive to achieve
that minimum target.
Namibia is currently hosting the third meeting of
the Women, Peace and Security Focal Point Network,
which concluded just an hour ago. A communiqué on
that meeting will be circulated to all missions at the
conclusion of the meeting in the next day or so.
I am happy to announce that Namibia intends to
establish a women’s peace centre, which will focus on
national, regional and international conflict resolution
and management activities, as well as aspects of

19-1052633/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

mediation and negotiations. The centre will further
focus on capacity-building by providing workshops
and predeployment training for peacekeepers,
while contributing to the maintenance of peace in
general. In that regard, we call upon the international
community and our development partners to support
the establishment of the centre.
To conclude, I would like to remind members that
the international community will celebrate a number
of landmarks next year, including the twenty-fifth
anniversary of the adoption of the Beijing Declaration
and Platform for Action and the twentieth anniversary
of the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000). In the lead
up to those anniversaries, I encourage Member States
to take stock of the limited progress that has been
achieved and look to the future. Those anniversaries
should be an opportunity for all of us to redouble our
efforts to ensure that women are adequately represented
in peacekeeping, decision-making and negotiation
positions at both the national and international levels,
as was our desire in 2000 when resolution 1325 (2000)
was adopted.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): I would first like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate on
the increased participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. We really appreciate your leadership in
promoting the women and peace and security agenda
and also want to recognize the substantial contribution
of Germany to United Nations peacekeeping in terms
of providing personnel, training and funding. We were
very pleased to hear the announcement of the global
female peacekeepers network, which was made at the
beginning of this meeting.
As has been reported, since 2015 the overall
proportion of United Nations peace operations
personnel who are women has increased only modestly,
from 4.2 per cent to 5 per cent. At the current pace
of change, it would take decades to reach the levels
outlined in resolution 2242 (2015). We certainly believe
that there is a great deal more we must do collectively
in order to maximize our efforts and achieve further
progress. We also encourage the Security Council to
prioritize its efforts in this regard, consistent with the
need to bring women’s participation and leadership to
the core of peace and security, in line with its mandate.
34/65

11/04/2019

Slovakia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I
would like make a few additional observations.
First, we strongly support the equal and full
participation of women in all efforts to establish and
maintain international peace and security, and call for the
full implementation of all the relevant Security Council
resolutions that address this issue. I would furthermore
like to reaffirm our support for the Secretary-General’s
reforms aimed at rendering United Nations peace
operations a more effective tool in the promotion of
peace and security and at enhancing support to political
processes in host countries. We highly commend his
leadership in this domain, including the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative, which has garnered a strong
sense of ownership among Member States, as well
as the recently adopted United Nations uniformed
gender-parity Strategy for the period 2018-2028, which
represents an important development in meeting the
goals set at the London 2016 Peacekeeping Ministerial.
Slovakia has been an active troop- and
police-contributing country since its admission to
the United Nations, 26 years ago, having served in
19 missions to date. Currently, our peacekeepers are
deployed in Cyprus, the Golan Heights and Haiti.
Slovakia has also participated in military and civilian
missions of the European Union, NATO and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
(OSCE), where we also attach great importance to the
women and peace and security agenda; indeed, as the
current Chair of the OSCE, we are undertaking a number
of initiatives and practical steps in the same context.
Increasing the number of women in our armed
forces has been a long-term policy of Slovakia.
Currently, servicewomen make up nearly 12 per cent
of our armed forces. That increasing trend is set to
continue in future. The current gender equality action
plan of the Slovak Ministry of Defence aims to integrate
the gender perspective into areas including operational
planning, education, training and evaluation.
I would like to highlight the case of Cyprus,
where we make our largest contribution to United
Nations peacekeeping missions. The United Nations
Peacekeeping Force in Cyprus (UNFICYP) has
already been mentioned by several speakers today,
including by the Ambassador of Greece, recently
cited as an excellent example of a mission where all
senior leadership is provided by women. As such, it
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8508

is a truly important example that should be followed.
In Cyprus, we have exceeded the targets set in the
uniformed gender-parity strategy, whereby almost
10 per cent of our military contingents and 80 per cent
of police personnel are uniformed female peacekeepers.
Overall, more than 44 per cent — 22 out of 50 — of all
UNFICYP contingents’ uniformed female personnel is
from Slovakia.

serving in uniformed military and police roles in United
Nations peace operations.

Resolution 2151 (2014), on security sector reform,
underscores the importance of women’s equal and
effective participation and full involvement in all stages
of the security sector-reform process. Gender-sensitive
security sector reform is therefore key to developing
security-sector institutions that are non-discriminatory,
representative of the population and capable of
responding effectively to the specific security needs of
diverse groups.

Uruguay endorses the statement delivered by the
representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security.

I would like to highlight that recently, on 13 March,
the Group of Friends of Security Sector Reform,
co-chaired by Slovakia and our close partner South
Africa, together with the Group of Friends of Gender
Parity, co-chaired by Ghana and Qatar, jointly organized
a high-level round table on gender parity and security
sector reform. That was our practical contribution to
this ongoing debate, and an important example of how
two Groups of Friends can be brought together and take
a broader, more comprehensive look at issues, going
beyond silos. That meeting highlighted that security
sector reform must be gender-sensitive throughout
its planning, design, implementation, monitoring and
evaluation phases. Reforming the security sector must
focus on recruitment processes and improving the
delivery of security services to address and prevent
sexual and gender-based violence. The discussions also
underscored that women must be promoted as equal
and strategic leaders, barriers must be broken down and
stereotypes eliminated about women’s role in societies,
including their participation in peace processes.
In conclusion, United Nations peace operations,
which are the most visible face of United Nations
engagement in the world, must be representative
of, and responsive to, the needs of men and women
alike. The complementary skills of male and female
personnel have long been recognized as essential for
the effectiveness of United Nations missions. We must
therefore strengthen our cooperation to accelerate
progress towards achieving United Nations targets
to increase the meaningful participation of women

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Uruguay.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): Allow me, at the outset, to congratulate
Germany for having convened today’s open debate.

I will focus my statement on Uruguay’s experience
as a troop-contributing country and on our actions to
increase the participation of women in peace operations.
Fully cognizant of the valuable contributions that
women make to peacekeeping and peacebuilding, my
country has deployed military observers to oversee
ceasefires, disarmament and access to humanitarian
aid. Moreover, in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo, women contingents have participated in
operations to negotiate the establishment of relations
with armed groups and conducted tasks to prevent and
respond to conflict-related sexual violence and human
rights violations. In these challenging contexts, many
women are deployed as military staff officers, doctors,
dentists, nurses, translators, drivers, radio operators
and soldiers, among many other roles. Indeed, they
excel in performing the most difficult jobs on an equal
footing with men. Moreover, our experience confirms
the unique capacity of female uniformed personnel to
interact with local communities, thereby illustrating
their particular sensitivity and ability to build trust,
particularly when dealing with situations involving
women and children.
Conscious that there is still a long way to go, Uruguay
will continue working to foster greater participation by
women in peacekeeping forces. Major efforts are under
way aimed at supporting and developing joint strategies
and initiatives with the United Nations and with other
Member States, while others focus on the domestic
context. At the international level, Uruguay supports
the Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy on
gender parity, along with the efforts of the Department
of Peace Operations through its uniformed genderparity strategy initiative, launched in January. Together
with a group of countries, Uruguay co-facilitated the
consultation process on the Action for Peacekeeping

19-1052635/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

initiative in 2018. Uruguay also joined the SecretaryGeneral’s Circle of Leadership on the prevention of and
response to sexual exploitation and abuse.
With regard to our joint initiatives developed with
other countries, Uruguay organized a preparatory
meeting for the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial
with the United Kingdom in Montevideo in December.
During the preparatory meeting, particular emphasis
was placed on training Blue Helmets in topics related to
women and peace and security and on specific training
for female peacekeepers. Moreover, Uruguay joined
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
launched by Canada. We will also be honoured to join
Canada in co-chairing the Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network in 2020, which coincides with the
twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000), and in
coordinating actions linked to peacekeeping operations.
Allow me to touch upon some of the initiatives that
my country has carried out domestically, which have
allowed us to progressively improve the participation
of women in our contingents in terms of quantity and
quality. I can confirm that Uruguay is one of the troopcontributing countries with the highest percentage of
female personnel deployed in peace missions. That
expansion has gone hand in hand with the increasing
presence of women in the Uruguayan armed forces and
police, thanks to the Government’s adoption of genderequality State policies that have allowed women to
participate in all activities, including those traditionally
performed by men. Today, on the basis of merit, women
freely join the armed forces and police-training schools.
Moreover, Uruguay is seeking to tackle the
challenges faced by female personnel on the ground,
such as performance in difficult operational
environments, and in sociocultural situations in
which the participation of women as negotiators is
rejected or in which their rights are simply not taken
into account. To facilitate the participation of female
staff with young children, our country is analysing the
possibility of relieving such women after three months
of peace-mission deployment.
It should also be noted that challenges often
develop into opportunities. It has become clear that we
could enhance the empowerment of local women, who
follow the example set by female personnel working in
operations on par with and as efficiently as men.
Another initiative that deserves special attention is
predeployment training. The National Peace Operations
36/65

11/04/2019

Training Institute of Uruguay offers mandatory courses
to all troops to be sent into the field. Women particularly
benefit from that training, which allows them to
tactfully cope in situations that necessitate their action,
especially to prevent and respond to violence against
women and children.
To conclude, I would like to express Uruguay’s
appreciation and gratitude to peacekeepers, especially
the women who act with dedication and sacrifice far
from their homes and children, inspired by a strong
vocation to serve in the name of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Estonia.
Mr. Jürgenson (Estonia): I would like to thank the
German presidency for convening today’s open debate
on a topic of the utmost importance.
Estonia aligns itself with the statement to be
delivered by the observer of the European Union. In
addition, I would like to make the following few remarks.
Peacekeeping operations and uniformed personnel
are the most visible representatives of the United
Nations, directly working with communities every day.
For that reason, it is imperative to increase the number
of female peacekeepers and promote their full, effective
and meaningful participation in United Nations peace
operations. Estonia therefore strongly supports the
recently adopted uniformed gender-parity strategy for
the period 2018-2028 and related efforts of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative.
Since the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, and its followup resolutions, remarkable achievements have been
made at the normative level. Women and peace and
security issues are now interlinked with the United
Nations peacekeeping agenda. However, challenges lie
at the level of implementation, and we must continue
promoting the role of women in peace and security at
the national, regional and international levels.
On the national level, Estonia has significantly
increased its level of ambition regarding female
conscripts in the military service, having tripled the
number of women that can be called to serve. That has
had a direct and positive impact on Estonia’s ability
as a troop-contributing country to accelerate gender
parity among United Nations peacekeeping troops
by encouraging female military and police personnel
to apply.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8508

In addition to striving to increase the number of
female peacekeepers, we consider it paramount to
sensitize all peacekeepers on gender aspects in peace
operations. Thorough predeployment training on
human rights and gender-related issues, including on the
prevention of, and response to, conflict-related sexual
violence and the eradication of sexual exploitation and
abuse, is a must. Therefore, gender advisers should be
an integral part of all United Nations missions, and
their activities must be further reinforced in settings
where conflict-related sexual violence is widespread.

and girls has continued to be used as a tactic of war in
conflicts across the world, including in my own region.

Last, but not least, we would like to thank Canada
for launching the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace
Operations to identify, address and remove the existing
barriers to women’s meaningful participation in United
Nations peace operations in different troop-contributing
countries and military and police organizations. That
kind of practical evidence-based approach could be the
way to help us to achieve the ambitious objectives that
we have set on women’s participation and impact on
United Nations peacekeeping.

Female peacekeepers from my country have already
made a mark and have shown themselves, alongside
their male counterparts, to be competent, dedicated and
professional. An outstanding example was Shahzadi
Gulfam, the first-ever recipient of the United Nations
International Female Police Peacekeeper Award in
2011. We are proud of her service, as indeed those of all
our peacekeepers.

I thank you, Mr. President, for including women
and peace and security as one of the main topics of
your presidency. We all recognize the importance of
involving women in the prevention and resolution
of conflicts, peace negotiations, peacebuilding
and in post-conflict reconstruction, and should act
accordingly. For its part, Estonia would like to continue
focusing on the issue of women and peace and security
as a non-permanent member of the Security Council
during 2020-2021 period.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Let me also begin by
thanking Germany for convening today’s open debate
on women in peacekeeping — an integral tool for
achieving some of the priorities under the women and
peace and security agenda. I also wish to convey our
appreciation to Secretary-General António Guterres
and the other briefers for their insightful briefings
delivered earlier today.
Beginning with resolution 1325 (2000) there have
so far been eight Security Council resolutions that
have articulated and moved forward the woman and
peace and security agenda. Even as the international
community has come together to collectively condemn
acts of unimaginable horror, sexual abuse of women

As one of the world’s leading troop-contributing
countries (TCCs), Pakistan has set the highest standards
in fulfilling peacekeeping mandates, including the
protection of vulnerable segments of the population,
especially women and children, from violence. We have
always advocated integrating the gender perspective into
the peacebuilding paradigm, with a view to promoting
comprehensive, inclusive and sustainable peace.

To share our experience and promote best practices
in peacekeeping, we have established the Centre for
International Peace and Stability in Islamabad, which
offers specially designed modules to help peacekeepers
respond effectively and protect innocent civilians
from sexual violence. During the recently held United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, we also offered a
course for female military observers at the Centre for
International Peace and Stability. During her visit to
Pakistan earlier this year, the President of the General
Assembly, Ms. María Fernanda Espinosa, visited the
Centre for International Peace and Stability to interact
with and learn more about the experiences of female
peacekeepers. That led to a rich discussion of ways to
inspire more women to join peacekeeping missions.
As a major TCC, let me make five specific points.
First, we believe that the increased participation of
female peacekeepers and encouraging more women to
take up mediation roles helps in the stabilization and
reconstruction phases of conflicts. Pakistan, for its
part, will be deploying a female engagement team in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo later this year. We
also recently achieved the goal of ensuring that 15 per
cent of staff officers deployed in peacekeeping missions
are female, thereby fulfilling our responsibilities in
accordance with the uniformed gender-parity strategy,
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative and Security
Council resolutions.

19-1052637/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, incentivizing the participation of women
in peacekeeping missions merits serious consideration.
That might include additional allowances, shorter
rotation cycles, better-suited medical facilities, better
accommodation and improved communication with the
families that they have left behind to serve the cause
of peace.
Thirdly, increasing the deployment of female
peacekeepers alone cannot realistically meet the
requirements of the women and peace and security
agenda. It is national Governments that bear the
primary responsibility for women’s safety and rights.
The international community should support States in
that regard, including by strengthening the capacity of
their national institutions.
Fourthly, Pakistan fully supports the SecretaryGeneral’s zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse. Pakistan was among the first group of
countries to sign the Secretary-General’s voluntary
compact on the subject, and the Prime Minister of
Pakistan also joined the Secretary-General’s Circle of
Leadership last year.
Fifthly, female peacekeepers must feel safe in their
environments. Any slack in ensuring their safety would
also affect the United Nations credibility and ability to
deliver. A zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse must also be implemented in letter and spirit
to accompany the progressive deployment of female
peacekeepers, as envisaged by the United Nations.
Let me conclude by saying that, for my country,
protecting the vulnerable, including women and
children, is not only a global peace and security
imperative but also our solemn obligation. We remain
resolute and steadfast in honouring our commitments
in that regard.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the European Union.
Mr. Van Den Akker: I speak on behalf of the
European Union (EU) and its member States. The
candidate countries Albania, Montenegro, North
Macedonia, Serbia and Turkey; the country of the
Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Ukraine,
the Republic of Moldova and Georgia, align themselves
with this statement.
Experience clearly shows that the full, effective
and meaningful participation of women in peace
38/65

11/04/2019

operations is critical to helping a country transition
from conflict to sustainable peace. The United Nations
has taken important steps in that regard. The European
Union in particular welcomes the recently adopted
uniformed gender-parity strategy for the period 20182028, the Department of Peacekeeping Operations
and Department of Field Support’s policy on genderresponsive United Nations peacekeeping operations
and the efforts taken in the context of the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. A concrete example of those
efforts is the United Nations Peacekeeping Force
in Cyprus, which became the first United Nations
peacekeeping operation to have a female Force
Commander, and now has all its components headed by
women, as well as a female Special Representative of
the Secretary-General.
Despite progress, almost 20 years since the
adoption of the Security Council’s landmark resolution
1325 (2000) and the subsequent resolutions on women
and peace and security, we are still lagging behind. The
15 per cent goal for military observers and staff officers,
set at the London 2016 Peacekeeping Ministerial, was
not met in 2018. Fewer than 5 per cent of military
contingents and less than 8 per cent of the members of
formed police units are women, while among individual
police officers the numbers are slightly better, at 20 per
cent. As for Government-provided corrections and
justice personnel, the proportion of women stands at
25 per cent. Only 28 per cent of civilians in peacekeeping
operations are women.
We face very similar challenges at the EU level.
Women compose around 30 per cent of all staff in
EU civilian missions, and about 5 per cent of military
missions and operations. The first female Head of
Mission was appointed to an EU civilian mission in
2015, and five out of 10 civilian missions have women
in place as Head or Deputy Head of Mission. Despite
those improvements, the growth that we have witnessed
has been too slow to achieve our ultimate goal:
gender equality in peacekeeping and peace-resolution
processes, which entails far more than increasing the
number of female peacekeepers.
While the prime responsibility of addressing
barriers and improving procedures for deployment
lies with troop- and police-contributing countries,
the European Union is fully committed to doing its
part. When the EU and the United Nations agreed
to reinforce the EU-United Nations long-standing
partnership on peacekeeping and crisis management in
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the margins of the General Assembly last September,
we made women and peace and security the first, out
of eight, joint priorities for our cooperation in the three
upcoming years, 2019-2021, as well as a cross-cutting
priority across all areas of cooperation.
To ensure progress in the first year of
implementation, our missions and operations are
already working together on the ground to enhance the
integration of a gender perspective throughout their
activities. We are mapping ongoing cooperation on the
ground, on the basis of which we will identify strategic
areas for further cooperation. Moreover, as mentioned
during the United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial on
29 March, we have agreed to organize a joint United
Nations-EU workshop in Brussels on enabling factors
for engaging more women in all roles and areas of
expertise and at all levels of peacekeeping and crisis
management. The aim of that joint effort is to build on
already ongoing work and existing data in this area and
arrive at a set of practical recommendations that will
be widely shared. We hope to encourage the practice of
regular informed and practical exchanges on enabling
factors for engaging more women in peacekeeping
among EU member States, other United Nations
troop- and police-contributing countries and experts in
this area.
To make a real difference and if we are to fulfil
the commitments that we collectively made in Action
for Peacekeeping and the Declaration of Shared
Commitments, progress on the participation of women
in peace operations needs to go hand and hand with
progress on all other aspects of the women and peace
and security agenda. We would recall five key priorities
in that context.
First, we should ensure adequate financing for
peacekeeping operations to deliver on their women and
peace and security and human rights mandates.
Secondly, a minimum number of gender units and
gender advisers should be set for all United Nations
missions, and their deployment should be reinforced in
settings where women’s rights are particularly at stake
and conflict-related sexual violence is widespread.
Thirdly, gender-sensitive training should be
encouraged for all United Nations peacekeeping
missions’ components to create a non-hostile
environment for women, mitigating, therefore, the
occurrence of gender-based violence incidents and acts

S/PV. 8508

of hatred against women across contingents, as well as
sexual exploitation and abuse incidents.
Fourthly, all Member States should be encouraged
to adopt national action plans, including adequate
budgeting and detailed operative actions, to ensure
women’s full participation in the security sector.
Fifthly, the collection of data related to the
composition of all mission components should be
ensured, along with a consistent procedures to strictly
monitor the deployment of women and their effective
participation in all the peacekeeping processes and at
all levels.
The instruments, strategies and political
commitments are there; now is the time for
their implementation. We sincerely thank Germany and
France for placing the women and peace and security
agenda at the centre of their presidencies, and we once
again reiterate the EU’s full commitment to engage in
those common efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Portugal.
Mr. Duarte Lopes (Portugal): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate.
Portugal fully aligns itself with the statement just
delivered by the observer of the European Union.
Portugal is strongly committed to gender equality,
human rights and international peace and security. As
stated in resolution 1325 (2000), a lack of gender equality
adversely affects the maintenance of international
peace and security.
Portugal recently adopted its third national plan
for implementing resolution 1325 (2000), with clear
targets, timetables and indicators. The new action plan
fosters the participation of civil society and includes
measures on: first, integrating the women and peace
and security agenda and a gender-equality perspective
at the national, regional and international levels;
secondly, protecting the rights of women and girls
and punishing all forms of violence, including sexual
violence; and, thirdly, promoting the participation
of women and young girls in conflict prevention and
peacebuilding processes.
As became clear at the recent United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial on 29 March, there is broad
recognition of the important role that women play in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding. Despite the progress

19-1052639/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

11/04/2019

achieved, almost two decades since the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), we are far from achieving the
full, effective and meaningful participation of female
peacekeepers and a sufficient level of integration of a
gender perspective in such operations.

mainstreaming and the introduction of technical
expertise are of course all very welcome, but the
fact remains that we are still falling short. We need
to understand why, and we need to do something
about that.

We therefore fully support the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and endorse the Declaration of
Shared Commitments on United Nations peacekeeping
operations. We also welcome the new uniformed
gender-parity strategy, launched by the Department of
Peace Operations (DPO), with clear goals to advance
female participation. Its timely implementation requires
very strong synergy between the United Nations and
Member States.

With over 60 years of United Nations peacekeeping
experience, the longest unbroken record of any Member
State, Ireland well knows the importance and urgency
of ensuring increased female participation. The
presence of women peacekeepers challenges traditional
gender norms: it challenges them for the better. It also
means that local women find it easier to engage with
peacekeepers, not least in preventing sexual exploitation
and abuse. Nonetheless, we recognize that our women
peacekeepers are trained for the most dangerous of
situations, and it should not even be questioned that
they are capable of performing the same tasks as their
male colleagues. Every role in the Irish Defence Forces
is open to both men and women.

As stated during the Peacekeeping Ministerial,
Portugal has shown an interest in working with DPO
on the possibility of organizing mixed training courses
on capacity and leadership, with 50 per cent male and
50 per cent female participation. We hope that that will
enable meaningful progress in key areas where women
have traditionally been underrepresented.
With regard to our presence in United Nations
peace operations, I would like to highlight the fact that
Portugal is now, for the first time, deploying female
soldiers to combat missions. In that context, we would
like to reiterate our willingness expressed during the
Peacekeeping Ministerial to share lessons learned with
interested partners.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ireland.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): As a representative
of a country of seasoned peacekeepers, I would like
to thank you, Mr. President, for convening today’s
debate on what we see as the critical issue of women
in peacekeeping.
We are speaking today over lunchtime because it
is important that the Action for Peacekeeping pledges
and the Secretary-General’s reform agenda on United
Nations peace operations be acted upon. The targets
for increasing the number of women in peacekeeping
at every level are significant. That means ensuring that
we apply a gender perspective and empower serving
women, in order to improve the actual effectiveness of
United Nations peacekeeping across the globe.
Despite some progress, we in Ireland remain
concerned about the rate at which we are succeeding.
The uniformed gender-parity strategy, gender
40/65

Ireland’s Defence Forces has initiated its own
gender, diversity and inclusion office and developed its
own action plan on resolution 1325 (2000). We firmly
believe that making positive, practical and quantitative
changes to increase the number of women peacekeepers
is essential. However, we are also conscious that that
is not a panacea to the inequality that persists in
peacekeeping. Put simply, one cannot just add women
and stir. We very much recognize the need for broader
cultural and structural shifts in security organizations
and institutions across the board.
To put it in concrete terms, our own Defence Forces
are actively implementing gender adviser roles across
their headquarters. We have gender focal points to
back that up, including in all overseas deployments.
We have also implemented family-friendly policies,
such as shortened or shared overseas deployments and
the semesterization of professional military courses.
Those are designed to benefit both men and women, of
course, but also to address the obstacles that can inhibit
women’s active and meaningful participation.
However, we are not stopping there. Going beyond
what we are doing ourselves, we are also working
with our partner peacekeeping Member States. We are
asking them to nominate women for the training that
we provide. In our next pledged training, over one third
of those participating will be women. We see that as
progress, but the job is not yet done.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We recognize the United Nations own efforts
in mainstreaming gender, including through fully
resourced senior gender advisers in its own United
Nations operations across the globe. The Department of
Peace Operations gender-parity strategy holds mission
leadership to account for meeting gender-related goals.
That is how it should be. We want to see that the full
value of women peacekeepers’ skills and training is
realized, and that our valuable women peacekeepers
are not sidelined, or that their work is confined to socalled women’s issues. Acting on those commitments
should bring about the structural and institutional
transformation that we all want to see. All of those
kinds of issues are the type on which we would shine
a light should Ireland be lucky enough to be given a
non-permanent place at this table in the Security
Council 2020 elections.
In conclusion, our own President, Michael D.
Higgins, has called on all of us to act “as conscious
agitators”, who must work to “place the dignity and
participation of women and girls’ rights at the heart
of our actions globally”. Quite frankly, we need to
do better. We need to do better to ensure women’s
participation in peacekeeping, not only because it
makes peacekeeping better but, put simply, because it
is our right.
The President: I now give the floor to the observer
of the African Union.
Ms. Mohammed: The African Union (AU) believes
that the women and peace and security agenda remains
a strong framework that guides our global efforts to
build more peaceful and sustainable societies. Clearly,
resolution 1325 (2000) has set a firm foundation for
women to take an equal role at all stages of conflict
resolution and peacebuilding efforts. That obviously
includes women’s representation in peacekeeping
operations as well as during peace talks.
However, 19 years down the line from the adoption
of that landmark resolution, women are still not equally
sitting at the tables of conflict prevention, mediation
and resolution processes. We also note that integrating
women as elements of United Nations peacekeeping
forces remains a slow process. Women represented
only 16 per cent of deployed military observers and
staff officers in peacekeeping operations in 2017, while
in the 32-year period between 1957 — the first time
that a woman officially served in a United Nations
peacekeeping mission — and 1989, only 20 women

S/PV. 8508

served as uniformed peacekeepers. Almost 30 years
later, despite the progress made, the numbers remain
alarmingly low globally.
Against that background, I wish to focus my
intervention on three main areas, as follows.
First, it is important to note that, as of 31 December
2018, African States represented 18 of the top 30
contributors of uniformed personnel to peacekeeping
operations. Almost 50 per cent of all uniformed
peacekeepers come from African Union member
States, and despite the low global representation
of women in peacekeeping, the African region’s
contribution was actually 63.4 per cent women in
United Nations peacekeeping.
We continue to make efforts to increase the
numbers, but in order to do so Member States — troopcontributing countries in particular — need to be
adequately supported. In that regard, we must recognize
the renewed efforts made by our African member
States and the international community, including in
the past year to include practical actions to qualitatively
increase the number of women serving in peace
operations. We must also recognize the African Union
member States that recommitted to gender-sensitive
and women-centred commitments for the 2019 United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial pledge.
Nonetheless, the stark reality is that the
international community still needs to better
understand the role of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping settings — alongside the gender
dimensions of conflict — if our responses are to be
effective. The joint AU-United Nations fact-finding
missions on women and peace and security led on
the ground in 2017 and 2018 in Chad, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, the Niger, Nigeria and South
Sudan by the AU Commissioner for Peace and Security,
the Special Envoy of the Chairperson of the African
Union Commission on Women, Peace and Security, the
United Nations Deputy Secretary-General, the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations and the
Executive Director of UN-Women clearly established
that women who have been victims of war and conflict
remain better engaged with female military and
police rather than male officers. If left unconsidered,
that could negatively impact any reconciliation and
peacebuilding process.
In that context, the African Union leadership has
called for all actors to step up their efforts to ensure

19-1052641/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

that women are full actors on the ground as actors
in uniform and civilians in peace operations. We all
know too well, particularly women serving in conflictaffected zones, that when women are marginalized
from peace processes on all sides of the spectrum,
durable peace has little chance to take root in postconflict societies.
The second point is that the African Union is
championing the implementation of women and peace
and security commitments at the continental level. The
AU is leading efforts to promote and bolster women’s
leadership in conflict prevention, mediation and
resolution. The African Union takes action on all those
areas under the “three Ps” slogan — women prevent,
women protect, women participate. In that context, the
AU has launched an action-oriented network of women
in mediation called FemWise-Africa and partnered
with the United Nations under the Joint Framework
for an Enhanced Partnership in Peace and Security to
ensure women’s leadership in peace and security with
the African Women Leaders Network.
The African Union has also assigned gender
officers in the various peace support operations to
ensure that women’s voices are heard and amplified
and that women participate in conflict-resolution and
peacebuilding efforts. At the policy level, our continent
counts commendable achievements, from inscribing the
women and gender and peace and security perspectives
into the African Peace and Security Architecture to
the overall peace and security programmes. Africa
currently counts 25 countries with national action
plans on women and peace and security, meaning
that African Member States constitute 31 per cent of
countries globally with national action plans.
We have also adopted a code of conduct and zerotolerance policy that outlines the AU’s position against
sexual violence, exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers
and military personnel. The code is shared with all
troop-contributing countries and is integrated into all
related training. The African Union Mission in Somalia
(AMISOM) already has a policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, and other countries are working on that and
other national strategies.
My third, and last, point is that the African Union,
through the Department of Peace and Security, has
redoubled efforts to address gender inequality and
combat stereotypes in peacekeeping missions. It is in
that spirit of inclusion that the African Union focused
42/65

11/04/2019

its gender strategy in AMISOM on addressing some of
the core barriers that prevent women from successfully
participating in peacekeeping operation activities.
By doing so, we aim to ensure that we build a more
balanced peacekeeping environment that is welcoming
to women.
In conclusion, the African Union would like to
encourage Member States and partners to redouble
efforts to close the gaps of the women and peace and
security agenda, notably by reaffirming political
commitments, qualitatively increasing the number
of women leading in peacekeeping operations and
ensuring a welcoming environment. Experience has
shown that women can and must play an active role in
the prevention of conflict, at negotiation tables, during
the stabilization process through peace operations and
in the reconstruction period after conflict. It is our
shared responsibility to make it happen.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kazakhstan.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): I commend the German
presidency of the Security Council and Her Excellency
Ms. Ursula von der Leyen for highlighting the important
role that women play in peacekeeping. I wish to express
my warm appreciation to the Secretary-General and
today’s briefers for their insightful briefings, which
indicate that there is still a wide gap between word
and deed when it comes to the women and peace and
security agenda.
As the Secretary-General has envisioned, we must
place gender parity at the highest level across the United
Nations. To that end, we need to implement his peace and
security architecture reform with greater collaboration
between the Department of Peace Operations, the
Department of Political and Peacebuilding Affairs and
UN-Women, both in the field and at Headquarters.
Transformative change should be realized across all
three pillars of the United Nations, in which women
can be key catalysts and dynamic agents of progress.
Only in that way will United Nations peacekeeping
continue to be an important tool for conflict prevention
and resolution.
We have to work hard if we want to increase the
number of women in military and police contingents by
2020. That means that we need to encourage women to
join the armed forces by breaking the stranglehold of
patriarchy, cultural norms and taboos against women,
creating new shifts in community awareness. Women
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

need to be empowered, not just in peacekeeping
operations but in daily societal life, through
investments in development, their education, economic
opportunities and leadership training. It is important
that they come to the forefront to lay the foundations
for peaceful and stable societies, as resolution 1325
(2000) advocates.
Current statistics demonstrate that countries
around the world deploy women to the United Nations
at far lower levels than they are represented in domestic
security forces. Many nations currently have women
who are qualified to serve but are overlooked for training
and field placement opportunities. That bypassing of
women must be reversed. Women must also be given
information about career opportunities in security
forces, often concealed because of a false sense of male
prerogative or prohibitions on the grounds of family
duties or being at a greater risk of harm and attacks
than men.
An erroneous belief also exists that the presence of
women will decrease unit cohesion and effectiveness
because of sexual violence within units. In fact, it
has been found that female peacekeepers improve
unit performance and help military commanders to
fulfil their mandates. Even in communities, sexual
exploitation and abuse is greatly reduced with the
presence of women in peacekeeping operations. They
also have better access to communities and can act
as information conduits, and thereby provide early
warning and contribute to security and community
well-being.
In addition, current United Nations performance
measures do not track the number, rank or function
of female peacekeepers, whether units have been
trained to prevent conflict-related sexual violence,
or whether the vetting systems correctly identify
peacekeepers credibly suspected of sexual exploitation
and abuse. We therefore need to rightfully introduce
those measures, which are critical to the fulfilment
of peacekeeping mandates, to be added to the United
Nations performance system.
To truly succeed, we need women’s empowerment
in times of war and peace. Most of all, it is critical to
build capacity in women through South-South, NorthSouth and trilateral cooperation and to empower them
to be leaders capable of engaging in early warning,
mediation, peace negotiations, peace agreements and
confidence-building measures, from the local and

S/PV. 8508

regional to the national and international levels. We
encourage donor countries to prioritize educational
programmes, allocate a greater number of scholarships
to women and girls from conflict-affected countries and
enable victims to transcend and take on leadership roles.
Everything we have recommended is what we are
implementing in our own country. It is in that spirit
that we are preparing our peacekeepers at the Kazakh
peacekeeping training centre. Kazakhstan is fully
committed to United Nations peacekeeping operations
and is sending highly qualified and competent
personnel, including females. Our female peacekeepers
are deployed in the United Nations Mission for the
Referendum in Western Sahara, and we plan to
further increase their numbers by deploying them to
other missions.
To conclude, we will join others in fully
implementing the women and peace and security agenda.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Morocco.
Mr. Kadiri (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your country’s accession to the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of April. The presence
among us this morning of the Federal Minister
of Defence of Germany is clear testimony to the
importance that your country attaches to the topic of
women and peace and security. I also wish to take this
opportunity to congratulate France for its extremely
successful presidency of the Council during the month
of March. I also thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and for all his efforts to making parity a reality
at the United Nations, as well as Major General Kristin
Lund and Ms. Lorna Merekaje for their briefings.
Morocco welcomes the initiative to convene this
open debate on a topic that has taken on particular
importance since the historic adoption of resolution
1325 (2000), which is now at the centre of our
debates — the role of women in United Nations
peacekeeping operations. The choice of this topic is
timely, a few days after the Peacekeeping Ministerial
of 29 March, during which many delegations expressed
their commitment to the greater representation of
women in United Nations peacekeeping operations.
Bearing in mind the importance and need to
strengthen women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations, Morocco — a major contributor to

19-1052643/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

peacekeeping operations since the 1960s — has
undertaken considerable efforts to achieve the target
of 15 per cent female staff officers. Moreover, the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and Declaration of Shared Commitments on United
Nations Peacekeeping Operations, which Morocco
was one of the first countries to endorse, also provide
for actions to be taken in that regard. We congratulate
and strongly support the efforts and initiatives of the
Secretary-General to promote gender equality and
parity in all United Nations activities.
To date, Morocco has achieved the 15 per cent
threshold and is already preparing to significantly
increase its female contribution through specific
pledges, particularly in terms of medical personnel,
military observers and officers for the Civilian-Military
Cooperation Unit. With that in mind, an all-female unit
was deployed by the Royal Moroccan Armed Forces to
the rapid deployment battalion of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Morocco will also contribute
for the first time to the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan with the deployment of a military observer group.
It is a reality highlighted by experience and studies
that the increased participation of women can have a
positive impact on the effectiveness of peacekeeping
missions. We therefore welcome the launching of the
Secretariat’s uniformed gender-parity strategy, which
proposes 25 per cent female participation for staff
officers and military observers and 15 per cent for
contingents. In that regard, and with a view to ensuring
its full implementation, it would be useful to consider
two important factors, including the number of troops
deployed and the national considerations of troopand police- contributing countries. Other elements
should also be taken into account in order to facilitate
the greater participation of women in peacekeeping
operations, and I will refer to a few.
First, we should offer incentives to encourage
women’s participation. In that regard, we commend
the Secretariat and Canada for launching the Elsie
Initiative for Women in Peace Operations. We could, for
example, consider shorter rotation periods. Secondly,
we must ensure that the specific needs of women are
taken into account across all missions, particularly in
terms of housing. Thirdly, we must avoid restricting
the full participation of women in mission activities by
conditioning them with caveats. Fourthly, we should
provide more training modules that are specifically
44/65

11/04/2019

designed for women. And, fifthly, we should favour
women candidates for civilian posts within missions.
Today’s topic is not only about women’s
participation in peacekeeping operations but also
political processes, mediation and conflict prevention.
On those aspects too, efforts have been made by all
actors, including Governments, the United Nations,
regional organizations or civil society. Morocco is
committed to supporting mediation as a means for the
peaceful resolution of disputes and ensuring the full
participation of women in peace processes. Therefore,
as part of our joint initiative with Spain on mediation
in the Mediterranean, various activities have been
undertaken, particularly in strengthening the capacities
of women mediators as well as active participation in
the various networks of women mediators.
To conclude, I would like to take this opportunity
to pay a heartfelt tribute to all of the women and
men deployed on the ground in the service of peace
and international security, often in very difficult
circumstances and at the risk of putting their lives
in peril.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Penaranda (Philippines): The world will
remain stuck in a cycle of violence and conflicts as long
as nations put almost every other issue ahead of equality
for women. That is a takeaway from the 2019 United
Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial held here two weeks
ago. Today’s open debate is crucial as we approach
the twentieth anniversary of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security. That resolution
deals with women’s strategic roles as peacekeepers,
negotiators and mediators and their contributions to the
narratives of war and peace. It is an operational and
moral imperative to recruit more women peacekeepers.
From the Vancouver Peacekeeping Ministerial
in November 2017 to the 2019 United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial, the Philippines has
strongly committed itself to deploying more women
peacekeepers. More emphatically than ever before,
the Philippines joins the United Nations in calling
for more female peacekeepers to enhance the holistic
effectiveness of peacekeeping operations. More
than 50 per cent of our total deployed peacekeeping
personnel in six United Nations missions — South
Sudan, Darfur, the Central African Republic, Haiti,
Mali and the India/Pakistan border — are women. That
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

is well beyond the 15 per cent requirement for troopand police-contributing countries.
Since the launching of the second cycle of its
national action plan on women and peace and security, in
March 2017, the Philippines has achieved the following
milestones under the three pillars of empowerment and
participation, protection and prevention, and promotion
and mainstreaming. The Philippines is one of the first
countries to formulate and implement a regional action
plan to localize resolution 1325 (2000). The following
are the Philippines’ inputs.
On the first pillar, among the provisions of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law, which was signed by
President Rodrigo Roa Duterte on 26 July 2018, is
the allocation of reserved seats for women in the
Bangsamoro Parliament and Cabinet. The continuing
efforts of the all-female Hijab troopers — as members
of the armed forces and the Philippine national police, in
partnership with different Government agencies, such
as the Office of the Presidential Adviser on the Peace
Process and civil society organizations — are being
undertaken through programmes and projects focused
on social healing and reconciliation and preventing
violent extremism.
On the second pillar, the Bangsamoro Organic
Law upholds and protects the fundamental rights
of women, including the right to engage in lawful
employment and to be protected from exploitation,
abuse or discrimination.
On the third pillar, the agency strategic action plans
operationalize the commitments of national Government
agencies under the national action plan. Capacitybuilding programmes for local Government units,
Government agencies and civil society organizations
are also being conducted to ensure that the women and
peace and security agenda is mainstreamed in the plans
and budgets for gender and development programmes.
The Philippines will hold a forum exploring various
sub-themes of women and peace and security in order to
familiarize participants, mainly from the Philippines’
security sector, on the impact and significance of
women’s participation in peacekeeping around the
world, with particular emphasis on the Philippine
experience. The Philippines further supports the calls of
Member States to appoint gender advisers as members
of crisis management teams in peacekeeping missions
and for the United Nations to commit resources for
mission leaders.

S/PV. 8508

In conclusion, I would like to emphasize that the
conviction of the Philippine Government is grounded
in the experience that the gender that binds the wounds
of war, comforts its widows and shelters children in
conflict has the strongest motivation and the best
approaches to stop the outbreak of war and restore a
broken peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Turkey.
Mr. Sinirlioğlu (Turkey): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important open debate.
We welcome the continuing attention of the Security
Council to the women and peace and security agenda,
and we thank the briefers for their insightful remarks.
Resolution 1325 (2000) constitutes an important
milestone, not only because it addresses the
disproportionate impact of armed conflict on women
and girls but also because it represents a landmark
achievement in terms of ensuring the full, effective and
meaningful participation of women in all stages of the
conflict cycle and the peace continuum. As we approach
its twentieth anniversary, there is ample room for
discussion on concrete strategies throughout the United
Nations system to enhance its implementation. That is
particularly the case for United Nations peacekeeping.
Female personnel have already proven that they
can perform the same roles to the same standards
and under the same difficult conditions as their
male counterparts. They also broaden the skill set
available on the ground as they make unique and
substantive contributions to peacekeeping operations.
Their presence in the field empowers women in the
host communities and contributes to making the
peacekeeping force more approachable to women and
young people in the community. As such, women are
key to the success of United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Women peacekeepers also act as role models
in the local environment, inspiring women and girls in
often male-dominated societies to push for their own
rights and participation in peace processes.
Thanks to the efforts and commitments of the
United Nations, the rate of female participation in
peacekeeping forces has increased in recent years, but
it still remains below United Nations targets. Despite
the evidence that inclusiveness improves peacekeeping
efficiency
and
effectiveness,
women
remain
underrepresented in actual operations, especially
among uniformed personnel. We welcome initiatives

19-1052645/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

such as the uniformed gender-parity strategy and the
Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations, which
aim to help overcome barriers to increasing women’s
participation in peace operations.
In our joint efforts, we can improve the situation on
the ground if we make good use of disaggregated data
on women to draw conclusions. Reporting should have
an integrated gender perspective that feeds into the
Secretary-General’s recommendations and conclusions.
In that sense, gender experts and advisers in the missions
contribute significantly to the overall success of United
Nations peacekeeping. We should make sure to continue
to make use of that asset in terms of training, advising,
assisting, mentoring and supporting the leadership and
relevant units of peacekeeping missions.
The involvement of United Nations peacekeepers
in sexual exploitation and abuse fundamentally
undermines the very foundation of the United Nations,
its credibility and the trust that the United Nations flag
enjoys. The zero-tolerance policy should be strictly
implemented against personnel involved in such cases
until the perpetrators are punished and those utterly
disgraceful acts cease completely. Turkey fully supports
the Secretary-General’s efforts to that end.
We should not overlook the fact that the ultimate
responsibility for the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda lies with individual
countries. In that spirit, we should make sure to
eliminate any discrimination or barriers against
women’s participation in peace operations. Turkey also
supports the empowerment and well-being of women
and girls in various emergency, conflict or post-conflict
situations through its comprehensive development
assistance programmes. The projects we carry out in
Afghanistan and Somalia, especially in the fields of
education and health services, are concrete examples of
our efforts to that end.
At the same time, we attach great importance to
ensuring the collaboration and coordination of our
efforts throughout the United Nations system and
continue to encourage more women to participate in
United Nations peacekeeping missions. We also actively
promote the implementation of the relevant resolutions
in other international and regional platforms, such
as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO.
Successive Security Council resolutions since the
adoption of resolution 1325 (2000) have contributed
46/65

11/04/2019

to the establishment of a sound normative framework.
Despite that achievement, however, today’s debate
indicates that there is still the need for further serious
improvement in involving women in all decision-making
processes aimed at preventing conflict as well as
building and sustaining peace.
To create lasting peace and stability, we need
women’s voices in every process, from conflict
prevention and conflict resolution to reconciliation and
post-conflict recovery. The recent conflict-settlement
history of our globe is full of success stories of women
who played crucial roles in the establishment of peace
and security. We should build on those achievements and
ensure women’s rightful and meaningful participation
in peace operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
Permanent Observer of the Observer State of the Holy
See to the United Nations.
Archbishop Auza: Almost 20 years ago, the
landmark resolution 1325 (2000) called for women to be
increasingly represented at decision-making levels in
peace processes and in the prevention, management and
resolution of conflict, to be protected from violence in
situations of armed conflict and — because they often
bear the brunt of violent conflict — and to participate
actively as agents of change for durable peace. As
Under-Secretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix has
emphasized, peacekeeping works effectively when
women play meaningful roles and when women in
host communities are directly engaged. Our discussion
today should consider the role of women in two
particular contexts.
The first context is that of the women who take
part in United Nations peacekeeping operations
around the world, whose numbers, in line with the
Secretary-General’s key priority, are increasing. They
are daughters, sisters, wives and mothers, who bring to
their work not only their courage, professionalism and
sense of duty but also a special sensitivity that enables
them to engage more effectively with local populations;
better assess the real needs on the ground by offering
women, boys and girls the opportunity to share their
grievances and concerns; and galvanize local efforts
to say no to violence and misery and yes to peace
and development.
That brings us to the second context — that of
the women who live in conflict zones or who have
experienced the trauma of war. They play an essential
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8508

role in rebuilding trust, offering insight and facilitating
reconciliation. Some of them have political
responsibilities and have been key players in
negotiating peace deals. It is encouraging to see that
more women are involved in emerging democratic
processes, strengthening the rule of law, giving voice
to the voiceless and so on. Yet the vast majority of
women who make a contribution do so through their
commitment at the local level. Women who have seen
their families and communities torn apart, their villages
and homes savagely destroyed, their dignity violated
and their loved ones taken are often, by their inner
strength, courage and resilience, the most inspiring
witnesses with the capacity to sow hope, open up new
prospects and bring people together. Their presence at
the negotiating table and during each and every stage of
peace processes is a necessity and an invaluable benefit.
They ensure inclusivity, credibility and durability. It is
of the utmost importance to guarantee that their voices
are heard.

dimensions, from food and water deprivation to sexual
violence to outright killings. We confront today this
same tragedy across many other countries and across
several United Nations peace operations.

In crisis situations, female leadership is often found
in faith-based communities, where women excel on the
path to dialogue, collaboration and non-violence. They
actively engage in peacebuilding and the prevention
of relapse into conflict. Their involvement normally
brings about large and lasting dividends. It is important,
therefore, not to overlook such a valid contribution but
to seek ways to further harness these efforts, especially
in regions where religion has been manipulated to incite
division or prevent peace processes from effectively
taking root.

Fiji
welcomes
the
Secretary-General’s
determination to bring peacebuilding, peacekeeping
and development closer together. We need only to look
at lessons learned from recent conflicts to understand
why that is so fundamental.

My delegation wishes to commend and express
gratitude to all women peacekeepers and peacebuilders
in the world, in particular those who work to promote
the greater involvement of women at all levels within
United Nations peacekeeping missions, which remain
the most recognizable presence of the United Nations
across the world.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Fiji.
Mr. Prasad (Fiji): I thank the Security Council
for this opportunity to address the members of the
Council. I congratulate you, Mr. President, during
this joint German and French presidency, on bringing
forward the subject of women’s contribution to peace
and security for open discussion in a more open setting.
Women bear the tragedies
disproportionately. Their suffering

of conflicts
has multiple

Resolutions 1325 (2000) and 2242 (2015), on women
and peace and security, all stress the centrality of
participation by women in peacebuilding and in helping
to achieve security. Those resolutions are powerfully
reinforced by the Secretary-General’s personal drive
and commitment to gender equality across the United
Nations system.
In peace and during times of conflict, women
play a critical role in keeping communities together.
When development and political institutions fail their
communities, women bear the overwhelming pain of
failure; seeking out livelihoods for from ever-dwindling
resources, fighting to maintain access to services such
as health care and pitching in when services collapse, at
great cost to themselves.

In all conflicts, long before guns and violence are
unleashed, food, water and health services become
weaponized. Women peacekeepers are intuitively
better at recognizing the slow weaponization of food,
water and essential services. It is therefore essential that
women be fully involved in peace processes and be part
of political settlements. When they are involved, peace
settlements are enduring. When they are not, peace
settlements are more likely to collapse. Women bring
empathy, practical understanding and deep insights to
such processes.
Women will always strengthen peace processes.
Failure is not an option; they know that failure will
result in immediate consequences for themselves and
their children. Therefore, by making United Nations
peacekeeping more diverse, it is far more likely that
peace operations will include women, and thereby
enhance prospects for enduring peace.
The Fijian Government seeks to empower women
to reach their full potential across all sectors of society.
The new Fiji Parliament has double the number of
women, who now represent 20 per cent. A lot more
work is required, of course.

19-1052647/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Fiji has chosen to serve the world through
peacekeeping. Its peacekeepers have played important
roles in Kosovo, Namibia, Afghanistan, Kuwait,
Timor-Leste, Somalia, Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, Egypt,
the Sudan, Solomon Islands in a non-United Nations
arrangement, Papua New Guinea and South Sudan,
among other countries. We have lost 59 peacekeepers
during those engagements. We have learned a lot
from those experiences, including that a good peace
operation, at its core, is about broadening spaces for
politics to kick in.
Thousands of United Nations peacekeepers interact
with and protect local communities every day. The
way in which they interact matters. Peacekeeping is
about the soft skills that missions bring to deliver their
mandates under extraordinary circumstances. They
include the ability to understand cultures and values
and the ability to see how women and children become
extraordinarily deprived in conflicts early on. Fiji pays
significant attention to strengthening those softs skills
in its training and preparation.
We know that when peacekeepers strike a positive
rapport with communities, they enhance prospects
for reconciliation. Through our many peacekeeping
efforts, we know that women peacekeepers at
checkpoints are far better at diffusing tensions; and that
women peacekeepers are far better in understanding
the hidden dimensions of conflict, such as the seizure
of humanitarian food assistance. Women in medical
support units help overcome high barriers to health
care access, and women peacekeepers are far better at
identifying signs of systemic sexual violence.
Fiji is deeply committed to increasing the
participation of women in its peacekeeping. Learning
from our many experiences across many peace
operations, Fiji is committed to accelerating the
recruitment of women in its army and navy. The
United Nations gender report published in January
notes that Fiji has achieved the following standards:
21 per cent of our staff officers in United Nations peace
operations are women; approximately 10 per cent of our
military contingents are women; and 51 per cent of our
individual police officers are women. A lot more needs
to be done — we are the first to admit it.
The Police Commissioner heading the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan is a Fijian woman. We
are incredibly proud of Commissioner Unaisi Vuniwaqa.
She serves as a great role model for us. Today we stand
48/65

11/04/2019

in solidarity with Superintendent Vilisi Waqavesi,
based in Darfur, as difficult political circumstances
unfold in the Sudan.
As a small country, we understand our limits.
Fiji looks forward to working closely with our
partners — Australia, New Zealand, China, the
United States, the United Kingdom, Malaysia and
Indonesia — on training and developing our women
peacekeepers. We are strengthening gender perspectives
and mainstreaming gender across predeployment and
deployment and across our operations. Fiji is launching
a new regional partnership with Australia and New
Zealand to reinforce that effort. We are committed to
the United Nations quest to improve the participation
of women across peace operations. That is our quest
as well.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mrs. Furman (Israel): I would like to thank the
German presidency for organizing this important open
debate, and the briefers for their comprehensive insights.
Nineteen years ago, the Security Council
adopted resolution 1325 (2000), calling for enhanced
efforts by the international community to increase
the participation of women in peacebuilding and
peacekeeping operations. As the Secretary-General
stated two weeks ago at the opening of the Peacekeeping
Ministerial, women play an essential role in improving
the effectiveness of peacekeeping missions, as well
as their engagement with local communities. Women
are often the first victims in conflicts and wars, being
more vulnerable to physical and sexual violence, but
often they are also the first to advocate for peace. When
women are on the front line of peacekeeping operations
and are part of peacebuilding teams, they function as
a catalyst for trust and cooperation, thereby enhancing
the ability of the United Nations to fulfil its mandates
for peace and security.
Since the establishment of the State of Israel,
women have been an integral part of our country’s
defence forces. Initially, only a few positions were
open to women. However, throughout the years their
opportunities were expanded through Israel Defence
Forces (IDF) reform, as well as individual pioneers
who fought for equality within the military. One such
pioneer was Alice Miller, whose attempt to become
an IDF pilot was denied based on her gender. Miller’s
appeal to the Supreme Court in 1995 brought about
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the acceptance of woman into the air force academy.
A few years later, the IDF appointed the first women’s
affairs adviser to the Chief of Staff. That was born out
of the recognition that the IDF would not be able to
reach its full potential without ensuring a supportive
and inclusive environment for women to serve in.
In the past decade, we have witnessed how changes
within the system to accommodate women have helped
us advance towards gender parity. Today over 85 per
cent of positions in the IDF are open to women, and
more than 30 per cent of IDF officers are female. Of all
the women serving in the IDF, 20 per cent hold officer
positions, while of all the men serving only 10 per cent
are officers. We may not have achieved full gender
parity yet, but we are well on our way and efforts
are ongoing.
We all agree that there is a need for more women
in United Nations peacekeeping, and Israel is pleased
to see that the seeds planted 19 years ago by resolution
1325 (2000) are starting to grow. More women are
taking on key managerial roles in the United Nations,
and the number of women in peacekeeping has doubled.
However, despite those achievements, as was mentioned
in the Peacekeeping Ministerial, we still have a long
way to go.
We commend the Secretary-General for his
leadership on gender parity thus far and recognize
that the United Nations is making tremendous strides.
However, in our view, there is an essential component
missing in order to encourage the full inclusion of
women in peacekeeping settings: the adjustment
of the environment and facilities in field missions.
It is not enough to simply set targets. If we want
more women to serve in the field, we must create an
inclusive environment by ensuring their safety within
United Nations compounds and providing them with
the facilities and services necessary, such as on-base
women’s health services, accommodation for families
and more. Our continued focus should be on increasing
the number of women in key positions throughout the
Organization by adjusting the working conditions and
services available to accommodate them.
If we are to encourage women to serve in
peacekeeping, the United Nations and its States
Members must endeavour to create a more welcoming
and inclusive environment in the field. The United
Nations will be able to reach its full potential only

S/PV. 8508

when both halves of the world’s population are involved
and contributing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Armenia.
Mr. Margaryan (Armenia): We would like to
thank the presidency of the Security Council for the
choice of theme for today’s open debate. We appreciate
the importance that Germany attaches to the subject,
demonstrated also by the participation of the Federal
Minister of Defence, Ms. Ursula von der Leyen, earlier
today. This meeting provides an important opportunity
to reflect on ways to strengthen collective efforts
towards more efficient and effective peacekeeping by
increasing women’s participation and representation.
The Government of Armenia attaches particular
importance to reforms aimed at promoting women’s
representation at all decision-making levels. We
firmly believe that peace and security efforts are
more sustainable when women are equal partners in
the prevention of conflicts, the delivery of relief and
recovery efforts, as well as in contributing to lasting and
durable solutions. Ensuring the solid and meaningful
participation of women in conflict resolution processes
is instrumental, as it has been proven to amplify chances
for credible and sustainable peace.
As next year will mark the twentieth anniversary of
the adoption of resolution 1325 (2000), Armenia stands
ready to support the implementation of commitments
for the promotion of the women and peace and security
agenda. We fully support the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative and the efforts undertaken
towards the equal and meaningful participation of
women at all stages of peace processes.
In February this year, the Government of Armenia
adopted a national action plan on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). The plan was elaborated
through an inclusive and comprehensive process,
involving Government agencies, civil society and
international organizations. The document prioritizes
the enhancement of training and career development
possibilities for women with a view to increasing
their participation in peacekeeping as well as in
peacebuilding activities. A particular focus has been
placed on vulnerable population groups, including
women from border communities and women affected
by conflict.

19-1052649/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The involvement of women in peacekeeping missions
is among the priorities of reforms implemented by the
Armenian armed forces. With the aim of promoting a
greater role played by women, Armenia has already
deployed women peacekeepers to United Nations and
United Nations-mandated operations. More women
will soon be deployed to the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon during the next rotation cycle this
summer in order to ensure compliance with the 15 per
cent target set by the United Nations.
Non-governmental organizations and civil society
networks have been instrumental in raising the bar for
women’s participation in peace- and security-related
activities. Since 2015, the HALO Trust has been
training and employing local women in its humanitarian
demining missions in the conflict-affected areas of
Nagorno Karabakh. Initiatives like that have multiple
economic, social and humanitarian benefits for local
communities in overcoming the effects of conflict,
towards a more peaceful and secure future.
The outcome document of the seventeenth
Summit of the Heads of State and Government of La
Francophonie, held in Yerevan on 11 and 12 October
2018 under the theme “Living Together”, also calls for
continued efforts to ensure the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations and for a greater role for
women in the prevention and resolution of conflicts.
Armenia fully recognizes the importance of women’s
empowerment and how it is linked and intertwined
with sustainable peace and development efforts at
different levels. An important example of women’s
participation in peacebuilding efforts is the Women for
Peace initiative, led by the spouse of the Prime Minister
of Armenia, as an inclusive platform for women and
mothers to promote peace and reconciliation in our
region and beyond.
Armenia is fully committed to the promotion of
gender-sensitive policies as a priority in our national
and foreign policy agenda. As a member of the United
Nations Commission on the Status of Women and
having assumed the chairmanship of the Commission
for the upcoming session, Armenia will be supporting
efforts aimed at ensuring gender equality through the
enhancement of women’s participation in all areas of
economic, political and social life, including through
the substantial involvement of women in peacebuilding
and peacekeeping activities.
50/65

11/04/2019

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Liechtenstein.
Mr. Sparber (Liechtenstein): We thank you,
Mr. President, and Minister Von der Leyen for convening
this open debate on an important and timely topic.
Stronger political will and leadership are needed
to empower women to participate fully in all stages
of building peace, particularly in times of political
transition. It is therefore important that women’s
representation in peacekeeping contingents increase
rapidly. The inclusion of women at all stages of the
conflict cycle must be one element of a broader change
towards a system based on full equality and free from
gender stereotypes that have historically kept women
away from police and military roles.
Women peacekeepers improve the operational
effectiveness, accessibility and credibility of
peacekeeping missions by providing contingents
with diverse perspectives and a broad range of skills.
According to studies, women peacekeepers help
strengthen relationships with communities, including by
being able to access information from populations and
venues that are closed off to men. Strong relationships
with communities lead to more successful dispute
resolution and strengthen the ability of missions to fulfil
their mandates, including the protection of civilians.
Women’s participation in the security sector is
associated with fewer misconduct complaints and
improved citizens’ perceptions of force integrity.
Women help to mainstream a gender perspective
across all components and operations of a mission and
facilitate a cultural change that disrupts harmful gender
stereotypes. A visible presence of female peacekeepers
empowers women and girls in host communities and
can raise women’s participation rates in local police
and military forces, improving the capacity of national
forces to take over security responsibilities. Women’s
participation in peacekeeping also contributes to
achieving Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 5, on
gender equality, and SDG 16, on peace, justice and
strong institutions, both of which are catalysts for the
successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development.
We note the importance of resolution 2242 (2015) in
encouraging the deployment of women and the precedent
it sets, particularly in its endorsement of incentives to
bolster numbers of female peacekeepers. We support
the measures aimed at implementing its provisions as
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

part of the Secretary-General’s system-wide strategy
on gender parity. At the same time, more consistent
mission mandates are needed on issues pertaining to
women and peace and security. In 2017, only 16 per cent
of the 25 gender advisers deployed to field missions
or the offices of special envoys were at senior level.
Missions should better incorporate gender advisers into
their work as part of the mission leadership structure
and provide them with all the resources necessary to be
able to carry out their functions.
Member States should increase their efforts to
encourage female police and military personnel to
participate in peacekeeping operations and eliminate
barriers to women’s full inclusion. Improving conditions
of service and targeted recruitment strategies towards
women, in particular through the media, can contribute
to those efforts. Moreover, female peacekeepers can be
effective agents of change only in environments that
are free from discrimination and unfair social norms
and attitudes, and where they are not deprived of their
rights and opportunities.
Finally, Liechtenstein welcomes and supports
your call, Mr. President, for questions for the briefers,
as a way of making our debates more interactive. We
are aware that the briefers have already left, but we
would be interested in their views on the following
two questions. First, how can peacekeeping operations
better follow up with women who leave missions, in
order to learn lessons from their experiences? Secondly,
why do police- and troop-contributing countries often
deploy women to the United Nations at levels lower
than their proportion in their domestic security forces?
The President: I thank the representative of
Liechtenstein for his questions; we will have to see how
we go about getting a response.
I now give the floor to the representative of Romania.
Mr. Jinga (Romania): It seems to me that
something has changed in the Chamber — there is more
light. Allow me, first of all, to commend Germany for
organizing this debate. I am very confident that, under
your presidency, Sir, the Security Council will continue
to build on this important topic.
Romania associates itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I would
now like to make a few remarks in my national capacity.
Women peacekeepers play a special role that is
indispensable in laying the foundations of sustainable

S/PV. 8508

peace in conflict zones. It has been proven that the
presence of women in United Nations peacekeeping
missions has a positive effect on the local population.
In fact, women and children are the most vulnerable
in terms of becoming victims of violence. It is a fact
that, for male peacekeepers, it is difficult to overcome
social and cultural boundaries required to build trust
with them. That is precisely where female peacekeepers
have to fill the gap by providing victims and local
communities with a more reliable sense of security
and trust. From our perspective, that ability should be
considered a vital component of any peace operation.
In that regard, we have a proven successful example
from Afghanistan, where Romania provided female
engagement teams and managed to interact regularly
with local women, thereby building trust and confidence
in, I would say, a very complex environment.
Moreover, there is a clear need for more women
in command positions, which is critical to ensure the
United Nations Blue Helmets deliver on their tasks.
Let me share with the Council one relevant national
example. We are proud that one woman — a Romanian
police officer — received the International Female
Police Peacekeeper title in 2015.
During
Romania’s
chairmanship
of
the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) in 2018, listening to
the voices of women was high on our agenda. In that
regard, the topic of financing the gender dimension of
peacebuilding was included in the PBC annual session
devoted to empowering youth and women as agents
of peacebuilding and sustaining peace in the Sahel
region. In addition, during the working visits I paid
last year to the Sahel region and West Africa, I met
with women civil society groups and women leaders.
I also had the privilege to understand, in depth, that
women must be included in all peace processes and that
their participation at all levels of society is essential for
peace to last.
Member States are taking concrete steps towards
improving female representation in United Nations
peace operations. I would like to take this opportunity
to express our full support for one of the most recent
developments undertaken by Canada and the United
Nations in launching the Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations and setting up the Elsie Fund
to support the initiative. We also warmly welcome
Germany’s launch today of a global female peacekeepers
network initiative.

19-1052651/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

At the same time, Romania strongly supports the
efforts carried out by the Secretary-General through
his Action for Peacekeeping initiative and acts to
implement resolution 1325 (2000), as well as the
women and peace and security agenda, especially by
continuing to integrate the gender perspective in our
decision-making processes. We equally welcome the
Secretary-General’s strategy on gender parity for the
period 2018-2028, which recognizes the importance
of women’s participation in peace operations. As a
result, Romania has already surpassed the 16 per cent
objective for 2019. In fact, 17 per cent of Romania’s
military observers and staff officers deployed in the
field are women, as compared to an average of 13 per
cent among Member States. We will continue working
to improve this figure.
As one of the endorsing countries of the
Declaration of Shared Commitments on United Nations
Peacekeeping Operations, Romania welcomes the
development of the light coordination mechanism
in order to increase partnerships for training and
capacity-building. At the regional level, my country has
established a mobile training team focused on gender
mainstreaming in security and defence. Its first audience
was the Southeastern Europe Defence Initiative, where
our trainers with United Nations experience delivered
a key leadership course at the South-Eastern European
Brigade headquarters.
Moreover, Romania is increasing the number of
security personnel trained to prevent and respond to
sexual and gender-based violence and is supporting
the Office of the Special Coordinator on improving
the United Nations response to sexual exploitation and
abuse with an expert on military law.
Finally, I believe in changing the narrative on the
role of women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping
processes. Men and boys should also be actively
involved. A good example in that respect is the HeForShe
campaign, in which the President of Romania is one of
the 10 champions in advocating gender equality.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Mr. Suárez Moreno (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): It is an honour for the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to speak on behalf of
the Movement of Non-Aligned Countries (NAM). This
is a summarized version of our statement.
52/65

11/04/2019

Everything that pertains to improving the efficiency
and effectiveness of peacekeeping operations is a
matter of crucial importance to NAM, bearing in mind
the fact that 88 per cent of peacekeeping personnel
deployed in the field ground come from NAM member
States. Therefore, we emphasize the need for effective
triangular consultations or, in other words, a renewed
and revitalized alliance between the Security Council,
police- and troop-contributing countries and the
Secretariat with shared responsibility. That will allow
us to undertake objective evaluations and harness the
potential of the mandates of peacekeeping operations.
Moreover, NAM reaffirms its principled position
regarding such operations, which must be carried out
in strict compliance with the purposes and principles
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations. At the
same time, we stress that respect for the principles of
sovereignty, territorial integrity, independence and
non-interference in the internal affairs of States are
fundamental elements of joint efforts for the promotion
of international peace and security. In that regard, NAM
reiterates that respect for those principles is essential
for the success of operations, in particular those with
civilian-protection mandates.
Furthermore, recognizing that operations have been
an indispensable tool in the promotion and maintenance
of international peace and security, we emphasize that,
in the context of a comprehensive approach and the
objective of achieving lasting peace and security, the
implementation of all tasks entrusted to operations
must be paired with and supported in parallel by a
broad and participatory political process in order to
sustain peace. That process should be well planned and
carefully designed, find its basis in national ownership
and support from the international community, and
operate with the consent and commitment of the parties
concerned. Peacekeeping operations should not be
used as an alternative to addressing the root causes of
conflicts, or to manage conflicts themselves.
The Movement welcomed the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and supported
his Declaration of Shared Commitments, which is
aimed at ensuring collective efforts to improve the
effectiveness and efficiency of peace operations, with
a view to addressing changing realities. Similarly, the
Movement stands ready to translate the Declaration
into a practical, integrated and mutually reinforcing
implementation framework. In that regard, we would
like to note Egypt’s efforts to that end, including
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

through the introduction of the Cairo road map. As
we approach the twentieth anniversary of the adoption
of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and
security, the States members of the Movement express
their commitment to increasing the number of female
civilians and uniformed personnel in peacekeeping
operations at all levels, including in key positions, and
to ensure the full, equal and meaningful participation
of women in all stages of peace processes.
In conclusion, the Movement takes this opportunity
to pay tribute to, and acknowledge the commendable
work of, the troops — men and women — who in many
cases do their jobs under adverse conditions on the
ground, in contexts of armed conflict, putting their
lives at risk on a daily basis. Our sincere appreciation
goes out to all of them, as well as to those who lost their
lives in the field defending the United Nations flag and
the cause of peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Bin Momen (Bangladesh): I would like to
commend Germany’s leadership in convening today’s
open debate. I would also like to thank the briefers for
their insights on how the international community can
best support and strengthen efforts to increase women’s
participation in peacekeeping.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement made
by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group
of Friends of Women, Peace and Security.
Bangladesh, then as a member of the Security
Council and one of the core sponsors of resolution 1325
(2000), was closely associated with the adoption of that
historic document. This was our humble endeavour:
to ensure women’s rights and roles in the maintenance
of international peace and security, which paved the
way towards many subsequent resolutions, namely,
resolutions 2242 (2015), 2378 (2017), 2382 (2017) and
2436 (2018).
In terms of maintaining international peace and
security, we take pride in our modest contribution
of troops and police to that noble objective. We are
gradually increasing our female peacekeepers in
keeping with our commitment to the United Nations.
We have sent 150 to 200 female peacekeepers every
year since 2010. So far, Bangladesh has deployed over
1,600 female peacekeepers and stands fifth among the

S/PV. 8508

troop- and police-contributing countries in contributing
female peacekeepers.
We earlier deployed two full contingents of allfemale formed police units in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and Haiti. Bangladesh has deployed female
officers as Contingent Commanders in the United
Nations Operation in Côte d’Ivoire, the United Nations
Stabilization Mission in Haiti, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
the Central African Republic and the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. Bangladesh has also deployed
two female helicopter pilots in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo. Currently, we have one platoon of female
troops in an infantry contingent in that country. We
are also planning to send an all-female platoon with all
future contingents. We have also kept one female police
contingent ready for the United Nations Peacekeeping
Capability Readiness System, which we hope will be
deployed soon.
To achieve the target of 15 per cent female staff
officer/military observers (SO/UNMOs) in United
Nations peacekeeping operations set by United
Nations, Bangladesh has taken all possible measures.
To that end, Bangladesh is required to deploy 22 female
officers as SO/UNMOs. We have already deployed 14
female officers and are in the process of deploying six
more. Our experience shows that women peacekeepers
can play a very effective role in winning the hearts and
minds of the host population, which is crucial for any
peacekeeping operation.
While we work towards ensuring participation
by more female peacekeepers, we must ensure that
women can participate fully and meaningfully in
peace operations at all levels — in civilian, police,
and military contexts — including at decision-making
levels. We also need to identify the country-specific
challenges to increasing the number of female
peacekeepers and work together to remove barriers for
their recruitment, retention and career progress. In that
regard, we strongly support the Secretary-General’s
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, the Santos Cruz
action plan and the uniformed gender-parity strategy of
the Department of Peace Operations. We also laud the
Secretary-General’s efforts aimed at ensuring gender
parity in senior appointments under the system-wide
strategy on gender parity.

19-1052653/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The Honourable Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina has
ensured women’s political and economic participation
through specific statutory provisions, affirmative
actions and appropriate incentives. We are continuously
working towards further empowerment of women
in all aspects of our social life by providing them
with necessary skills, education and training, and by
eliminating all sorts of discrimination and barriers
against them. We are in the final stages of drafting
our national plan of action on women and peace and
security, pursuant to resolution 1325 (2000) and its
successor resolutions.
To encourage and facilitate women’s participation
in our uniformed forces, we have lifted all prohibitions
that prevent women from joining our combat forces. To
encourage more females to come and join uniformed
forces, we are offering their spouses, if they are working,
to be posted in the same area, and we are providing child
care and other female-friendly facilities to them. We
are also rewarding achievers with our highest national
awards. For example, one female brigadier general was
given Bangladesh’s highest national civilian award for
her contribution to the army.
We are aware of the barriers to women, including
sexual exploitation and abuse. Bangladesh has always
stood strongly in support of the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy against all forms of sexual
exploitation and abuse by peacekeepers. Prime Minister
Sheikh Hasina is a member of the Circle of Leadership
on the prevention of and response to sexual exploitation
and abuse in United Nations operations. We are also a
signatory of the voluntary compact with the SecretaryGeneral on the commitment to eliminate sexual
exploitation and abuse. In addition, we have made it an
important component of our predeployment training.
While the Secretariat, the Security Council and
Member States are doing their best to ensure effective
and meaningful participation by female peacekeepers,
we should not be complacent. Both the Organization
and the Security Council could bring forward new ideas
and proposals, provide greater incentives for female
peacekeepers to participate, assist them in adjusting
to local conditions and see to it that the specific needs
of mothers who are working as peacekeepers are
accommodated. We believe that adequate facilities
such as six-month rotations, child-care support back
home, appropriate incentives, assistance with logistical
issues, including accommodation and so forth, need
to be ensured if we are to increase the number of
54/65

11/04/2019

women in the field. We are happy to note that Canada,
in partnership with the United Nations, has launched
the Elsie Initiative Fund to remove barriers for women
peacekeepers and encourage greater participation.
In conclusion, I reiterate that we in Bangladesh
have making our best efforts to increase women’s
participation as uniformed and civilian peacekeepers.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brazil.
Mr. Giacomelli da Silva (Brazil): Let me start by
thanking you, Mr. President, for having organized this
open debate, as well as the briefers for their insightful
presentations. Brazil welcomes this opportunity to
exchange views and to learn from the best practices of
other countries.
Brazil recognizes the crucial role played by
uniformed and civilian women in peacekeeping, as
outlined in Brazil’s first national action plan on women
and peace and security.
It is with great satisfaction that I can inform the
Council that the Brazilian national action plan, adopted
in March 2017 and initially effective for two years,
was extended for four more years. We expect that
this extended period of implementation will allow us
to continue to advance towards fulfilling the goals of
resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on
the topic.
Brazil’s commitment to increasing the presence
of uniformed women in peacekeeping is a long-term
project. I am, however, pleased to be able to share some
positive results achieved within the first two years of
the implementation of Brazil’s national action plan.
In 2017 the Brazilian Army Academy admitted, for
the first time, 34 women to train for combat careers.
More recently, in 2019, the Brazilian navy started to
welcome women candidates for all operative combat
positions, enabling them to be part of navy troops
deployed abroad.
Concerning Brazilian women who are already
deployed, we also celebrate the fact that Brazil is close
to the target set by the Secretariat for military and staff
officers, with approximately around 15 per cent and
12 per cent of women in each category, respectively.
Nevertheless, we remain committed to increasing these
numbers as well as those related to civilian and police
officers. In this regard, we welcome the progress made
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8508

possible by the Uniformed Gender Parity Strategy
2018-2028 in facilitating conditions for the deployment
of uniformed and civilian women.

thank the Secretary-General, His Excellency António
Guterres, and Major General Kristin Lund for the
informative briefing on the issue at hand.

Furthermore, the Brazilian Ministry of Foreign
Affairs has eagerly sought to increase awareness among
women of opportunities for civilians in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and special political missions,
as well as to make sure that women are adequately
represented in matters relating to international peace
and security inside the Ministry’s bureaucracy. The
achievement of these goals is central to Brazil’s national
action plan.

Since 2006, Cambodia has contributed thousands
of troops to serve in some of the most dangerous
conflict zones throughout the world. Today, more than
800 Cambodians serve in peacekeeping operations in
the Sudan, South Sudan, Chad, Lebanon, Mali, the
Central African Republic, Syria and Cyprus.

As we approach the twentieth anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), the women and peace and
security agenda must remain a priority for the Council.
In this regard, Brazil recalls the importance of
instruments such as the 2015 Global Study on resolution
1325 (2000) conducted by UN-Women, which inspired
Brazil’s decision to formulate a national action plan.
In our view, the upcoming celebration could be an
opportunity to evaluate the progress achieved and the
challenges ahead. It could also motivate those Member
States that have yet to adopt their own national action
plans to do so.
While we recognize the positive results achieved,
we must acknowledge that the challenges ahead
are manifold and significant. In overcoming those
difficulties, we find that positive role models are
important at both a personal and a collective level. With
this in mind, I would like to once again congratulate
Commander Marcia Andrade Braga, a Brazilian
Navy officer currently serving as gender adviser
for the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in the Central African Republic,
who a few days ago received the United Nations
Military Gender Advocate Award. Commander
Braga has now joined many other Brazilians who are
role models for uniformed and civilian women and
whose efforts inspire us to continue striving for the
greater participation of women in matters related to
international peace and security.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cambodia.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): At the outset, I would like
to congratulate Germany on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council this month and for having
organized this important debate. I would also like to

Through our engagement in United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Cambodia recognizes the
importance of human security and considers women
to be the driving force in maintaining the culture of
peace in our country and globally. Cambodia wishes
to reiterate its commitment in line with the SecretaryGeneral’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
Accordingly, Cambodia is fully committed to
increasing the number of civilian and uniformed women
in peacekeeping at all levels and in key positions.
Increasing women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations is necessary not only to guarantee gender
parity among the forces, but also to improve mission
effectiveness and promote stability among the affected
populations on the ground.
Indeed, increasing women’s participation can
help reduce the risk of sexual exploitation and abuse,
improve policing on the ground, contribute to effective
intelligence-gathering efforts and improve the process
of dispute settlement among local populations. These
are but a few of the benefits that women bring to
peacekeeping as indispensable members of United
Nations peacekeeping operations.
In line with resolution 2242 (2015) and its call for
a revised strategy to double the number of women in
the military and police contingents of United Nations
peacekeeping operations, Cambodia supports the
Secretary-General’s efforts in this regard.
Currently, Cambodia has deployed 42 uniformed
women to peacekeeping operations in various
missions–11 in the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan; four in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in the Central African
Republic; 17 in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali; and 10 in the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon. The Royal
Government of Cambodia is determined to gradually

19-1052655/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

increase the proportion of women in peacekeeping
operations to 20 per cent.
As efforts are made to promote gender parity,
partners must come together and provide support
through financial and technical assistance. Such a team
effort would ensure the speedier integration of United
Nations peacekeeping forces while helping to build the
capacities of States that may not have the resources or
the expertise to fully implement the necessary strategies
by themselves.
In that connection, I wish to highlight that, in
addition to the necessary skills, English training is
very important for uniformed women so that they can
effectively communicate in performing their mission.
In conclusion, Cambodia stands together with all its
partners in support of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. We assure the Council
that we will continue working diligently to improve
the lives of the most vulnerable populations through
integrated, accountable, well-coordinated and effective
peacekeeping efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Montenegro.
Mrs. Pejanović Đurišić (Montenegro): I would
like to thank you, Mr. President, for having organized
this meeting and to commend your strong commitment
to this important issue on the United Nations agenda. I
also thank today’s briefers for their valuable inputs to
this debate.
As a member of the Group of Friends of Women,
Peace and Security, Montenegro aligns itself with the
statement made by Canada on behalf of the Group.
Montenegro also aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will,
however, add a few remarks in my national capacity.
In many countries of the world, including
Montenegro, women are not adequately involved in
the armed forces, in particular at the command and
decision-making levels. Therefore, in the process of
reforming our defence system, gender equality has
been largely considered as a matter of building up
human resources. As a result of our continuous efforts,
the number of women in the armed forces has increased
from 8.7 per cent in 2011 to 10.6 per cent in 2019, as
has the number of women applying for admission to
foreign military academies and for employment in
the armed forces, as contractual soldiers, officers and
56/65

11/04/2019

civilian personnel. Seven women have participated in
the peacekeeping mission of the International Security
Assistance Force in Afghanistan. The number of
women employed at the Ministry of Defence accounts
for 42.9 per cent of its personnel, with that rate being
14.7 per cent if the army of Montenegro is also taken
into account. By actively promoting possibilities for
women’s education in foreign military academies, the
number of women in positions that were once typically
filled by men has increased. We now have a woman pilot,
a woman commander of a navigational ship squad and
women as leaders of chemical, biological, radiological
and nuclear platoons, departments for mobile liaison
systems, engineer platoons and intelligence and
reconnaissance platoons, as well as a female Deputy
Commander of the Air Force Operational Centre. Next
year, a Montenegrin female cadet will graduate from
the prestigious United States Military Academy at
West Point.
Those statistics still indicate an insufficient number
of women, but reflect our clear commitment to reaching
both the national goals and our common aspirations
under the United Nations peacekeeping agenda,
including the United Nations uniformed gender parity
strategy for the period 2018-2028 and related initiatives.
Therefore, in 2016, the Ministry of Defence adopted a
strategy for human resources management, followed
by several human-resources-management plans and
policies, aimed at creating equal opportunities for
women and men to join the armed forces. Furthermore,
in June 2018, the Ministry of Defence adopted guidelines
for increasing women’s participation in the army of
Montenegro, defining very specific goals — to ensure
that more qualified and motivated female candidates
apply for admission to the armed forces and military
education programmes and that the selection process
for admission to the service and education programmes
takes into consideration gender equality to strengthen
the professional development of women in the army;
ensure that career advancement for women is not
hindered owing to formal and/or informal obstacles;
ensure the implementation of prevention and protection
mechanisms for sexual harassment; encourage and train
women to participate in international missions and
operations; and provide gender-responsive budgeting.
At the regional level, Montenegro, together with
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of North
Macedonia, participates in the implementation of a
regional project on strengthening regional cooperation
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

in integrating the gender perspective into the security
sector in the Western Balkans, financed by the Kingdom
of Norway and the Slovak Republic. In the forthcoming
period, in accordance with our long-term defence
development plan for the period 2019-2029, Montenegro
will intensify its efforts to bring the army closer to young
women. The focus is on creating conditions for further
increasing the number of women at the command level
and in peacekeeping operations. Additionally, we are
currently in the final stage of adopting our second fouryear action plan for the implementation of resolution
1325 (2000) in Montenegro. That action plan is also
focused on increasing the participation of women in
decision-making and peacekeeping processes, as well
as on the protection of women and girls in conflict
zones and the integration of gender perspectives and
gender education in peacekeeping operations.
Montenegro firmly believes that women’s
participation and their career advancement are important
for more efficient and responsible armed forces, while
their participation in peacekeeping missions and
operations contributes to ensuring that peace processes
worldwide are comprehensive, inclusive and more
effective. Our best long-term contribution to increasing
women’s meaningful participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations is our continuous investment
in building capacities within our national armed forces
in accordance with the best international standards of
gender parity.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Nepal.
Mr. Rai (Nepal): At the outset, I would like to
begin by thanking you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate to recognize the importance of
women’s participation in peacekeeping. I also thank
the Secretary-General and the briefers for their updates
and valuable insights.
It has become evident that the participation of
women increases the effectiveness, stability and
efficiency of peace missions. Women make an
inimitable contribution to peacekeeping by winning
the hearts and minds of the community they are
deployed to serve. They have easier access to local
women, which can help reduce gender-based violence.
That, in turn, helps in the protection of civilians in
general. Additionally, women in peacekeeping provide
direct positive motivation to the local community
to embrace women’s empowerment, girls’ education

S/PV. 8508

and gender equality. Studies have shown that female
peacekeepers are highly effective in de-escalating local
tensions and building trust with the local communities.
Needless to say, women’s participation helps prevent
and combat sexual exploitation and abuse. All those
positive ramifications eventually help in the effective
implementation of a mission’s mandate. Therefore,
we must ensure women’s active involvement in
peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes.
I wish to share my country’s experiences. Through
its own experience of the successful home-grown peace
process, Nepal underscores that women’s increased role
in the national context greatly complements the United
Nations aspiration for a greater role for women at the
global level. In 2011, Nepal adopted its first five-year
national action plan to implement resolutions 1325
(2000) and 1820 (2008). Nepal was the first country
in South Asia, and the second in Asia overall, to
establish such a plan. As of now, the second national
plan has been drafted and builds on the experience and
lessons learned from the first phase of implementation.
Necessary legal arrangements have been made to
encourage the recruitment of women in Nepal’s security
forces. Moreover, 33 per cent of positions under the
reserved quota are allotted for women in all publicsector jobs. Nepal is committed to ensuring women’s
participation in peacekeeping. We have already met
United Nations targets in terms of the participation of
female peacekeepers as staff officers, military observers
and individual police officers. My country also began
integrating female engagement teams made up of from
30 to 35 female peacekeepers in infantry battalions
2017. Currently, Nepal is the fourth-largest contributor
of female peacekeepers. Let me also reiterate Nepal’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
I would like to make the following points to
enhance the participation of women in peacekeeping.
Troop- and police-contributing countries (TCCs/PCCs)
should be supported in terms of their capacity-building,
with special emphasis on the deployment of female
peacekeepers. In that regard, I acknowledge the efforts
of Canada and the United Nations through the Elsie
Initiative. I encourage Member States to support it or
initiate similar funds to support TCCs and PCCs. Nepal
also welcomes Germany’s announcement that it will
establish a female peacekeepers network. Secondly,
the safety, security and dignity of female peacekeepers
should be adequately ensured. Thirdly, there should
be an encouraging working environment and shorter

19-1052657/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

deployment periods for female peacekeepers. Lastly,
meaningful partnership with civil society and regional
organizations and local communities should be ensured
to incorporate gender perspectives in peace operations.
In conclusion, I would like pay tribute to those
brave women who work day and night in peace missions
to make this world a safer and better place.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ethiopia.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We extend our appreciation
to the German presidency for organizing this important
debate and prioritizing the role of women in conflict
situations, including their protection and empowerment.
We are also grateful to the Secretary-General for his
Action for Peacekeeping initiative, with women in
peacekeeping as one of its pillars, and also the genderequality implementation schemes he has introduced in
the structures of the Organization.
Ethiopia co-hosted, together with Canada, the
2019 Peacekeeping Ministerial preparatory meeting
on women and peace and security in Addis Ababa
on 28 and 29 January. We trust that the meeting
contributed to drawing the attention of defence
ministers from around the world and other heads of
delegation who underlined the need to execute concrete
measures in the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda.
We remain committed to the women and peace and
security agenda, which is one of the eight priorities
identified under the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping initiative. As the co-Chair of the Group of
Friends on Action for Peacekeeping and a major troopcontributing country to United Nations peacekeeping
operations, Ethiopia is supporting efforts towards the
implementation of that initiative.
We firmly believe that the full and effective
participation of women is essential to peacekeeping
performance. That has been proved in the performance
of the more than 800 Ethiopian women peacekeepers
currently deployed in various United Nations missions,
as well as the African Union Mission in Somalia.
Though Ethiopia is a leading contributor of female
peacekeepers, we recognize that a lot remains to be
done. In that context, I wish to reaffirm our commitment
to continuing to enhance women’s participation in the
military, police and civilian components, including in
United Nations peacekeeping operations.
58/65

11/04/2019

We absolutely agree with the vision that
underscores the fact that long-term peace and stability
will be achieved where the international community is
able to make sure that women enjoy equal opportunities
in their participation, including in decision-making
processes. That is the reason why Ethiopia is working
for gender parity in our uniformed personnel, which
aligns with the United Nations gender parity strategy in
peace operations, which sets a target of 15 per cent for
women among contingent troops, as well as a goal of
20 per cent for women in formed police units by 2028.
The progress made in mainstreaming a gender
perspective in the work of the United Nations since
the adoption of landmark resolution 1325 (2000) and
succeeding United Nations resolutions on the effective
participation of women at all levels across conflict
prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding processes
must be reinvigorated by all States Members of the United
Nations. Structural barriers that marginalize women
and hinder their effective participation, including legal
and cultural obstacles, must be resolved expeditiously.
It is evident that the growing risk of violence
and threats to the physical safety of women and their
exposure to sexual abuse in conflict situations should
be addressed with utmost urgency and priority. We
strongly believe that mainstreaming the women
and peace and security agenda requires effective
coordination and consistent engagement among relevant
stakeholders in regional and subregional organizations,
as well as States, development agencies, women’s
interest groups and peace and security partners within
the framework of the women and peace and security
agenda. Accordingly, cooperation between the African
Union and the United Nations is instrumental in
integrating a regional approach into the women and
peace and security commitments.
Let me conclude by highlighting the importance of
appreciating and supporting initiatives of the African
Union Peace and Security Council geared towards the
implementation of the Continental Results Framework
for Monitoring and Reporting on the Implementation of
the Women, Peace and Security Agenda in Africa.
The President: I want to direct the attention of the
representative of Ethiopia to the fact that, on 23 April,
sexual violence in conflict will be on the Council’s
agenda, since he mentioned it in his intervention.
I now give the floor to the representative of Kenya.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Mr. Amayo (Kenya): I wish to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing this important debate,
and take note with appreciation of the comprehensive
concept note (S/2019/293, annex) that you circulated
to guide today’s debate. I also thank Major General
Kristin Lund, the first female Force Commander and
current Head of Mission and Chief of Staff at the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, and
Ms. Lorna Nanjia Merekaje, Secretary General of
South Sudan Democratic Engagement Monitoring and
Observation Programme, for their briefings.
A general consensus exists that women enhance
the ability of peacekeepers to reach and interact with
local communities in a peacekeeping mission. That is
particularly so for local women affected by conflict,
who presumably find it easier to share their challenges
with fellow women and in the process reduce cases
of violence. However, beyond the question of gender,
many other challenges still exist to their deployment
and effectiveness. The ability of women peacekeepers
to make a difference in the peace and security arena
is sometimes limited by, among other things, their
numbers, the lack of training on specific genderrelated challenges facing local women in the missions,
language and, at times, an inadequate understanding of
the local culture and its social and cultural barriers.
The sheer lack of sufficient numbers of female
soldiers in the rank and file of most militaries is perhaps
one of the greatest challenges to the participation of
women in peacekeeping. A country can deploy women
to peace support operations only if they are available
within the establishment. That is further complicated
by the length of time of deployment, bearing in mind
the family responsibilities they also shoulder.
Equally, the success of women peacekeepers in
enhancing the effectiveness of peacekeeping is contextspecific and varies from one mission to another.
Women peacekeepers have proved to be more effective
in missions where they are familiar with the specific
gender-related challenges affecting local women and
children, including where the locals can resonate with
them in terms of culture, race, language and, at times,
colour. Where female peacekeepers are able to speak
the local language, they are more likely to understand
the specific challenges facing local women, which is an
ingredient vital to the mission’s success. For example,
in eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo, Swahili
speakers have proved to be more effective in enhancing
the interaction between local women and peacekeepers,

S/PV. 8508

thereby improving situational awareness and further
influencing the local women by acting as role models.
Similarly, cultural sensitivities in the local
communities may affect the deployment of women
peacekeepers in certain areas. That is particularly so in
communities that still view the profession of arms as a
preserve of men. My delegation therefore recommends
for consideration the following measures to address the
challenges that were already mentioned.
First, Governments of Member States should be
encouraged to fast-track gender mainstreaming in their
national security organizations in order to create a pool
from which female peacekeepers can be drawn.
Secondly, mission-specific training on genderrelated issues is critical to enhancing the readiness and
effectiveness of female peacekeepers. That will help
in developing a better understanding of the social and
cultural setting of the community and hence improve
performance and final outcomes.
Thirdly, certain considerations ought to be made
before a decision is taken on the deployment of women
peacekeepers. For instance, shorter deployment periods
should be considered for female peacekeepers who find
it hard to be away for lengthy periods. Additionally,
when deploying female peacekeepers, we should be
sensitive to cultural variations in different missions.
Fourthly, I am happy to report that Kenya’s
deployment of women in peacekeeping operations now
stands at 19 per cent, thereby surpassing the United
Nations recommended percentage of 15 per cent
across all United Nations peacekeeping operations. As
a country, we shall continue to deploy more women
peacekeepers, as necessary.
Finally, I wish to reaffirm our delegation’s
commitment to and support for the Action for
Peacekeeping initiative and the Secretary-General’s
zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse .
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Senegal.
Mr. Barro (Senegal) (spoke in French): First
of all, Mr. President, allow me to congratulate your
country, Germany, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month and to welcome today’s
open debate on the issue of the participation of women
in peacekeeping operations. This is a collective

19-1052659/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

undertaking that remains dependent on the mobilization
of all actors.
I would also like to acknowledge the high-quality
briefings delivered earlier by Secretary-General
António Guterres; Major General Kristin Lund, Head
of Mission and Chief of Staff of the United Nations
Truce Supervision Organization; and Ms. Lorna Nanjia
Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan Democratic
Engagement Monitoring and Observation Programme.
In adopting resolution 1325 (2000) two decades
ago, which still serves as our compass on the gender
dimension in peacekeeping, the United Nations fully
recognized the importance of women’s participation
in conflict prevention, management and resolution and
in peacebuilding. Although some very encouraging
progress has been made, the fact remains that the
objectives set are far from being achieved. Women’s
participation in peace operations remains relatively low,
accounting for only 5 per cent of military contingents,
8 per cent of formed police units and 28 per cent of
civilian components.
Indeed, one of the essential objectives of the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative and its subsequent
Declaration of Shared Commitments, endorsed by 151
Member States and four international organizations, is
to increase the number of women in areas of operations,
at both the strategic and operational levels. In that
regard, the Secretary-General’s uniformed gender parity
strategy is undoubtedly another step in the right direction
However, its success depends on the full involvement of
Member States. We therefore need to promote ongoing
dialogue among the Secretariat and troop-contributing
countries, whose gender policies have made progress
that is — it must be said — rather inconsistent. Such
an approach would enable the Organization to continue
to support those countries, while setting realistic and
achievable objectives for promoting gender equality.
Factors related to the low number of women entering
national defence and security forces in recent times
must be taken into account, including those that do not
allow some countries to increase the number of women
in their contribution to peacekeeping operations in any
quantitative or even qualitative way.
In Senegal, for example, the integration of women
into the defence and security forces is relatively recent.
In addition, it would be right to offer incentives, such
as reducing the length of deployment of female staff,
removing material obstacles to their recruitment and
60/65

11/04/2019

retention and taking their specific needs into account
in the establishment of infrastructure and services
dedicated to operations. The same applies to the
possibility of considering financial incentives for those
concerned and the need to combat sexual abuse and
exploitation. For its part, Senegal, which has endorsed
the Circle of Leadership declaration on the prevention
of that scourge, fully endorses the zero-tolerance policy
and remains convinced that increasing the number of
women in peacekeeping operations leads to better care
for victims.
The Government of Senegal has put in place a
national policy for the integration of women into its
defence and security forces. The policy is based on
an attractive framework, underpinned by awarenessraising campaigns that highlight the value of women
in uniform, to help break down certain sociocultural
barriers. The appointment of a female commissioner
to helm the national police force in 2013 sent a strong
message in that regard.
In addition, the 2012-2022 sector strategy on gender,
adopted in 2010, aims to reach the goal of 10 per cent
of women in the armed forces by creating conditions
conducive to the integration, advancement and socioprofessional development of women. To implement
that strategy, Senegal signed a memorandum of
understanding with the Pan-African Centre for Gender,
Peace and Development of the non-governmental
organization Femme Africa Solidarité, in particular to
address the gender dimension in training, especially
in predeployment training. As a result, there has been
an increase in the number of women in Senegal’s
defence and security forces and, consequently, in its
contributions to peacekeeping operations, where the
number of women doubled between 2018 and 2019, in
the spirit of resolution 2242 (2015). The prospects are
even more promising with the support of partners, such
as the UN-Women all-female selection assistance and
assessment team training programme, funded by the
United States and Canadian Elsie Initiative for Women
in Peace Operations, among others.
In conclusion, as a major contributor of uniformed
personnel, Senegal reaffirms its commitment to
the Secretariat in its gender equality policy within
peacekeeping operations. I remind members that the
success of that policy depends on adopting an inclusive
approach that takes into account the situation in
Member States.
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

S/PV. 8508

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.

that recognizes the right of people to live free from all
forms of violence.

Mr. Gallegos Chiriboga (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): I have the honour to speak on behalf of Ecuador
in today’s timely open debate, which you, Mr. President,
have convened on the issue of participation of women
in peacekeeping.

In that regard, Ecuador has a national plan for the
eradication of gender violence, which was established
as a public policy in 2007. Ecuador is currently
undertaking a major national crusade to eradicate
discrimination and violence against women. In that
context, we highlight our comprehensive organic law
to prevent and eradicate violence against women,
which entered into force in February 2018. That is an
important development at the national level in that area
and ensures the involvement of women in working for
its implementation.

The Secretary-General, the Council and the
representatives of individual Members themselves
have addressed, on several occasions, the relevance
and importance of women’s equal participation
in peacekeeping operations and their invaluable
contribution to the promotion of peace and security.
Ecuador has a sound legal framework that guarantees
the validity, exercise and enforceability of women’s
rights, which is based on two fundamental pillars: the
Constitution, which includes explicit references to gender
equality, and binding international instruments ratified
by Ecuador. Ecuador actively seeks the participation
of women in the armed forces and police observation
missions and has made a political commitment to
maintaining their presence and increasing their number.
Furthermore, we have included the gender perspective
throughout our development plan, which recognizes the
equal participation of women and men in public and
private spheres.
Ecuador is committed to the political and economic
empowerment of women and their active and significant
participation in the quest for peace. In that regard, we
strive for equality among women and men at all levels of
education at the national level, and we have implemented
an integrated health care model that includes the gender
perspective in developing public policies.
Ecuador is also firmly committed to facilitating
decent work and women’s access to decision-making
processes. The Government programmes to reduce
underemployment and unemployment encourage both
women’s participation in the labour market and narrowing
the wage differential. Moreover, the Republic’s organic
law on elections and political organizations calls for
equal participation in decision-making processes and
at all levels of power.
The Constitution of the Republic establishes that
Ecuador is a constitutional State of rights that will
adopt affirmative actions to promote genuine equality
for rights holders who face a situation of inequality, and
provides for priority protection in public and private
arenas for victims of sexual violence. It is a Constitution

Furthermore, the Constitution also determines that
the armed forces are an institution for the protection
of the rights, freedoms and guarantees of citizens. The
Ministry of National Defence incorporates the concept
of defence as a public good and, in that context, the
gender approach is included in its defence policy
agenda. Human rights are also considered as an area
of action in spearheading defence policy and include
the promotion of policies for gender equality and
practices for peaceful coexistence and respect for the
cultural identity of its members, as well as the effective
implementation of resolutions 1325 (2000) and 1889
(2009). The inclusion of women in the armed forces has
increased since 2009, when female military officers
accounted for 1.1 per cent of the total number of troops.
By 2012, that figure doubled and this year stands
at 3.5 per cent. At the multilateral and peacekeeping
levels, the role of Ecuadorian women has also increased,
as demonstrated by the contribution made by women
officers as observers in the United Nations Mission for
the Referendum in Western Sahara.
In conclusion, we welcome these spaces for
discussing the political and economic empowerment of
women and their meaningful and active participation in
pursuit of peace. We also express our sincere desire to
join efforts towards a productive and successful dialogue
that promotes gender equality and the advancement of
women in all areas. These are essential elements in
honouring the commitment to leave no one behind.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of El Salvador.
Mr. Escalante (El Salvador) (spoke in Spanish):
I would like to begin by aligning myself with the
statement made by the representative of Canada on
behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and

19-1052661/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Security. Like others, I thank the German presidency for
convening this open debate. I also thank the SecretaryGeneral, Major General Lund, Head of Mission, the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, and
Ms. Merekaje, Secretary General of South Sudan
Democratic Engagement Monitoring and Observation
Programme, for their briefings.
As we have all said today, women play a
fundamental role in peacekeeping operations. Their
inclusion strengthens the defence of human rights and
leads to better results in peace negotiations. They bring
different perspectives and priorities to prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding processes. Practice has
shown that when women participate in peace talks, they
broaden the debate beyond the interests of the parties
to the conflict and advocate for a more equitable peace.
Unfortunately, women continue to be excluded from
conflict prevention, management and resolution.
The women in peacekeeping agenda, in addition to
increasing their active participation in such processes,
should promote full respect for the human rights of
women and girls, the prevention of sexual and genderbased violence in conflict, gender equity and the
integration of gender perspectives into all its activities.
El Salvador is committed to peacekeeping
operations and currently almost 9 per cent of the
total number of its armed forces and national civil
police officers serving in the seven peace missions in
which we participate are women. That is a relatively
small number in comparison to other contributors
but it is significant in the context of my country and
has been increasing in recent years. The Salvadoran
women carry out different tasks at various levels, such
as expert helicopter pilots and crews, for example, in
our contingent in Mali, institutional-building work in
Haiti, health activities through specialized doctors or
the recent deployment of our first military observer in
the mission in South Sudan.
Nevertheless, we note that we must continue
to make progress at the national level to meet the
percentage established by the United Nations in terms
of women’s participation in peace operations, not only
because the United Nations requires it but also because
we are convinced that it is right. We therefore welcome
the creation of different mechanisms to continue to
increase the participation of Salvadoran women in
peacekeeping operations.
62/65

11/04/2019

In that regard, we welcome the Canadian
Government’s innovative Elsie Initiative on Women
for Peace Operations to step up our efforts for women’s
active participation, including by encouraging more
deployments in more flexible formats.
Despite the insistence and the various efforts made
to reach the minimum of 15 per cent of female troops,
the likelihood of a decrease in the coming years is quite
high, as the Secretary-General points out in his report
of October 2018 (S/2018/900).
My country believes it important to deepen the
analysis of this issue and to re-evaluate the approach
guiding our efforts. Particularly in my country, there are
various challenges to increasing women’s participation,
such as cultural, economic and family issues. Many
women police or military officers are also mothers,
wives, widows or carers for the elderly.
While, for structural reasons, men can strike
a balance between participation in peacekeeping
operations and family life, we must find ways in
which women can do the same. Addressing women’s
different perceptions, specific situations, experiences
and capacities will help to recognize the real
obstacles to their participation and, as far as possible,
overcome them.
For its part, El Salvador will continue to promote
gender-sensitive structures that foster national
capacities, including empowering women to access
increasingly higher ranks within our armed forces,
as well as in the various multilateral forums in which
we participate, in order to have better guidance in that
regard and, ultimately, better gender parity.
Finally, we would like to highlight our support for
the Secretary-General’s gender parity strategy, which
we believe to be essential not only to comply with
quotas for women’s participation but also to focus on
seeing women assume different levels of command in
peacekeeping operations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): Gender parity in peace
operations has vast potential to improve effectiveness,
capability and credibility. We have made pledges to do
better and set targets to go higher. But the number of
uniformed women in the field remains extremely low
and, frankly speaking, the rate of change has been
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

glacial. That failing is undermining United Nations
efforts to fulfil mandates and sustain peace.
Women make up half the world’s population,
suffer disproportionately and differently in conflict,
and have in-depth knowledge of local context and
community needs. Yet women only make up 4 per
cent of military and 10 per cent of police personnel
in United Nations operations. That is compromising
our engagement with local communities, limiting our
situational awareness and inhibiting the protection
reach of peacekeeping missions.
Australia welcomes the Secretary-General’s
firm commitment to gender equality, supported by
the uniformed gender parity strategy. We support
the Elsie Initiative for Women in Peace Operations,
which aims to accelerate the pace of change and
enhance the deployment of women as peacekeepers.
The appointment of women into senior leadership
positions is crucial yet continues to face the greatest
barriers. In January, the United Nations Peacekeeping
Force in Cyprus became the first-ever peacekeeping
mission to be led by a female Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Force Commander and Senior
Police Adviser. Australia was proud to be a part of
that milestone, but to take 70 years to achieve it is far
too long.
We must acknowledge that a major reason why
so few women are deployed to United Nations peace
operations is because women are underrepresented in
security forces across the world. Increasing the number
of women relies on Member States putting initiatives in
place to support the recruitment, retention, promotion
and deployment of women within their security forces.
This is not just about numbers, but also about cultural
and organizational change. This includes removing
gender restrictions on all occupations, increasing
flexible employment options and reducing gender
stereotyping and sexual harassment.
Australia is committed to the full inclusion
of women in our defence and police forces and to
mainstreaming a gender perspective across operations.
The same applies to United Nations peacekeeping
missions. Australia has translated this commitment
at the United Nations by achieving and exceeding the
uniformed women targets. We have provided gender
advisers to United Nations missions and stress the
importance of adequately resourcing these positions in
all missions. We also fund the participation of female

S/PV. 8508

peacekeepers at United Nations training courses to
increase the numbers, qualifications and readiness of
women for a peacekeeping deployment.
Finally, evidence shows that women and men serve
better together. United Nations peace operations exist
to support the most vulnerable people in the most
difficult conditions. They require and deserve the most
capable and effective missions we can provide. This can
be done only if we draw on the full human resources
at our disposal and implement a gender perspective in
all operations. In this, the United Nations must lead
by example.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Lebanon.
Mr. Saleh Azzam (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic):
I would like at the outset to congratulate you,
Mr. President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council this month. I wish you and the
delegation of Germany every success. My country’s
delegation also thanks you for having chosen such an
important topic for this open debate, namely, women in
peacekeeping operations. I would like as well to thank
the briefers for their informative briefings.
Several days ago, we had a ministerial meeting in
the General Assembly Hall on peacekeeping operations,
with high-level participation from countries all over the
world. The topic of and level of participation in that
conference reflected the conviction of the international
community that peacekeeping operations play a central
role in the maintenance of international peace and
security. It sent a message of support and appreciation
to the contributing countries and the peacekeeping
operations for their achievements.
There is consensus on the decisive role of
peacekeeping operations in reducing tensions and
defusing conflicts. Within that framework, the
Action for Peacekeeping initiative of the SecretaryGeneral provides the international community with
an updated and comprehensive roadmap to strengthen
and rationalize those operations, and make them
better capable of carrying out their mandate. That
is why Lebanon was first among the countries to
support the initiative. We are convinced that, with
its content, objectives and capacity, it can make a
qualitative change concerning the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations.

19-1052663/65

S/PV.8508

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The women and peace and security agenda, as
enshrined in resolution 1325 (2000), is among the top
priorities of the Action for Peacekeeping initiative.
The agenda reflects the acknowledgement of the
international community of the need to integrate the
gender perspective into peacekeeping operations as
an indispensable condition for strengthening and
enhancing them.
Until recently, women made up no more than
4 per cent of the military component of peacekeeping
operations around the world, 10 per cent of the police
component and 28 per cent of civilian personnel.
Those figures illustrate the considerable gap that exists
when it comes to the representation of women, which
requires a major effort to bridge. Working towards
gender parity in peacekeeping would be a victory for
the inalienable right to representation for half of human
society — women — and enable them to carry out their
duties and responsibilities to strengthen international
peace and security. That is an indisputable issue of
principle. Furthermore, it is not a question of simply
attempting to correct an imbalance of rights; it is
also a need for peacekeeping operations as such.
Strengthening the role of women within peacekeeping
operations would enhance those operations and thereby
promote peace.
Indeed, women bring comparative advantages
to peacekeeping operations that improve their
performance. Their presence allows for the empowering
of local women and helps to improve and deepen
the relationship between local communities and
peacekeeping personnel.
As Council members know, Lebanon hosts one of
the largest United Nations peacekeeping operations, the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
For four decades, UNIFIL has played a major role
in maintaining stability along the southern border of
Lebanon, thereby helping to maintain stability in the
country and the region. Lebanon highly appreciates the
efforts and sacrifices made by UNIFIL, its commanders
and staff, and we thank the contributing countries for
their long-term commitment to supporting UNIFIL.
In the context of the topic of today’s meeting,
my country’s delegation pays homage to the women
working in UNIFIL. By late February, the rate of
women’s participation in UNIFIL had increased to
5.25 per cent. Although we must recognize that positive
achievement, the current rate remains well below
64/65

11/04/2019

what we had hoped for. Greater participation must be
encouraged, as appropriate.
In November 2015, UNIFIL created a female
assessment and analysis support team tasked
with various activities, including operational and
communication activities with the local people. Since
the establishment of the team, we have noticed an
increase in the number of social activities involving
women and children within UNIFIL area of operation.
On 13 March, Sector West of UNIFIL hosted a
workshop for the women of the Lebanese army and of
UNIFIL to exchange experiences. That event, the first
of its kind, was part of efforts to strengthen cooperation
and partnership between the Lebanese army and the
United Nations Force and to increase joint activities
related to the gender dimension and civilian/military
cooperation. We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix for having spoken at the workshop
during his most recent visit to Lebanon.
I would like to conclude by stressing that correcting
the gender imbalance in peacekeeping operations
is tantamount to strengthening the peacekeeping
mechanism. That is a long-term investment in building
and sustaining peace. I hope that the outcome of today’s
meeting will be a unified, simple and direct outcome:
more women, more peace.
The President: Taking into consideration that
Germany is also part of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), I take the statement
made by the representative of Lebanon as having been
directed towards us as well. There should be more
women in UNIFIL.
I now give the floor to the representative of Egypt.
Mr. Gad (Egypt): Let me start by thanking
Germany for convening this important open debate in
the Security Council today, and the Secretary-General
and all the briefers for their useful and informative
presentations today.
Moreover, my delegation supports the two
statements that were delivered on behalf of the African
Union and the Non-Aligned Movement today.
At the outset, I would like to highlight the role of
the Cairo Roadmap for Enhancing the Performance
of Peacekeeping Operations from Mandate to Exit on
the international issue of women and peacekeeping,
and especially the fact that the Roadmap is partially
19-10526

11/04/2019

United Nations peacekeeping operations

based on the outcome of the Cairo High-level
Regional Conference on Enhancing the Performance
of Peacekeeping Operations: From Mandate to Exit,
organized by the Government of Egypt and the
Cairo International Center for Conflict Resolution,
Peacekeeping and Peacebuilding in November 2018.
That Roadmap also draws upon outcomes of other
key policy documents of the United Nations, most
notably the three strategic reviews of 2015 and Security
Council presidential statement S/PRST/2017/27, of
December 2017. The final version of the Cairo Roadmap
has also benefited from comments received during
extensive consultations with other Member States, the
Secretariat and leading practitioners and subject-matter
experts, including during three events organized in New
York in December 2018 and February and March 2019.
The Roadmap aims to advance ongoing reform
efforts by presenting concrete and actionable
recommendations for the implementation of the Action
for Peacekeeping initiative. They take into consideration
the primary objective of the initiative with a view to
enhancing the performance and, consequently, the
effectiveness of United Nations peacekeeping.
With regard to women’s participation in peacekeeping
operations, last month Egypt pledged to reach 10 per
cent of women in each deployed formed police unit in
all United Nations peacekeeping operations. Ten women
have been already included in every deployed formed
police unit. Likewise, the Cairo Roadmap highlights
the need for the international community to guarantee
that the Secretariat will consider commissioning a
study on the trends and factors affecting women’s full
and meaningful participation in peacekeeping missions
to enable effective and sustainable reforms.
Furthermore, we believe that it is important, in
that regard, that Member States and the Secretariat
consider targeted training support for women serving
in uniformed components and encourage innovative

S/PV. 8508

partnership arrangements, such as the Elsie Initiative
on Women in Peace Operations, to reach the targets
set by the United Nations for women’s participation at
15 per cent in military positions and 20 per cent among
police deployments.
It is necessary that Member States and the
Secretariat adopt concrete strategies beyond targets
and incentives to support the increased deployment of
uniformed women in military and police roles, including
leadership positions, while placing greater emphasis on
women’s contributions to capability and operational
effectiveness, thereby ensuring the deployment of
trained and qualified women peacekeepers.
Likewise, Member States and the Secretariat are
invited to advance the implementation of the United
Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation
and abuse, with its victim-centred approach, and jointly
assess the effectiveness of the measures undertaken
thus far in eradicating sexual exploitation and abuse
crimes in peacekeeping operations. Moreover, the
Secretariat is invited to incorporate that assessment
into the upcoming report of the Secretary-General to
the General Assembly, pursuant to its resolution 71/278,
of 10 March 2017.
Once again, we thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this important meeting today, and we look
forward to further discussions on this important matter.
The President: I would like to take this opportunity
to thank all delegations for their contributions to
this open debate. We have heard from 63 speakers,
including three briefers, in roughly six hours, which I
think is not bad. I therefore also thank everybody for
their discipline.
There are no more names inscribed on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.05 p.m.

19-1052665/65
