United Nations

S/PV.4209

Security Council

Provisional

Fifty-fifth year

4209

th meeting
Thursday, 26 October 2000, 10.30 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Andjaba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bangladesh . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Canada . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Jamaica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mali . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Netherlands . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Tunisia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ukraine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Cappagli
Mr. Sami
Mr. Heinbecker
Mr. Shen Guofang
Mr. Levitte
Miss Durrant
Mr. Mohammad Kamal
Mr. Kassé
Mr. Hamer
Mr. Gatilov
Mr. Ben Mustapha
Mr. Yel’chenko
Sir Jeremy Greenstock
Mr. Cunningham

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 18 October 2000 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2000/999).

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178.

00-71155 (E)
`````````

S/PV.4209

The meeting was called to order at 11.15 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 18 October 2000 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2000/999)
The President: I should like to inform the
Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Germany
and Italy in which they request to be invited to
participate in the discussion of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance with
the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Sacirbey
(Bosnia and Herzegovina) took the seat reserved
for him at the Council table; Mr. Schumacher
(Germany) and Mr. Francese (Italy) took the
seats reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, and in the absence of objection, I shall
take it that the Security Council agrees to extend an
invitation under rule 39 of its provisional rules of
procedure to Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch, High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I invite Mr. Petritsch to take a seat at the Council
table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them a letter
dated 18 October 2000 from the Secretary-General

2

addressed to the President of the Security Council,
transmitting a letter dated 18 October 2000 and a report
by the High Representative for the Implementation of
the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
document S/2000/999.
At this meeting the Security Council will hear a
briefing
by
Mr.
Wolfgang
Petritsch,
High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina. I give him the
floor.
Mr. Petritsch: I address the Council today at
what is a time of great change and renewed hope for
South-Eastern Europe. The potential future for Bosnia
and Herzegovina looks very different today because of
the seismic changes in two key neighbouring countries:
Yugoslavia and Croatia.
Change is frustratingly slow in Bosnia itself but
nonetheless continues for the better. Much will depend
on the outcome of the general elections on 11
November to bring about real, sustained change. We
need new leaders who will move the country forward,
rather than the present leaders who camp out on
nationalist positions, despite the fact that they are out
of touch with their voters and the changes in
neighbouring States.
Change will not see a return to a pre-war Bosnia
and Herzegovina. The country is a decade behind the
rest of Central Europe in pushing through economic
market reforms. We want to move on from the
economics of the State plan. More importantly, the
scars of war run too deep to rescue Bosnia’s
multicultural past in its entirety.
Some members might recall William Shawcross’s
comment in his recent book on warlords and the work
of United Nations peacekeeping missions:
“humility is important. Not everything can be
achieved, not every wrong can be righted simply
because the international community desires it ...
Bosnia will not become Michigan ...”
But Bosnia and Herzegovina is and will remain a
multi-ethnic country because it is the home of three
constituent peoples — Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats —
as well as of many minorities. They will find ways to
live side by side, perhaps as German speakers, Italian
speakers and French speakers do in Switzerland. This
report, the seventeenth by a High Representative —
and this is the third time I have had the honour of

S/PV.4209

addressing the Security Council — looks briefly at the
tasks the Office of the High Representative, and by
extension, the international community, still face in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I turn to the revolution in Belgrade and its quieter
but no less important counterpart in Zagreb, and what
they mean for winning peace in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
First and foremost, we should not drop our guard.
The destructive nationalisms that pulled the region
apart have not fallen with Slobodan Milosević. The
political changes in Belgrade are watched more with
apprehension than with relief in Kosovo and
Montenegro, as well as Bosnia.
Croatia’s Foreign Minister, Mr. Tonino Picula,
has made his first official visit to Sarajevo since
assuming office, a clear signal that this country has
fully recognized Bosnian sovereignty, after its previous
Government spent years trying to undermine it. When I
met the newly elected President of Yugoslavia,
Mr. Vojislav Kostunica, last week in Belgrade I urged
him to do the same, suggesting that this is the safest
way of ensuring that Kosovo remains within the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as required by
Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). I also
impressed upon him that Yugoslavia’s full membership
in the United Nations means working with its
institutions — for example, cooperating with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia in The Hague. With elections in Bosnia
soon to be held, I also called on him to end Belgrade’s
patronage of anti-Dayton forces in the Bosnian Serb
entity, which fight on to try and secure the ill-gotten
gains of “ethnic cleansing”.
Mr. Kostunica has made a very promising start,
taking the courageous decision to visit Sarajevo on
Sunday to meet State leaders there. I would like to pay
tribute here to the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General in Sarajevo, Jacques Paul Klein,
whose tireless efforts helped to secure the success of
that crucial visit. President Kostunica also assured me
that he would work to establish diplomatic relations
with Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as he had formed
his own Government. But there is much work to be
done in this area.
We need to make sure that the international
community speaks with one voice — especially when
the European Union meets at Zagreb for a summit on

south-eastern Europe next month — to say that borders
cannot be tinkered with. There is talk among some
former Balkan mediators of a need to compensate
Serbia for its allegedly inevitable loss of Kosovo. This
would have disastrous consequences right across the
region. We should make it crystal clear that cynical,
nineteenth-century map-making has no place in our
peacekeeping efforts today. A failure to speak clearly
on this now would cost us very dearly in the future, and
would destroy the five years of hard and fruitful work
since the Dayton Accords were signed, especially at a
time when the majority of people in the region now see
that nationalism makes them poor and isolated.
Europeanization is the one thing that nearly all
sides aspire to, and that we use to drive reform in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Last May in Brussels the
Peace Implementation Council approved my three
strategic priorities to help Bosnian citizens achieve that
dream: comprehensive economic reform; accelerated
refugee returns; and the strengthening of State
institutions.
But overall progress has been slow since I last
reported to the Council in May, with the country’s
nationalist incumbents unwilling to take tough
decisions, especially with a general election looming.
They refuse to accept that donor money is fast running
out and that there is increasing competition for that
money from countries like Yugoslavia — this when the
country is in serious economic crisis. Gross domestic
product growth in Bosnia and Herzegovina was 7.1 per
cent in 1999, but that superficially high figure is really
the result of the last foreign reconstruction money
going into the country’s war-torn economy. The real
headache is the trade balance. Preliminary data show
that the country is covering imports only to the extent
of 25 per cent by exports. This is, of course,
unsustainable.
My Office, in close cooperation with international
financial institutions, has put in place clear banking
laws that should enable transparent financial operations
across both entities. We aim to close the communist-era
payment bureaux by the end of the year. That will rid
the country of an expensive, non-transparent means of
settling payments, which the nationalist parties will no
longer be able to milk.
Local judicial and police services are clamping
down on corruption for the first time. But we are still
unhappy with the slow pace at which political leaders

3

S/PV.4209

are tackling the issue. Aid and investment will come
only when the country’s poor record on corruption is
cleaned up. Sadly, most Bosnian politicians prefer to
put their heads in the sand with regard to that issue.
A law on State treasury has been approved that
should see more funds flowing through central rather
than entity institutions — a powerful glue to make the
two halves of this fractured country stick. We are
studying ways to cut damagingly high taxes and spread
the burden. Foreign investors are loath to put their
money into a country where they end up paying more
than 80 per cent in taxes. International experts,
together with local officials, are preparing 86 strategic
enterprises in the Federation and 52 in the Serb entity
for transparent tender privatization. And we are
studying ways of unbundling utilities, such as
electricity and telecommunications, in a way that will
dismantle damaging parallel structures, making
companies compete in a single economic space on
price, and not on a consumer’s presumed ethnic
identity.
It is the economy — the advantages of a single
economic space — that will secure Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s future as a functioning State. It may be
anecdotal, but I know of Bosniacs and Croats who
already travel to Banja Luka, the Serbs’ regional
capital, to buy furniture because it is cheaper there than
in Sarajevo.
The tough implementation of the property laws
which I had to impose last year has started to
depoliticize the emotional issue of refugee returns. The
strict implementation of the rule of law, helped by the
good work of the United Nations in Bosnia —
especially that of the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) — will have
profound implications for all areas of life in Bosnia,
and from this specific issue much else will follow. A
right enshrined in law to one’s own property is vital to
restore confidence in the country’s future.
The latest UNHCR figures show that by the end
of August this year about 30,000 minority returns were
registered — more than double the figure in the same
period in 1999. The figure is much higher when nonregistered returns are taken into account. But these are
all dull figures. What is truly extraordinary is where
these returns have taken place: in, or near, towns like
Srebrenica and Foca, synonymous with massacres and

4

rape camps during the war in the eastern half of what is
now the Serb entity.
But I do not want to paint a false picture. While
the rule of law has begun to melt the permafrost
covering the return process, there are still hundreds of
thousands of people who remain either displaced or
refugees. Again, I look to the elections in the hope that
ordinary Bosnians will vote out nationalist forces who
remain intent on keeping the returns process frozen.
Since I last addressed the Security Council, I
have removed 24 public officials for persistent
obstruction of the Dayton Accords. I am under pressure
from some parts of the international community, and
from many Bosnian citizens as well, to be more
interventionist. But, while removals and imposing laws
send a clear message, the country’s political leaders use
this to avoid tough decisions.
A case in point has been political leaders’ refusal
to adopt amendments to the pension laws, as demanded
by the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund. Political leaders did, as usual, nothing. They
expected me to impose them. Instead, they have been
warned that if they do not do this, they risk losing the
country hundreds of millions of dollars in badly needed
aid.
That being said, after months of wasted debate
and posturing, I ended up having to impose a law on a
single travel document for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As
with the new vehicle registration plates, which also
have no entity markings, the move was very popular
amongst ordinary Bosnian citizens. They are fed up
with finding themselves at the bottom of the visa queue
because their leaders, in their narrow-minded
nationalism, cannot agree on standard, internationally
recognized travel documents. This is yet another
example, like the economy, of how self-interest can be
made to work in favour of Dayton implementation. I
am happy to report that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s first
new passports were issued yesterday.
In terms of State-building, one will now be able
to dial anywhere in Bosnia through the same
international code, ending the ridiculous situation of
having to dial Republika Srpska through Belgrade. The
State border service — yet another law I had to impose
early this year — has started functioning, much to the
chagrin of some leaders in Republika Srpska, as they
operate on the border with Yugoslavia. Full marks go
to the United Nations for its work in this area.

S/PV.4209

I announced at the beginning of the week the
creation of a public broadcasting service. A multiethnic staff will provide balanced news and will make
programmes that will be beamed across both entities.
The Olympic games were successfully broadcast
simultaneously in both entities with a multi-ethnic
commentating team in Sydney. Cold, hard cash — or
the shortage of it — and modern management practices
drive this exciting project, not ethnic quotas.
The country’s Constitutional Court last month
gazetted a decision with far-reaching consequences for
all Bosnian citizens’ equality before the law. The ruling
on the so-called constituent peoples’ case means that
Bosniacs, Serbs and Croats are entitled to the same
rights in both entities. This laudable concept, however,
has yet to be translated into the entities’ constitutions.
But State institutions such as the Presidency, the
Council of Ministers and the Parliamentary Assembly
continued to be stymied by ethnic concerns.
After a great deal of pressure, we have wrung an
agreement out of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s education
ministers to ensure that both the Latin and the Cyrillic
alphabets and a small, core curriculum are taught in all
schools. But this is far from enough. Education must be
a priority if the country is to have a future.
Unfortunately, a recent report by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) reveals that many
young Bosnians do not believe that they have a future
in their own country: a staggering 62 per cent of those
polled in the report said they would leave Bosnia if
they had the chance.

our
own
guilt,
intervention
must
be
commensurate and consistent; it must be followed
through. That is how people can be delivered
from evil and peacekeepers can prevail more
often over warlords”.
I have said this before, but it needs to be stressed
time and again: Bosnian citizens themselves must
create the prosperous and tolerant country that Bosnia
and Herzegovina could be; they must take ownership of
their destiny in order to realize their dream of a place
in Europe and in the world. Their neighbours must also
turn their backs on the past and look forward by
helping Bosnia and Herzegovina; it should be clear that
their own place in the new Europe also depends on this.
But we in the international community must also
continue to do all we can to hold up a guiding light to
bring Bosnia and Herzegovina home.
That is the end of my report. However, I would
like also to inform the Council about a decision I took
yesterday. As members are aware, the victims of the
1995 Srebrenica massacre, the worst crime committed
in Europe since the Second World War, have not yet
been given a place for their final rest. The associations
of relatives of these victims have demanded for a long
time that this issue be resolved. Several agencies have
since tried to tackle the issue to no avail. My decision
transfers into trust a plot of land in the municipality of
Srebrenica in order to bury the victims and erect a
memorial. I consider this to be a first, but an important,
step on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s way to come to
terms with its past.

To quote Mr. Shawcross again,

Mr. Cunningham (United States of America): I
want to welcome Mr. Petritsch back to the Council and
to thank him for his thorough briefing on the progress
his office has overseen to date in building a peaceful
multi-ethnic society in Bosnia. That is a very difficult
task, and we are encouraged by the positive
developments noted in his report. We congratulate him
in particular on the re-establishment of the Council of
Ministers and on the increased rates of return of those
displaced by the war. We also welcome steps to
establish an Independent Judicial Council and note
especially that a multi-ethnic court in Mostar has begun
to try those war crimes which the International
Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia has approved
for prosecution under the so-called rules of the road.

“Intervention can assist people when they
are desperate. But if it is to be more than a sop to

However, we remain concerned that some
Government officials and other individuals continue to

I want to be frank about the problems. But we are
moving forward, even if, as in a sandstorm on a desert
trek, one feels sometimes that one is not moving at all.
Despite the dramatic changes in the region, we need to
stay with Bosnia and Herzegovina and see the task
through. Our job there is unfinished. I am aware that
Yugoslavia will need assistance on its way to
democracy, and that there are many other hotspots in
the world deserving the Council’s attention. However,
the international community has spent too much effort
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to abandon this project
prematurely. We will need the Council’s continued
moral, political and financial support to get it right.

5

S/PV.4209

block the return of refugees and displaced persons. The
message must be clear that we will not tolerate
continued obstruction. We will work only with those
political leaders who are committed to implementing
Dayton.
The United States strongly supports full and
active use in Bosnia by the High Representative and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe of the mandates provided by the international
community. Real progress is being made, and we need
to accelerate it. With two vitally important elections
coming up in the region — in Kosovo and in Bosnia —
it is time to go forward and not to look back at the past.
We should seek to remove or restrain all those
standing in the way of Dayton’s full implementation:
there are war criminals remaining at large, organized
crime figures and nationalist extremists. In that regard,
we welcome the removal of 24 individuals who were
blatantly obstructing implementation of the Dayton
Peace Agreement. But those 24 are not the only
obstructionists, and decisive action is necessary to
ensure that refugee returns continue and that a climate
based on the rule of law is established in Bosnia.
With specific regard to Mostar, we see some signs
of progress there. In the light of repeated difficulties
with funding for the local administration, we would
like to urge the Office of the High Representative to
issue a decision instructing the local electricity
company, Elektroprivreda, to pay a portion of its
revenues to fund the budget of Mostar under terms that
have been under discussion for several months now.

source of optimism. On the other hand, in order to
preserve stability, multifaceted support by the
Stabilization Force is frequently required, as well as
continued, ever-stronger pressure on the Bosnian
participants in the peace process by the Office of the
High Representative and other international players.
Russia continues actively to be involved in the
implementation of the Dayton Accords. However, we
do not consider ourselves to be bound by the Brussels
Declaration, as we have serious objections to a number
of its provisions. We will in future work towards the
full and non-discriminatory implementation of the
Dayton Agreement, in keeping with the letter and spirit
of those agreements.
In principle, we understand how the High
Representative is establishing priorities in his work,
but it seems to us that his special powers are being
overutilized, thereby placing Bosnia and Herzegovina,
in essence, under a kind of international protectorate.
We do not believe that the use of force to push Dayton
forward creates a stable foundation for institutionbuilding. International structures cannot and should not
replace legally elected authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a whole and in both entities.
Following the visit of President Kostunica to
Sarajevo, we hope to see the establishment of fruitful
cooperation between Bosnia and Herzegovina and
Yugoslavia, particularly the speedy implementation of
diplomatic relations between them and the resolution
all bilateral problems without the imposition of any
conditions on either side.

Finally, the democratic change in Belgrade is
particularly significant and auspicious. There will be
many problems ahead, but we hope the new leadership
of President Kostunica will have a positive influence
on events in Bosnia in the same way that Croatia’s
change in regime has helped to normalize relations
between Croatia and Bosnia.

We believe that the international community
should focus its efforts on working with the political
authorities of Bosnia and Herzegovina by encouraging
them to cooperate both among themselves and with the
international community. Such an approach is
particularly relevant in the period preceding the 11
November elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Mr. Gatilov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We too are grateful to the High
Representative, Mr. Petritsch, for his thorough briefing
on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and for the
efforts he is making to establish normal living
conditions in that country.

Mr. Cappagli (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): We
would like to thank High Representative Wolfgang
Petritsch for his presence in the Council today and for
his detailed report and additional comments.

We wish to note, however, that the situation there
remains fragile. On the one hand, as we have heard
today, positive changes are taking place that are a

6

The first part of the report contained in document
S/2000/999, concerning political issues, shows, in our
opinion, that strengthening State institutions apparently
remains an elusive goal. Although some important
progress has been noted, such as, for example, the

S/PV.4209

establishment of a new Council of Ministers and of
three new ministries, it is disappointing that the reports
we receive consistently indicate procrastination in the
area of decision-making, a lack of commitment on the
part of officials, and the need for the international
community to bring continuous pressure to bear in
order to overcome obstructionism and a lack of
political will on the part of those who focus on ethnic
issues instead of the country’s real needs, thus
jeopardizing the effective operation of the institutions.
For that reason, we would like to voice our full support
for Ambassador Petritsch’s firm and decisive
management style.
We hope that the working group set up by the
House of Representatives and the Council of Ministers
of Bosnia and Herzegovina will be able to overcome
difficulties related to the adoption of the electoral law,
thereby enabling the Parliamentary Assembly to adopt
a definitive electoral law as soon as possible. In this
respect, we hope that the forthcoming general
elections, to be held on 11 November, will be the last
to be held under the provisional rules established by
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe.
We hope also that the positive trend noted during
the municipal elections on 8 April last will continue in
November. At any rate, during the pre-electoral period
we must not tolerate any incitement to violence by the
political parties or any advocacy of changes in the
structure of the State that are not in keeping with the
Dayton Accords. There must be no tolerance either for
any attacks on freedom of the press.

relating to the return and restitution of property in
Croatia.
Finally, we hope that the democratic changes that
have occurred in the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
will make it possible to restore relations between that
country and Bosnia and Herzegovina and thus enhance
stability in the area. We believe that the summit held
yesterday in Skopje, which was attended by the
President of the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia,
Vojislav Kostunica, is a step in the right direction.
Mr. Mohammad Kamal (Malaysia): My
delegation joins previous speakers in welcoming High
Representative Wolfgang Petritsch back to the Security
Council. We too are grateful for his written report and
for his briefing this morning, which highlighted the
continued progress in, as well as the many remaining
challenges and obstacles to, the implementation of the
Peace Agreement in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm once again
our full support for Ambassador Petritsch’s ongoing
efforts to further consolidate the path to a selfsustaining peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We recall that following the initiative of
Ambassador Petritsch, the Peace Implementation
Council, meeting in Brussels last May, set three key
strategic targets for advancing the Bosnian peace
process: the strengthening of State institutions, a
comprehensive economic reform, and the accelerated
return of refugees and displaced persons.

Turning the economy, the report of the High
Representative notes that important measures have
been taken to create a single economic state in order to
promote the private sector and stimulate investment.
We believe that these and other measures designed to
deepen economic reform are indispensable for Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s economy to become self-sustaining
and therefore less dependent on external assistance.

We have supported, and we endorse, this threepronged strategy, just as we did the concept of
ownership espoused by the High Representative and
the New York Declaration, adopted by the Bosnian
joint Presidency almost a year ago. Like others, we
believe that all these efforts provide a clear framework
within which the international community and the
leadership of all Bosnian constituent peoples should
work together and make progress in the peace process.

As for the return of persons belonging to minority
groups, it is encouraging that as of 31 August 2000
about 29,700 had come back and that today very few
areas in Bosnia and Herzegovina are considered offlimits for security reasons. In connection with what is
stated by the High Representative in paragraph 46 of
his report, we urge the Government of Croatia to adopt
the necessary measures to streamline procedures

As was made clear in the report, and in the
briefing by Ambassador Petritsch just now, some
progress — albeit still limited in many cases — has
indeed been made in those key areas. We take note of
the re-establishment of the Council of Ministers and
the appointment of its Chair, as well as of the recent
constructive performance of the joint Presidency. At
the same time, we recognize the fact that many of the

7

S/PV.4209

important decisions had to be imposed by the High
Representative or were made after his direct
intervention, as is evident from the recent cases of the
establishment of the State Border Service, the single
national passport and the amendments to the law on
succession to the Bosnian Presidency. This state of
affairs is rather unfortunate, or, at least, regrettable.
The international community — which, clearly,
includes the High Representative himself — would like
to see the Bosnian leaders and politicians increasingly
assume greater responsibility for working together and
engaging constructively to strengthen Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a State and promote the effective
functioning of its common institutions — a paramount
responsibility that is in line with the concept of
ownership. Clearly, this warrants much stronger
commitment and political will on the part of the
Bosnian leadership to work together for the common
good of the country.
My delegation welcomes the ruling by the
Constitutional Court of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
was issued on 1 July 2000, regarding the
constitutionality of all three nations in both Bosnian
entities, as well as the Bosnian State as a whole. We
view this ruling as a significant contribution to the
strengthening of the statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We, too, are pleased to note the considerable
improvement in the situation in the city of Mostar and
the Herzegovina-Neretva canton, which has led to the
unification of, among others, the city administration,
the cantonal judicial system and the cantonal Ministry
of the Interior. We recall that the existence of parallel
structures in this canton was a matter of concern which
the Security Council specifically highlighted in a
statement to the press last March. At the same time, the
recent development pertaining to the implementation of
the final arbitration award for the district of Brcko is
equally encouraging.
My delegation is also encouraged to see the
recent increase in so-called minority returns, which,
according to rough estimates, is more than double the
number of such returns during the same period last
year. However, the overall return process has been
rather slow, and further determined efforts should
therefore be made to promote it. Political and
administrative obstructions to the return process must
be addressed effectively while efforts are being made

8

to foster economic, educational and labour-market
opportunities for returnees. We further believe that the
full and rigorous implementation of the package of
property legislation will contribute to a further increase
in the rate of return. We note with concern that the
implementation of this legislation in certain areas,
particularly in eastern Republika Srpska and the
Croat-controlled municipalities of Herzegovina,
remains dismal, largely due to political impediments.
The judicial system assessment programme has
carried out important work that can contribute
significantly to the ongoing efforts to reform the
Bosnian judiciary. My delegation strongly supports the
continuation of this work and the need for concrete
follow-up actions in this area. We therefore welcome
the establishment of an independent judicial
commission that will lead to the implementation of the
judicial reform programmes.
Finally, while my delegation fully respects the
decision by President Alija Izetbegović to resign from
the Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina on 12
October 2000, we feel that his departure from this
important office will certainly be a great loss to the
peace process in Bosnia and Herzegovina. My
delegation would like to take this opportunity to pay
tribute to President Izetbegović, who is an outstanding
statesman and a respected leader in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and who has worked assiduously for
peace in that country and the region. President
Izetbegović has undoubtedly made an enormous
contribution to and personal sacrifices for the political
independence and territorial integrity of the State of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the well-being of its
people. We hope that, in his new capacity, President
Izetbegović will continue to contribute to the peace
process in his country.
Mr. Ben Mustapha (Tunisia) (spoke in French):
I should like to congratulate you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting to consider the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should also like to thank
Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch for his detailed and
enlightening briefing on the development of situation
in that country.
The report before us today shows that there has
been slow progress, requiring sustained action on the
part of the international community as a whole. We
believe that the recent developments in the region are
conducive to creating a new, positive momentum which

S/PV.4209

could accelerate the implementation of the peace
agreements. They offer real hope for regional
stabilization.
Clearly, the task is complex and there is a long
way to go before a final and lasting peace can be
achieved. It will be necessary to overcome what is
considered to be localized resistance and intransigence
that is not characteristic of a situation that, on the
whole, is favourable.
In order for peace to be built on a solid
foundation, it must be based on moral values of
tolerance and respect for diversity. We continue to
believe that the establishment of a multi-ethnic society
in Bosnia and Herzegovina should allow for the
expression of specific identities on the part of the three
communities. In this context, it is important to place
special emphasis on education which enables young
people to learn to live together, coexisting with their
differences.
We are gratified that concrete measures have been
adopted to consolidate unity in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, in particular through the establishment of
a single national passport and the drafting of laws
relating to identity cards and other national documents.
The consolidation of institutions in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a strategic goal, endorsed by the
Brussels meeting of the Peace Implementation Council.
We support that goal and believe that strengthening
political institutions is essential for the establishment
of State authority. Furthermore, we await with interest
the forthcoming general elections planned for
November, and we hope that the trend initiated during
the April municipal elections will be reinforced and
that the multi-ethnic and moderate parties will continue
to make progress.
We encourage the Presidency to persevere in the
application of the New York agreements, and we
appeal to the parties to overcome their differences and
to adopt electoral laws as soon as possible in order to
contribute to the promotion of democracy.
The return of refugees and displaced persons is a
major concern for my delegation and an essential
condition for the implementation of the Peace Accords
in Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome the return of
refugees, particularly persons belonging to minorities,
in satisfactory conditions, and we appreciate efforts to

guarantee security and to procure the means of survival
for this vulnerable category of people.
Despite encouraging economic progress, the
situation remains fragile. The country continues to
depend heavily on foreign aid, with all the risks that
this could entail if the level of this aid drops. That is
why we think that economic reform needs to go deeper
and to create conditions conducive to the autonomous
development of the country, based on the domestic
capacity-building of the country and the promotion of
private investment. We are convinced that political
stability, restored security and the success of economic
reforms are all factors that could attract investors to
Bosnia and Herzegovina, particularly since the country
must develop in a European context. The Stability Pact
offers many possibilities that should be explored.
An independent, effective and impartial judiciary
is the best defence against impunity and can promote
conciliation among the Bosnian communities. We
salute efforts made in this realm, particularly the
initiative to establish an independent judicial
commission that will seek to reform the judicial
system, coordinate international aid and design specific
programmes.
Mr. Levitte (France) (spoke in French): Allow
me first to welcome Mr. Wolfgang Petritsch’s presence
among us. We have listened with the greatest interest to
his detailed presentation. I must assure the High
Representative of France’s full support in the
accomplishment of the important mission that he is
carrying out with talent, patience and determination.
With slightly more than two weeks to go before
the general elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, how
can we fail to rejoice at the fact that the Bosnian people
will now have a chance to express through the ballot
their devotion to democracy, their aspiration to the rule
of law, their rejection of ethnic division and their
legitimate ambition to be fully a part of their family,
the European family. The report of the High
Representative very candidly stresses that the wounds
of the past will take a long time to heal. The decision
that Mr. Petritsch took yesterday regarding the
dignified burial of the victims of the Srebrenica tragedy
will contribute to this, but we must also hope that the
November elections will produce gains for the
moderate parties and less support for the errant radical
nationalists. Were such a development to occur, the
citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in the same way as

9

S/PV.4209

the Yugoslav and Croatian peoples, would be giving us
new reasons to hope, with prospects of peace,
reconciliation and economic development in the region.
A new step forward would be taken in the Bosnians’
chance to take control of their own fate, a process that
the international community seeks to encourage.
On 23 and 24 May, the Peace Implementation
Council met in Brussels and set the course. Institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina must be consolidated, the
economy must be reformed and the return of refugees
must remain a priority. The High Representative has
continued to work in this direction, with a blend of
dialogue and firmness: dialogue, because this is the
best way of bringing the Bosnian leaders to shoulder
their responsibilities; and firmness, particularly
through imposing laws or regulations when this is the
only way to put an end to intransigence, overcome the
resistance of elected or appointed officials who do not
act in good faith and, finally, to ensure that the general
interest prevails. In this spirit, I would like to note that
the single national passport of Bosnia and Herzegovina
was officially presented yesterday, 25 October, by the
Presidency and the High Representative.
We must hope that changes in the region will
create a new state of mind. We must hope that goodwill
will be contagious and that the prospect of
normalization, glimpsed yesterday at the Skopje
summit, will also have a beneficial impact in terms of
trade and, more generally, of opening up the economy,
a field in which there is an urgent need for reform.

Mr. Sami (Bangladesh): I thank Mr. Wolfgang
Petritsch, High Representative for the Implementation
of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina,
for his candid presentation on the developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We consider his briefing
timely, in particular as a new scenario in the Balkans
has been unfolding with the change in political
leadership in the region.
Progress in the implementation of the Dayton
Peace Accord has been painfully slow until now. This
was largely due to the existing political climate of the
region. We believe that a propitious moment is now in
the offing for speedier implementation. Mr. Kostunica
himself declared during his visit to Sarajevo that he
would defend Dayton and expressed his desire to
normalize relations with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
encourage the High Representative to establish a
dialogue with Belgrade for advancing the peace
process. It is high time to restart negotiations, which
had stopped with the former Yugoslav President.
We are appreciative of the Office of the High
Representative’s constant pursuit of its three strategic
priorities: economic reform, the acceleration of the
return of refugees and displaced persons, and the
consolidation of institutions, especially at the State
level.

I would like to underscore the European Union’s
commitment to this process of integration and reform.
The Union is both the main donor and the main troop
contributor for Bosnia and Herzegovina. It will have an
opportunity to reaffirm its political involvement during
the Zagreb summit, to be held on 24 November on the
initiative of France.

It is of immediate importance to inject vigour into
the fragile economy of Bosnia. Only a secure economic
future can provide an effective antidote to the
devastation caused by the 1992-95 war. What is needed
is to facilitate a climate for investment, both domestic
and international. This will require major reform in the
administrative structure. It is commonly believed that
the Bosnian workforce is well-suited to small- and
medium-sized enterprises. Bosnian entrepreneurship
has to be nurtured. Numerous bottlenecks from the past
still stifle free enterprise. These must be dismantled.

I would also like to draw attention to a recent
initiative of the European Union in Mostar. It was
under the auspices of the Union, and thanks to the
spirit of cooperation displayed by the two leaders of
that divided city, that on 12 July the Mostar document
was adopted and signed by the conference of the city’s
mayors. This document marks an important phase
towards the implementation of a final statute that
provides for a single, self-reliant and multi-ethnic
administration for the city.

The status of refugees and internally displaced
persons has also remained a major concern. The Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
and other United Nations agencies have been playing
laudable roles in accelerating the refugee return
process. But five years after the war there are still a
quarter of a million people outside the borders, and
three quarters of a million remain internally displaced.
We believe that facilitating their return is a priority
undertaking. We welcome, however, the current trend

10

S/PV.4209

of increasing numbers of refugees returning to their
pre-war homes.
We are appreciative of the steps taken by the
High Representative in reforming the legislation
regarding property return and in taking stern action
against public officials who have a record of
obstructionism. We would be interested to know the
results of the steps taken by the High Representative
earlier this year.
The High Representative’s Office is also seized of
the formidable job of assisting in State-building. The
consolidation of the State structure starts with a fully
functional and independent judiciary to establish the
rule of law, and a responsive and professional police
force. Inter-ethnic cooperation has often been blocked
by radical nationalist forces. We believe the tide has
turned against these forces. We strongly urge the Joint
Presidency to honour the commitments they made
under the New York Declaration and to work in close
concert to promote inter-ethnic cooperation.
In conclusion, we would like to express our
optimism that with the change of the leadership in the
Balkans, the efforts of the High Representative will
now be rewarded with quicker results. Dayton should
be working at a faster pace. From the Council we are
prepared to extend our continued support to the goals
of the High Representative.
Mr. Yel’chenko (Ukraine): I, too, want to thank
High Representative Petritsch for his informative
briefing.
My country commends the High Representative
and his Office for a good job done over the period
under review. We note that, with the assistance and
involvement of the Office of the High Representative,
there have been a large number of encouraging
achievements during the last six months, in almost all
areas of the implementation of the civilian aspects of
the Dayton/Paris Peace Accords.
First of all, we welcome the progress made in the
building of common institutions, in particular the reestablishment in June of the Council of Ministers and
the subsequent establishment of three new ministries,
as well as the adoption of a number of important
decisions and laws by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Presidency, Parliamentary Assembly and Constitutional
Court.

At the same time, like others, we remain
concerned
about
the
High
Representative’s
observations that many important decisions related to
common institutions continue to require the constant
application of pressure from the international
community. It is very unfortunate that the lack of
commitment among politicians — and specifically the
lack of proper dialogue among the three members of
the Presidency — continues to block effective
decision-making.
In this regard, my delegation encourages the High
Representative to pursue further his resolute stance on
this subject. We welcome his decision of 29 September
to impose a single national passport in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, following the failure of the Parliament to
adopt the necessary legislation. We also wish every
success to the Office of the High Representative and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe in their joint efforts to assist in the holding of
the general, parliamentary elections in Bosnia and
Herzegovina on 11 November.
It is regrettable that the recent months have
witnessed a period of deterioration of the political
situation in the Republika Srpska. This situation
required frequent interventions by the Office of the
High Representative to ensure the functioning of that
entity’s Parliament and Government. It is our hope that
the new political environment created by the recent
presidential elections in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia will be conducive to the stabilization of the
political situation in the Republika Srpska and bring
closer solutions to many other problems in regard to
relations between Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
My delegation took note with satisfaction of the
information in the report that the situation in the city of
Mostar has considerably improved in recent months
and that the implementation of the Brcko District is
proceeding well.
As far as the economic situation is concerned, we
share the conclusions of the Peace Implementation
Council meeting in Brussels about the central role of
economic reform in the strategy of the international
community for Bosnia and Herzegovina. Therefore, we
fully support the ongoing efforts to pursue this strategy
by creating a single economic space, enabling private
sector growth and fostering privatization.

11

S/PV.4209

We are encouraged with the reports indicating
that the number of minority returns registered up until
last August is more than double the number of returns
during the same period last year. This positive
tendency testifies to the steady progress being made by
the international community in the normalization of
life in Bosnia and in stimulating minority returns. In
view of these inspiring figures, the international
community should redouble its efforts to ensure
security for returnees and to ensure that they have
equal rights as citizens.
In this regard, it is also of particular importance
to make the property laws effective and to promote
comprehensive judiciary reform and the establishment
of human rights institutions. My delegation applauds
all steps being taken by the High Representative to
these ends.
Finally, Ukraine maintains that the role of the
High Representative and his Office in leading the
international efforts aimed at restoring peace and
stability in Bosnia and in the entire Balkans remains
vital. Therefore, my delegation wishes to reiterate its
support for the activities of the High Representative.
We wish him and all his staff every success.
Mr. Hamer (Netherlands): I thank Mr. Petritsch,
the High Representative, for his report and briefing and
welcome him back in our midst.
Much has been achieved in Bosnia and
Herzegovina over the past five years since the
Dayton/Paris Peace Agreements. And yet, as the High
Representative has made clear, much remains to be
done. One milestone of progress will be the general
elections on 11 November. My delegation shares the
hope of the High Representative, and indeed of the
entire international community, that the trend in favour
of multi-ethnic or moderate political parties,
established in the municipal elections last April, will be
continued in these general elections.
But there are less encouraging signs as well. At
several levels there is still a lot of obstructionism, a
lack of dialogue and a lack of constructive engagement.
These problems are usually, if not always, inspired by a
desire to protect vested interests. We support the High
Representative when he finds himself forced to
intervene and to impose regulations — which will
serve all in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not only
particular interest groups. We also call on all to fully

12

engage in the process of fostering functional and
democratically accountable common institutions.
The economy of Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
an area of concern. On the one hand, there is marked
progress – the growth rates are indeed impressive; on
the other, economic reform has been slow and the
country, as Mr. Petritsch remarked, has fallen 10 years
behind in its development. The Netherlands welcomes
the economic strategy adopted at the Brussels meeting
of the Peace Implementation Council last May and we
hope that this strategy will facilitate the transition from
a donor-dependent economy to a self-sustaining market
economy.
In this context, I should like to underline once
again the importance we attach to privatization. Here
again, preservation of the current economic status quo
serves only economic and political vested interests. A
quick, equitable and transparent privatization process
will help the country to finally catch up.
I have one question for Mr. Petritsch concerning
the economy. Economic experts have noted a marked
difference in economic development and prosperity
between the Federation and the Republika Srpska. I
would appreciate it if the High Representative could
share his views on this matter with us and if he could,
perhaps, elaborate on the implications of this divide for
the prospects for cooperation.
Finally, the High Representative and most
speakers have noted the considerable progress made
over the past year in the area of refugee return. There is
no better yardstick for the success of peace
implementation than the decision of individuals that it
is safe to return. Judged by that yardstick alone, Bosnia
and Herzegovina is on the right path. That is the result
of hard work under difficult circumstances by all
concerned – citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina as
well as international personnel. To them, as to the High
Representative, I should like to pay tribute for their
achievements.
Mr. Shen Guofang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
First of all, we thank you, Sir, for convening this open
briefing on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Our thanks also go to High Representative
Petritsch for his report and updates. We found the
report informative and comprehensive. The Chinese
delegation supports the High Representative’s work
and appreciates the efforts made by various parties in

S/PV.4209

Bosnia and Herzegovina to implement the Peace
Agreement.
China has closely followed developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The overall situation has
remained calm and stable and the Peace Agreement
continues to be implemented, which we find
encouraging. This can be attributed to the political will
and cooperation of the parties in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the assistance provided by the
international community. We welcome the progress
made in various areas, especially the return of minority
refugees in increasing numbers. The local police forces
are playing a crucial role in ensuring the safety and
security of the returnees and very few places in Bosnia
and Herzegovina are considered to be inaccessible for
security reasons.
We note from the report, however, that progress
in implementing the Peace Agreement is very slow. In
some areas, it appears to be at a standstill. In particular,
there is a lack of dialogue and constructive engagement
in decision-making among the three members of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, who continue
to be guided by ethnic interests rather than by the
overall interests of the country. Thus, five years after
peace was achieved in Bosnia and Herzegovina, they
are still faced by challenging tasks which they are far
from completing. The international community must
exert its influence in this regard.
It has been our consistent view that a
comprehensive and thorough settlement of the question
of Bosnia and Herzegovina ultimately depends on the
people of that country themselves. The participation of
the international community in reconstruction should
be based on the principle of ceding the leading role to
the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Their will and
choices should be respected. The international
community’s efforts should focus on helping them to
achieve self-government and independence. In
economic reconstruction and reform in particular,
efforts should be made to reduce their reliance on
external assistance. They should be helped to establish
a self-sustaining market economy. If they do not, all
kinds of social and economic problems may resurface
in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the process of economic
transition.
Sir Jeremy Greenstock (United Kingdom): It is
very good to see the High Representative with us again
today. We very warmly appreciate and fully support

what he and his team have been doing over the past six
months, particularly the progress that has been made in
the implementation of the commitments undertaken at
the Brussels meetings of the Peace Implementation
Council. His Office’s refined focus on refugee return,
economic reform and state-level institution-building is
beginning to bear fruit in a very welcome way. What is
happening in Mostar, with strong European Union
support, is another encouraging indication of the
change under way.
Perhaps the main downside has been that the bulk
of progress over the past year has been through the
efforts of the international community rather than of
the
Bosnians
themselves.
What
the
High
Representative said about the growth figures over the
recent period is another indication of that. We very
much commend what Ambassador Petritsch has been
doing in targeting the use of his Bonn powers and his
determination to remain above the fray when a local
solution is obtainable. Instances of that have been seen
in the Council of Ministers and in the current pension
law debate.
We share his hope that the general elections on 11
November will see a more responsible group of
politicians elected. That will be an opportunity to
develop the High Representative’s concept of local
ownership of the peace implementation process. Full
implementation of the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitutional Court’s decision on constituent peoples,
including any amendments to the election law, is in our
view an essential part of Dayton implementation and
another key challenge for the next entity and state-level
Governments. We share his view that those decisions
are non-negotiable and we urge his Office to do all it
can to assist the new Governments once they are
formed.
We share the High Representative’s concern
about the deterioration in Republika Srpska in the leadup to the elections in the Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia. The collapse of the Milosevic regime is
undoubtedly good news for Bosnia, but President
Kostunica has something to learn about Dayton
implementation.
We
welcome
the
High
Representative’s early engagement with Mr. Kostunica
and efforts to manage his visit to Trebinje last
weekend. It is essential that the Office of the High
Representative continue to engage President Kostunica
as a partner in Dayton implementation and to
emphasize the relationship between development of

13

S/PV.4209

state-level institutions and a sovereign State of Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
It is really remarkable to think that five years
have now gone by since Dayton. We think that the
international community’s interests are now in good
hands in Sarajevo and we wish the High Representative
and his team every success in the important months of
further change that are to come.
Mr. Kassé (Mali) (spoke in French): Allow me,
as previous delegations have done, to thank the High
Representative for the Implementation of the Peace
Agreement on Bosnia and Herzegovina, Mr. Petritsch,
for his comprehensive and instructive briefing on
developments in the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina since mid-April 2000.
My delegation believes that despite the
difficulties encountered there has been real progress,
even if slow, in the implementation of the Dayton
Accord. My delegation would like to welcome and
support the commendable efforts made by Ambassador
Petritsch and his team.
My delegation welcomes the important political,
economic and social decisions made by the Peace
Implementation Council at its meeting on 23 and 24
May 2000 in Brussels. Also, my delegation welcomes
and encourages such positive steps as the establishment
of a new Council of Ministers and the approval of its
chairmanship, the adoption of an electoral law, the
holding of municipal elections on 8 April 2000, the
preparations for general elections in November and the
single passport, because they are consonant with the
idea of consolidating the foundations of democracy and
the multi-ethnic nature of the State.
My delegation strongly encourages the efforts to
reform the judiciary, which will strengthen State
institutions. My delegation believes that institutional
reforms must be accompanied by economic reforms
and that economic development is the best guarantee of
peace. In this respect, we invite the authorities of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to continue with the
macroeconomic reforms undertaken and to cooperate
fully with the international financial organizations.
My delegation is very pleased to note the massive
return of refugees. We believe that this trend should be
strongly encouraged by the international community,
and subsequent steps should be taken to that end.

14

Finally, my delegation strongly supports and
encourages the efforts of the international community,
which should spare no effort to ensure that the Dayton
peace process is irreversible and that it strengthens the
multi-ethnic nature of the State of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Vámos-Goldman (Canada) (spoke in
French): My delegation wishes to express its deep
appreciation to High Representative Petritsch for the
briefing he gave us today, as well as for the excellent
work he continues to do in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We would also like to take this opportunity to thank the
High Representative for his letter dated 9 October 2000
to the Steering Board countries regarding political
developments in Belgrade and the opportunity these
present for progress on issues of succession.
Canada believes that these issues should be
resolved, and we look forward to seeing the results of
the efforts of the High Representative’s Office. Canada
welcomes the commencement of the process of reestablishing diplomatic relations between Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia
following the visit that President Kostunica recently
paid to Sarajevo. We note in this regard the special
effort made by the High Representative to ensure the
success of that visit.
(spoke in English)
Canada is concerned about statements made
recently by Croatian Government officials announcing
their intention to formally protest changes made to
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s electoral regulations. As has
been clearly indicated by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe, these changes are in
accordance with the Bosnia and Herzegovina
Constitution and the Dayton Peace Accords. Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s electoral regulations represent an
internal issue. We urge the Croatian Government to
maintain its commitment to respect the integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Canada believes strongly that the return of
refugees and displaced persons to their pre-war homes
remains a top priority. It is very important that the
Bosnian authorities fully implement measures likely to
foster returns, such as the property law, and cease
obstructing legal evictions. Progress on this front is
critical in measuring the commitment of Bosnian
authorities to a lasting peace within the Dayton
framework.

S/PV.4209

We need also to maintain pressure on Croatia and
the Republika Srpska to ensure that they take the
appropriate actions to fully implement the agreement
they signed last March on two-way refugee return.
(spoke in French)
Earlier this month, Canada assumed command of
Multinational Division-South West in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, on a rotational basis with the United
Kingdom and the Netherlands. We are determined to
play a dynamic role within our sector of command,
particularly with regard to refugee returns and the work
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. We look forward to continuing close
cooperation with the High Representative’s Office in
pursuing these and other objectives related to our
command.
Miss Durrant (Jamaica): I wish to join in the
welcome extended to the High Representative, Mr.
Wolfgang Petritsch, and in thanking him for his very
useful briefing. When he last briefed the Council, in
May, the High Representative had focused on three
areas, namely, economic reform, the acceleration of the
return of refugees and the consolidation of institutions.
Today’s briefing builds on these developments and
paints a comprehensive picture of the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina against a background of
recent political developments in the region. While
progress has been slow, there have been some
encouraging developments reported by Mr. Petritsch,
particularly in regard to the common institutions,
refugee return, judicial reform and human rights
institutions.
The full implementation of the New York
Declaration, adopted on 15 November 1999, continues
to be critical to the process under way in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The strengthening of the State
institutions along multi-ethnic lines must remain a
priority. The Peace Implementation Council, at its
meeting in Brussels in May, set one of its main goals as
“Fostering
functional
and
democratically
accountable common institutions supported by an
effective, merit-based civil service and a sound
financial basis, based on the Rule of Law.”
We have noted the holding of regular meetings of
the Council of Ministers and the establishment of three
new Ministries — of the Treasury, for European
Integration and for Human Rights and Refugees. These

developments are encouraging, and we would wish in
due course to hear more about the progress on the
State-level civil service law and in clearing the backlog
of legislation which has to be adopted in accordance
with the Peace Implementation Council work
programme.
The agreements reached on a number of issues by
the Joint Presidency are also encouraging. We are,
however, concerned that the Presidency secretariat,
which was called for in the New York Declaration, has
still not been fully established. We note the need for
more dialogue and constructive engagement in
decision-making among the three members of the
Presidency. It is clear from Mr. Petritsch’s briefing that
the process can be accelerated only with the firm
commitment of the politicians to multi-ethnic
cooperation.
We welcome the fact that general elections will
be held in November, and we see the election law as an
indispensable dimension of a democratic Bosnia and
Herzegovina. While it is disappointing that, due to
differences relating to its adoption, the law has not
been passed, we commend the efforts of the House of
Representatives and the Council of Ministers to
establish a working group to overcome the differences
in this area. My delegation fully agrees with
Mr. Petritsch that any election law must establish
principles for all levels in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Nearly five years after the Dayton Accords some
one million refugees and displaced persons are waiting
to return to their pre-war homes. The reported rate of
minority return has been encouraging, as numbers up to
31 August were more than double their number for the
same period in 1999. As Mr. Petritsch pointed out, the
rate of returns is even greater than the registered
figures show. The fact that minorities feel comfortable
and safe enough to return home is a positive indication
that the situation there is coming under control and is
improving. The report that few if any areas can now be
deemed
inaccessible
because
of
security
considerations, due to the role of the local police, is
welcome.
Despite this we are cognizant of the need for
work
on
refugee-related
matters
such
as
documentation, employment, education, pensions and
access to utilities. In some cases other lasting solutions,
such as local integration and settlement, may have to
be considered for those unable or unwilling to return.

15

S/PV.4209

The implementation of the Property Law
Implementation Plan is closely bound up with refugee
return. Those returning and those displaced must be
able to reclaim their properties. While the property
legislation has begun to make steady progress, much
remains to be done. We recognize in this regard the
work of the Office of the High Representative, the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) and we
would wish to hear more about the remaining obstacles
to progress in this area.
My delegation sees judicial reform as the
cornerstone for the creation of a democratic society and
the entrenchment of the rule of law. The recently
adopted Law on Courts and Court Service in the
Republika Srpska is welcome. The establishment of the
Coordinating Board for the education of judges and
prosecutors is another important addition, as this will
offer additional education to judges in both the
Republika Srpska and the Federation.
My delegation also welcomes the work currently
under way to establish an independent judicial
commission, as in our view this could provide a focal
point for international assistance to judicial reform
initiatives and for the identification and design of
specific programmes for judicial assistance.
In the area of human rights, we welcome the
appointment of three Ombudsmen in the Republika
Srpska, but we are disappointed that the decision of the
Human Rights Chamber regarding the reconstruction of
mosques in Banja Luka has not been implemented.
My delegation would be remiss if it were to
conclude its remarks without expressing support for the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We recognize the
challenge of creating a mufti-ethnic society with multiethnic institutions, and we believe that success is
contingent on the cooperation of the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and their leaders.
My delegation wishes to stress the need for the
full involvement of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in charting their own course. International
commitment must be aimed at assisting the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to build local capacity, as it is
only through their involvement that a sustainable
Bosnia and Herzegovina can be achieved.

16

My delegation recognizes that many of the
economic, social and political problems facing Bosnia
and Herzegovina can be best addressed from a regional
perspective, and for this reason we attach importance
to the development of a programme for reconstruction
and renewal in South-eastern Europe within the
framework of the Stability Pact. We are encouraged by
the prospects for better cooperation among the leaders
of all the countries in the region.
Finally, I wish to thank the High Representative
and his staff for their unwavering commitment to the
creation of a just, lasting and sustainable peace in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Namibia.
My delegation is grateful to the High
Representative for his comprehensive and informative
report on the implementation of the peace process in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The report of the High Representative indicates
that, overall, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been calm and stable. Steady, albeit slow, progress
has been achieved in areas of institution-building. This
achievement gives us hope that Bosnia and
Herzegovina will soon chase the ghost of ethnic
cleansing to the dustbin of history. It also encourages
us to continue supporting the efforts and contributions
extended to the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina by
the international community.
Namibia takes note with appreciation the
appraisal of the peace process by the Peace
Implementation Council which met in Brussels in May.
The three strategic targets identified with respect to the
consolidation of State institutions enjoy my country’s
attention.
We are happy to learn that the rate of return of
refugees and internally displaced persons has picked up
this year. However, the macro-economic performance
of the country has been mixed. In this regard, my
delegation is encouraged by the new political climate
in the region, especially the new Administration in the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, as well as in Croatia.
Finally, we acknowledge the work of the office of
the High Representative and the United Nations
Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as other
international institutions which have dedicated their

S/PV.4209

financial and human resources to build democratic
State institutions in that country.
I now resume my function as President of the
Security Council.
The next speaker on my list is the representative
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Mr. Sacirbey (Bosnia and Herzegovina): Mr.
President, we are most pleased to see you presiding
over the Council for this most significant briefing. May
I here thank the High Representative and his staff for
their work, commitment and endless efforts as well as
for the most recent report which, I am sure, we all
appreciate. May I also thank you, Mr. President, and
others responsible for the opportunity to speak on
behalf of Bosnia and Herzegovina before the Council.
This opportunity is not only fair, but is also critical for
our development toward self-sustainability.
Unfortunately, this also puts me in a difficult
position, as a representative of my country and of all
the people in my Government, of either having
sometimes to defensively respond to Ambassador
Petritsch’s critical observations or having to accept
such as true through my silence. I do not believe,
though, that it would be constructive for me to address
such specific issues in this manner, except to add my
agreement to Ambassador Petritsch’s perspective —
that is, the cautiously optimistic view of the regional
situation as a whole. Instead, we would prefer to point
out several of the following.
First, it is appropriate that through my presence
here and my opportunity to speak the representatives of
the international community are accountable to the
people of Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as to this
Council and other such forums. This is part of taking
ownership of our future.
Secondly, from Ambassador Petritsch’s comments
one may be left with the damagingly false impression
that all that goes wrong in Bosnia is due to the
Bosnians and that all that happens right is due to the
representatives of the international community. It is my
diplomatic duty, as representative of the current
Government in Bosnia and Herzegovina, to say that
this is not true. It is also my personal duty, though, to
say that this is only half true. Many of the difficulties
that we deal with in Bosnia and Herzegovina are of our
own doing — that is, the leadership in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Some of the difficulties have also been

made more complicated by many missteps and
misunderstandings by the international community in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. The establishment of a single
travel document for Bosnian citizens is an example of
correcting a misdeed in which the international
community initially played a crucial role — that is,
made a mistake. I think sometimes we are all in need of
a reality check. I also must recall here that the ethnic
stratification of our political institutions is not the
choice of most Bosnians, but is the result of what
happened during the negotiation of the Dayton Peace
Accords. This is something we were told at the time we
must accept.
Thirdly, while I would personally prefer to see
the scheduled elections bring about many of the
changes in leadership that Ambassador Petritsch, and I
am sure others, would prefer, I must caution that the
democratic success of elections cannot be judged by
the outcome, but rather by the process. The results may
not be fully satisfactory, but in fact the elections must
be judged by the conditions under which they are held.
Here I must recall that we have had at least half a
dozen elections in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which
were certified by the OSCE as just, fair and
democratic. Regardless of the outcome, I, and/or my
successor, will be obliged to fully respect such results
and follow the instructions of such new or old
leadership and such new or old Government. That is
democracy.
Fourthly, Bosnia and Herzegovina remains
prepared to establish diplomatic relations with the
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia without condition. We
look forward to the Government in Belgrade
cooperating with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia, to concluding with it the
discussion on succession, and to that Government
becoming a Member of the United Nations and other
relevant international forums.
Fifthly, let me welcome Ambassador Petritsch’s
decision on the victims of Srebrenica. I congratulate
and personally thank him. This decision promotes those
options consistent with the views of the Srebrenica
report and I believe with this Council’s moral
responsibility.
Finally, I would not wish to create any impression
that my comments are meant to convey any significant
disagreement with the specifics of Ambassador
Petritsch’s report. To the contrary, I must,

17

S/PV.4209

unfortunately, agree with too many of the negative, as
well as the positive, assessments. Rather, these are
qualitative nuances, and if I did not take this
opportunity to repeat and re-emphasize the
accountability of the High Representative and others in
promoting the Peace Agreement and normalcy in my
country, I am not sure what other task my Mission, I
myself and all diplomats here from Bosnia and
Herzegovina would have.
Let me remind everyone that there are many of us
who continue to struggle for Bosnia’s place as a normal
State, a member of the Euro-Atlantic family, free of
ethnic prejudices and divisions. We were there in
Dayton and before, and many are still here. We
sometimes feel swallowed up by the generalizations. In
Dayton we did not want an ethnically stratified
Government that would promote ethnic polarization.
We did not want four passports. We did not want so
much of what is bad and criticized here today. But we
were told that we must accept the lesser of two evils: a
bad peace over a just war. As someone who signed that
bad peace as Foreign Minister, I must reiterate that I
believe that we made the correct decision, and we,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a sovereign State and
Member of the United Nations, invited the
international community, including through the
establishment of the Office of the High Representative,
to help turn our situation into a good peace. No one
conquered Bosnia and Herzegovina. No army had to
fight its way in.
Clearly, this is an indication of the understanding
and commitment that most Bosnians and their leaders
have to this transition to a normal, stable peace. We
need the assistance and, unfortunately, too often the
leadership provided by the international community.
However, do not underestimate either our will or our
comprehension of the situation, and do not generalize
or unnecessarily browbeat. To repeat the words of the
representative of the Netherlands: Give the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina some credit. I would also like
to give credit to the members of the Security Council. I
listened carefully to their comments and found they
were well versed in the situation and had done their
work on behalf of Bosnia very well. I thank them.
Finally, on behalf of President Izetbegović, let me
thank the representative of Malaysia for his most kind
words. I am sure the President will very much
appreciate them.

18

The President: I thank the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his kind words addressed
to me and the members of the Council.
The next speaker inscribed on my list is the
representative of Germany. I invite him to take a seat at
the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Schumacher (Germany): I take this
opportunity to express my appreciation for the, as
always, comprehensive and succinct briefing we have
just received from Mr. Petritsch. Germany took note
with satisfaction of the Council’s decision to organize
this meeting in a manner that would allow nonmembers to express their opinion. We hope that this
has set, once and for all, a good precedent. We are
convinced that this open-minded approach to this issue
reflects the forward-looking manner in which the
Council is about to implement the respective decisions
of the Brahimi Panel which are addressed to it directly.
After the democratic change of power in Zagreb,
the recent developments in Belgrade have finally
opened the doors wide for reaching regional stability,
adding a new and hopefully decisive momentum to the
implementation of the Dayton Peace Accord. This —
and we have heard it already from Mr. Petritsch — has
finally put the onus on the Government of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the Governments of both entities to
deliver. The country is a decade behind, we have just
learned from Mr. Petritsch, and the political leaders
who have desperately failed in their responsibilities – I
point only to the deplorable and appalling record of the
Council of Ministers and the Parliament of Bosnia and
Herzegovina – should be strongly reminded of their
responsibilities to the international community and,
most important, their people.
As the Ambassador of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has just mentioned the “misdeed” of the international
community on the adoption of the passport law, I
would like to remind him that on 17 December 1997,
after two years of Dayton implementation, the passport
law was the only law, and remained for a very long
time the only law, of Bosnia and Herzegovina which
was properly adopted in the Bosnian Parliament.
Bosnia and Herzegovina is facing a crucial election on
11 November and the people really now have a choice.
We call on President Kostunica to take the step of
establishing
diplomatic
relations
—
without
preconditions, as has been underlined on numerous
occasions in the Peace Implementation Council — with

S/PV.4209

Bosnia and Herzegovina as soon as possible, without
further delay. Both neighbouring countries — Croatia
and Yugoslavia — are entitled to form a special
relationship with their respective ethnic communities, a
relationship that we call upon the High Representative
to actively assist in formulating, thus adding an
important element of stability to the region.
Dayton is an irreversible process; it cannot be
reiterated often enough to those political forces in the
country who still tend to look backwards. In addition,
Dayton is an irreversible process in all its aspects and
phases, including all measures taken by the High
Representative after Sintra and Bonn to implement the
Accord with the powers given to him by the Peace
Implementation Council. We can only strongly
encourage the High Representative — albeit with
political sensitivity and a watchful eye, which goes
without saying — to continue his energetic approach
by taking full advantage of the powers vested in him to
ensure that implementation stays on track. As we have
just heard from our British colleague, five years of
Dayton implementation have gone by. I think we have
wasted enough time and, I should add, enough funds.
Clearly, Mr. Petritsch must be congratulated on
progress achieved over the last month, in particular in
the four key areas he mentioned: first, in establishment
of a new Council of Ministers, which I hope will
finally resume responsibility as the Government of the
country; secondly, the ruling of the Constitutional
Court that all three constituent peoples, and others, are
considered to be equal in both entities — and we would
appreciate perhaps receiving more information about
the strategy envisaged to implement this most
important ruling; thirdly, the increased number of
minority returns — although one should remember that
against the backdrop of the overall number of refugees,
those returns still remain a trickle and not a broad
current; and, fourthly, the progress achieved to foster
the independence of local media and to continue
judicial reform. It goes without saying that, as in the
past, Germany is fully committed to render its support
to the Dayton peace process in all its aspects, and to
the work of the High Representative. We are of the
opinion that Wolfgang Petritsch is doing an excellent
job in Sarajevo.
However, in concluding, I would not like to
forget to mention the most crucial issues yet to be
solved as an indispensable condition of bringing peace
to the region: the overall security situation, the

existence of two — if not, de facto, three — armies,
and the completion of the disarmament process under
annex 1.B of the Dayton Peace Accord. We would very
much appreciate it if the High Representative could
cast some light on these items and issues in his next
report to the Council.
The President: The next speaker inscribed on my
list is the representative of Italy. I invite him to take a
seat at the Council table and to make his statement.
Mr. Francese (Italy) (spoke in French): Allow
me first of all to express Italy’s appreciation for the
decision you personally, Mr. President, and the other
members of the Security Council, have made today to
make possible the presence today at this meeting of the
countries most directly interested in the development
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and
particularly for making it possible for Italy to
participate actively in this debate. The positive
response to our request to participate along with other
relevant actors in connection with the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina is a step forward towards
transparency in the work of the Security Council and
towards more active participation by countries that can
make positive contributions to peacekeeping missions.
That is precisely one of the goals that was very clearly
highlighted quite recently in the report of the Panel on
United Nations Peace Operations, led by former
Algerian Foreign Minister Brahimi.
I have taken note of the very interesting
comments that have been made around the table today,
and merely wish to add a few brief observations to
ensure that this practice, which is being given such
concrete form today, contributes directly to advancing
the work of the Council and not to hindering the
efficacy of its deliberations.
First of all, I would like to point out that during
the last five years Italy has contributed about $110
million to the social and economic reconstruction of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. This commitment was carried
out through decentralized initiatives at cooperation that
involved the participation of cities, regions and
representatives of Italian civil society, and their
counterparts in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Along with
that, I should also mention the involvement of the
Italian army and the special forces of the carabinieri
police, which, in the context of the International Police
Task Force and the Multinational Specialized Unit are
developing a new service in accordance with the new

19

S/PV.4209

standards of police professionalism in international
missions. Those standards are considered as important
elements when we talk of reorganizing United Nations
peace operations.
Throughout our time in Bosnia and Herzegovina
we have always noted the great importance of the
coordinating and initiating role played by the High
Representative, Ambassador Wolfgang Petritsch, who,
along with Ambassador Klein, is one of the first pillars
of international solidarity with Bosnia and
Herzegovina. In his presentation today, for which we
very much thank him, Ambassador Petritsch shared
with us some observations that inspire great hope in us
while also warning us of the need for heightened
vigilance. There is both light and shadow in the
situation, as we can see clearly in the four basic areas
he mentioned.
Like the High Representative, we are particularly
pleased with the growing success of activities against
corruption, as well as with the initiatives he has
undertaken and coordinated with regard to promoting
economic reform. The situation of refugees does not
seem as promising, but this is an area in which the will
of individuals has at least as much weight as that of
public initiatives taken by international authorities and
by those of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The main thing
continues to be strengthening institutions, an area in
which there has been clear progress but in which very
serious questions remain. In this regard, we hope that
the elections of 11 November will illustrate that
progress is possible in the strengthening of institutions.
We wish to thank Ambassador Petritsch for his very
candid and detailed presentation.
Speaking in a broader political context, we can
say once again that the light at the end of the tunnel is
represented by the prospect of integration into Europe,
as was noted by our head of Government and President
of the National Council, Mr. Amato, who, along with
the Ministers for Foreign Affairs and Economy, visited
Belgrade right after President Kostunica was
inaugurated. All the peoples of South-East Europe,
including President Kostunica’s Yugoslavia, which has
chosen democracy, want and are able to grow closer to
the European community. The electoral process is
obviously a decisive milestone down that path,
particularly with regard to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
where we expect to see manifestations of this option at
the elections of 11 November, and further progress
later on. In particular, we hope that this will enable

20

Bosnia and Herzegovina to join the Council of Europe
as soon as possible.
Another step forward to which we are paying
great heed is the Zagreb summit of the European Union
and the countries of South-Eastern Europe, to be held
on the initiative of the French presidency of the
European Union to mark the recent beginnings of a
convergence that could also involve Bosnia and
Herzegovina and its neighbour, Croatia.
The democratic developments we have seen in
Belgrade can contribute not only to harmonious
integration of all countries of the region in a European
context, but also, we very much hope, to strengthening
State institutions in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
democratic developments in Belgrade are a win-win
situation for the entire region, and we hope that the
democratic advances in Belgrade will have a positive
influence on inter-ethnic relations in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Clearly all of us, including the parties
themselves, must each pull our weight. First and
foremost, the international community must continue
actively to address the needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
In terms of bilateral relations, the countries near
to the South-Eastern region will need to continue to
develop focused initiatives for political as well as
economic cooperation in support of this process. This
is true, of course, for the authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Italy hopes that they will dedicate
themselves fully and resolutely to economic reform so
that investors who are interested in a country that could
become increasingly attractive for enterprises can
participate, in a market context, in the economic and
social progress of the people of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We hope that the Sarajevo authorities
will show the same commitment to inter-ethnic
integration, including inter-ethnic integration in
military structures. Here, Italy has offered to help
promote more harmonious cooperation in the military
sector, and that offer remains open.
I noted that early in his statement Ambassador
Petritsch spoke of the ideal example of intercultural
and inter-ethnic relations in Switzerland. It is my hope
that inter-ethnic relations in Bosnia and Herzegovina
will soon come to be more similar to those in
Switzerland than they are at present.
The President: I call on Mr. Petritsch to respond
to comments and questions that have been raised.

S/PV.4209

Mr. Petritsch: I would like to take this
opportunity first to remind members of the Council and
others who have spoken here that it is my mandate
under annex 10 of the Dayton Peace Agreement to
coordinate all the civilian agencies engaged in peace
implementation. That means, necessarily, that I have to
deal with a wide range of issues and topics that have
been covered here today in statements by members of
the Security Council and by others.
Let me stress above all that I welcome and very
much appreciate the fact that the representative of
Bosnia and Herzegovina was able to take the floor
here. I deeply believe that we will be successful in the
end only if we really secure cooperation with
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, and if we
really work to push the idea of ownership. Ownership,
of course, also means that local authorities should,
more and more, take responsibility for what they are
doing. This in turn means that we need to be open to
criticism and to suggestions on the part of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to come up with the best result
possible. We are not there to demonstrate that the
international community knows best; we are there to
find a solution for the people, for the citizens of Bosnia
and Herzegovina. In that respect, I very much
appreciate what has been said to that effect here in the
Security Council.
Let me express my appreciation for the highly
cogent and relevant remarks that have been made here
and for the positions that have been expressed, and my
satisfaction at them. Basically, there is strong support
for the three priority areas adopted last May at Brussels
by the Foreign Ministers of the Peace Implementation
Council. I would like to comment on the three priority
areas and on some of the individual specific issues that
were raised here by delegations.
Let me start out with the issue of State
institutions, because the issue of those institutions and
of strengthening them is intimately tied to the powers
invested in the High Representative, the so-called Bonn
powers. Without the imposition of the State border
service earlier this year, I believe we would now be in
a highly difficult and critical situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina because of the recent surge in illegal
transmigration through Bosnia and Herzegovina into
other parts of Europe. The fact that the State border
service — which unfortunately had to be imposed — is
in place with the strong support of the United Nations

is important in terms of fighting illegal migration and
transmigration.
Another example, of course, is the passport.
Apart from the reasons that were given here by me and
by Security Council members, there are other
implications of the passport, including economic
implications: without valid, internationally recognized
passports,
businesspeople
from
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina would have difficulties in travelling and
in establishing businesses. So in many ways it was a
necessity — not just a political necessity, not just in
terms of State-building, but also in the economic
sense — that the international community and I as the
High Representative came up with an early decision on
this.
When we talk about State institutions, I believe
that the Council of Ministers is central. We now have
six ministries in place; this means that the central
Government in Sarajevo is already reminiscent of a
modern Government: it has six ministries and covers
most of the relevant topics. Therefore, my efforts after
the elections will be directed at strengthening the
Council of Ministers as much as possible, to turn it into
the central institution that it was supposed to be
according to Dayton.
Turning to the decisions of the Constitutional
Court, let me say that I very much appreciate the
efficiency and the professionalism demonstrated by the
Court. Its landmark decisions will be of the greatest
importance and will have positive consequences for the
overall state-building process in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They are non-negotiable, as was pointed
out by Ambassador Greenstock, and this needs to be
underlined and understood by the local entity
governments.
We will see to it that the Constitutional Court’s
decisions are implemented and become part of the
entity constitutions. Also important is the need to
continue to depoliticize judicial issues. We need to go
on and do what would be necessary in any other state,
which is necessary also in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We will solicit the support of the Council of
Europe — of which Bosnia and Herzegovina will
hopefully be a member very soon — and that of the
Council of Europe’s Venice Commission, which has
already in the past helped us to find the right solutions
to some of the more sticky issues. I am quite confident

21

S/PV.4209

that with this help we will be successful
implementing the Constitutional Court’s decisions.

in

Let me turn to some other issues. Economic
reform is the engine of change in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and there are indeed differences between
the two entities when it comes to the state of the
economy. There are clear reasons for this. The first two
years in the Republika Srpska were basically lost in
terms of the peace implementation process because of
the obstructionism of politicians such as Mr. Krisnic,
who is now in The Hague. This has changed, but
nonetheless the Republika Srpska is lagging behind for
these and other reasons. But I must also say that when
it comes to the privatization process, some of the
successes are actually more visible in the Republika
Srpska than in the Federation.
So, in short, there is a mixed record when it
comes to economic reform, but the primary concern
will remain the privatization process and the
restructuring of the major utilities in all of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in order to provide for a single economic
space for the country. I also see this as the one and only
way to fight corruption, to strengthen the institutions
and the independent judiciary, and to create a level
playing field for a competitive, market-oriented
economy.
The next point is the return of refugees, which, as
the Council is probably aware, is at the core of the
Dayton Accords. I should say also that it is not
something that is confined by the Dayton Accords. It is
true that there are quite a few ethnic features in the
Dayton Accord, as was pointed out by the
representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, which at the
time were necessary and which need to be successively
brought down to a realistic level.
But the Dayton Accords do not place any
restrictions on us in terms of refugee returns, and
therefore we are pushing very hard to achieve the
necessary results in that area. Given current figures,
together with the very comprehensive property

22

legislation plan that is now being implemented, I am
quite confident that this year and next will see the
return issue become a self-sustaining one, so that the
local authorities, which are primarily charged with this
question, will be able fully to take over once again the
issue of ownership and bring it to a happy ending.
Of course — and this is a paradoxical situation —
because of the great success in returns this year, we do
not have enough flexible funds where there is a lack of
alternative accommodations. Of course, we also need
to recognize that results are regionally quite diverse —
in some parts things are working out excellently, while
in others things are still not up to par.
In the end, let me say that we now see fresh
winds of change in the whole region. Yugoslavia and
Croatia provide for a better environment that is more
conducive to peace implementation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Within 10 months, the three main actors
in the Yugoslav drama have stepped down in one way
or another. I would like also to stress here the dignified
way in which Mr. Izetbegovic, of his own free will,
stepped down and thus provided space, room and
opportunity for progress in the overall peace
implementation process in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I should like to take this opportunity to thank the
United Nations agencies that are working together with
us in Bosnia and Herzegovina. I should like also to
thank the Security Council for its continued support,
and the representatives assembled here for their
respective contributions and, above all, for the support
I can feel from the statements they made here.
The President: I thank Mr. Petritsch for the
clarifications he has provided.
There are no further speakers inscribed on my
list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m.
