II.

25

Resolutions adopted without reference to a Main Committee

the attention of the international community to the need
to contribute to the Assistance Fund for the Struggle
against Colonialism and Apartheid established by the
Organization of African Unity;

40/21. Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvi-

20. Urges the specialized agencies and other organizations concerned within the United Nations system to continue to expand their co-operation with the Organization
of African Unity and, through it, their assistance to the liberation movements recognized by that organization;

(Malvinas) and having received the report of the SecretaryGeneral, 35
Aware of the interest of the international community in
the peaceful and definitive settlement by the Governments
of Argentina and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland of all their differences, in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations,
Taking note of the interest repeatedly expressed by both
parties in normalizing their relations,
Convinced that such purpose would be facilitated by a
global negotiation between both Governments that will
allow them to rebuild mutual confidence on a solid basis
and to resolve the pending problems, including all aspects
on the future of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas),
l. Requests the Governments of Argentina and the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland to
initiate negotiations with a view to finding the means to
resolve peacefully and definitively the pending problems
between both countries, including all aspects on the future
of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas), in accordance with the
Charter of the United Nations;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
renewed mission of good offices in order to assist the parties in complying with the request made in paragraph l
above, and to take the necessary measures to that end;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its forty-first session a report on the
progress made in the implementation of the present resolution;
4. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-first session the item entitled "Question of the Falkland Islands (Malvinas)".

21. Reaffirms its willingness to co-operate with the
Organization of African Unity and its organs in the implementation of resolutions and decisions of mutual concern;
22. Calls upon the competent organs, specialized agencies and other organizations of the United Nations system
to continue to ensure that their personnel and recruitment
policies provide for the just and equitable representation
of Africa at all levels at their respective headquarters and
in their regional and field operations;
23. Urges all Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
provide material and economic assistance to help African
countries of asylum cope with the heavy burden imposed
on their limited resources and weak infrastructures by the
presence of large numbers of refugees;
24. Invites Member States and regional and international organizations, in particular those of the United
Nations system, and non-governmental organizations to
contribute generously and effectively to the implementation of the Declaration and Programme of Action of the
Second International Conference on Assistance to Refugees in Africa; 33
25. Calls upon United Nations organs - in particular
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council,
the Special Committee on the Situation with regard to the
Implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, the Special Committee against Apartheid and the United Nations
Council for Namibia - to continue to associate closely the
Organization of African Unity with all their work concerning Africa;
26. Requests the Secretary-General to ensure that adequate facilities continue to be made available to facilitate
continued liaison and consultations on matters of
common interest as well as for the provision of technical
assistance to the General Secretariat of the Organization of
African Unity, as required;
27. Also requests the Secretary-General, in consultation with the Secretary-General of the Organization of
African Unity, to arrange the date and venue for the next
meeting between representatives of the General Secretariat
of that organization and the secretariats of the United
Nations and other organizations of the United Nations
system;
28. Further requests the Secretary-General to report to
the General Assembly at its forty-first session on the
implementation of the present resolution and on the development of co-operation between the Organization of
African Unity and the organizations concerned within the
United Nations system.
87th plenary meeting
21 November 1985
33 A/39/402. annex.
34 Sec also sect. I, footnote 7, and sect. X.B.6, decision 40/410.

nas)34

The General Assembly,
Having considered the question of the Falkland Islands

95th plenary meeting
27 November 1985

40/40. Critical economic situation in Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 39/29 of 3 December 1984, and

the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in
Africa annexed thereto,
Noting the Declaration on the Economic Situation in
Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic
Recovery 1986-1990, annexed thereto, adopted by the
Assembly of Heads of State and Government of the
Organization of African Unity at its twenty-first ordinary
session, held at Addis Ababa from 18 to 20 July 1985, 29
Noting further Economic and Social Council resolution
1985/80 of 26 July 1985,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on the critical economic situation in Africa, 36
Expressing its appreciation to the international community ~p.d the United Nations system for their positive
resprin,se to the emergency situation in Africa and recognizing the need to continue to extend that support to fulfil
unmet emergency needs,
Commending the Secretary-General for his continuing
efforts in ensuring that the emergency assistance by the
United Nations system and the international community
is delivered to affected countries in a concerted manner,
35 A/40/891.
36 A/40/372-E/1985/104 and Add. I and 2.

26

General Assembly- Fortieth Session

. Gra_vely_ concer!'ed that, even if the current emergency
situation 1s alleviated, the structural economic problems
~1~ continue to crip_ple African economies and might precipitate recurrent cnses,
Alarmed by_ the forecasts that indicate for Africa stagnant or negative growth rates, declining per capita food
production, escalating debt burden and the serious effects
of drought and desertification,
Recognizing fully the need to focus attention and efforts
on the rehabilitation and medium-term and long-term
development problems of the African countries,
I. Takes note of the Declaration on the Economic Situation in Africa and Africa's Priority Programme for Economic Recovery 1986-1990, adopted by the Assembly of
He~ds of S~te a!ld Government of the Organization of
Afncan Umty at its twenty-first session;
2. Decides to convene a special session of the General
A~~mbly at th~ mi!1iste_rial ~eve) t? consider in depth the
cntical economic s1tuat10n m Afnca, to be held in New
York from 27 to 3 I May I 986;
3. Decides also that the special session of the General
Assembly on the critical economic situation in Africa
should focus,~~ a ~omprehensive and integrated manner,
on the rehabihtation and medium-term and long-term
developmen~ pro~lems and challenges facing African
co~ntnes, with a view to promoting and adopting actiononented and concerted measures;
4. Decides further to establish a Preparatory Committee of the Whole for the Special Session of the General
Assembly on the Critical Economic Situation in Africa
that would undertake the necessary preparations to ensure
the success of the session;
5. Requests the Secretary-General to take appropriate
m~sures to facilitate the work of the Preparatory Committee;
6. furthe~ requests the Secretary-General, in close cooperation with the relevant organs, organizations and
bodies of the United Nations system, to submit to the Prepara~ory ~mmittee and to the General Assembly at its
special sessio1;1 reports _containing action-oriented proposals to deal with the cntical economic situation in Africa
particularly the major developmental areas identified i~
the Declaration on the Critical Economic Situation in
~frica annexed to Assembly resoluiirin 39/29, taking fully
mto account the priorities set by the Assembly of Heads of
Sta!e an~ Government of the Organization of African
Umty at its twenty-first session;
7. Commends the international community for its val~ble ~uppo~ and positive response to the emergency situation m Afnca, and appeals to it to continue these efforts
an~ to give its support for the full implementation of resolution 39/29 and the Declaration annexed thereto;
8. Commends the Secretary-General for his valuable
effo~s in ensuring the co-ordinated response of the United
Nations system and the international community to the
emergency situation in Africa;
9. ~equests the Secretary-General, in implementing
reso~ution 39/29_ and the Declaration annexed therltlP., to
contmue to monitor the emergency situation, to asse$S the
needs and responses, t_o o:iaintain the system's capacity to
respon~ to the contmumg emergency in the affected
countnes, and to report to the General Assembly at its
forty-first session.
98th plenary meeting
2 December 1985
37 Official Records of the General Assemblv. Fortieth Session, Plenarv
Meetmgs, 36th meeting.
•

40/56. Twenty-fifth anniversary of the Dedaradon
on the Grandn1 of Independence to Colonial
Countries and Peoples
The General Assembly,
Recalling the Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, contained in its
resolution 1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960,
Having held, in the year of the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations, a special plenary meeting in observance of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the Declaration on
the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Peoples, 37
Recalling the provisions of the Charter of the United
Nations, in which the peoples of the world proclaimed
their determination to reaffirm faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and worth of the human
person and in the equal rights of men and women and of
nations large and small and to promote social progress and
better standards of life in larger freedom,
Recalling also the relevant provisions of the Declaration
on Pi:inciples of International Law concerning Friendly
R~lations and Co-operation among States in accordance
with the Charter of the United Nations, 38
Recalling its resolutions 2621 (XXV) of 12 October
1970, containing the programme of action for the full
implementation of the Declaration on the Granting of
Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples, and 35/
118 of 11 December 1980, the annex to which contains the
Plan of Action for the Full Implementation of the Declaration,
Considering that the process of national liberation is
irresistible and irreversible, and recalling that the Declaration so_l~mnly proclaimed the necessity speedily and
unconditionally to put an end to colonialism in all its
forms and manifestations,
Recognizing the significant and commendable role
played by the United_Nations, since its very inception, in
the. field .of d~colomzation and noting the emergence,
dunng this penod, of about one hundred States into sovereign existence,
Noting with satisfaction, in particular, that during the
past twenty-five years a large number of former colonial
Territories have ~chiev~d independence, mainly through
the courageous hberat10n struggle carried out by the
peoples of those countries, led by their national liberation
movements, and that many former Trust and Non-SelfGovet11:ing .Terri to~es have exercised their right to selfdetermmation and independence in accordance with the
Declaration,
Noting also with satisfaction the important contribution
made by the Special Committee on the Situation with
regard to the Implementation of the Declaration on the
Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and
Pe?ples ~n furt~ering the aims and objectives of the Declaration with a view to the liberation of peoples from colomal rule,
Noti~gfurther with satisfaction the active and important
role bemg played by former colonial Territories as States
Members of the United Nations and members of the other
~rganizations of the United Nations system in the realization of the purposes and principles of the Charter the
pre~rvation of international peace and security, decoionization and_the promotion of human progress, as well as the
profound impact thereof on contemporary international
relations,
38 Resolution 2625 (XXV). anne,
