General Assembly -

Twenty-third Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE FIRST COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Ruol11tion
No.

2453 (XXIII)

2454 (XXIII)

2455 (XXIII)

Title

(A/7442)

2456 (XXIII)

2466 (XXIII)
2467 (XXIII)

!ten,

International co-operation in the peacefu\ uses of outer space
(A/7462)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Question of general and complete disarmament (A/7441)
Resolution A
Resolution B
Urgent need for suspension of nuclear and thermonuclear tests

...

. .................. .

Conference of Non-Nuclcar-Weapon States (A/7445)
Resolution A
Reso\ution B
Resolution C
Resolution D
The Korean question (A/7460)
Examination of the question of the reservation exclusively for
peaceful purposes of the sea-bed and the ocean floor, and the
subsoil thereof, underlying the high seas beyond the limits of
present national jurisdiction, and the use of their resources in
the interests of mankind ( A/7477)
Resolution A ...
Resolution B
Resolution C
Resolution D

Other deci,ion•
Elimination of foreign military bases in the countries of Asia, Africa and Latín
America . .
. ....... .
Memorandum of the Government of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics concerning urgent measures to stop the arms race and achieve disarmament

2453 (XXID). International co,operation in the
peaceful uses of outer space

24
24

20 December 1968
20 December 1968

9
10

27
27

20 December 1968
20 December 1968

11
12

28

20 December 1968

12

96
96
96
96
25

20 December 1968
20 December 1968
20 December 1968
20 December 1968
20 December 1968

13
13
14
14
14

26
26
26
26

21 December 1968
21 December 1968
21 December 1%8
21 December 1968

15
15
16

16

29

20 December 1968

17

94

20 December 1968

17

field oí practica! applications oí space science and
technology should be actively promoted,
1. Expresses its appreciation to the Government of
Austria for acting as host oí the United Nations Conference on the Exploration and Peaceful Uses of Outer
Space and for its assistance in the organization of the
Conference ;
2. C ominends the results of the Coníerence and
notes with gratification that it achieved its purpose of
examining the practica! benefits of space exploration
on the basis oí scientific and technical achievements
and the opportunities available to non-space Powers
for !nternational co-operation in space activities, with
s~ecial relevance to the needs of the deve\oping countnes;
3. Notes the intention of the Committee on the
Peaceful U ses oí O uter Space to consider al! proposals
arising from the discussions at the Conference ;
4. W e/comes the decision oí the Committee on the
Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to consider in detail
al! aspects of the proposals made by India that a small
advisory group be constituted and that action be taken

A
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2221 (XXI) of 19 December 1966, 2250 (S-V) of 23 May 1967 and 2261
(XXII) oí 3 November 1967 regarding the convening
of the United Nations Coníerence on the Exploration
and Peaceful U ses of Outer Space,
Noting that the Conference was convened at Vienna
from 14 to 27 August 1968,
N oting further that the discussions at the Conference
have indicated that the exploration and use of oÚter
space could bring immediate practica! benefi.ts to al!
countries regardless of the degree of their economic
and scientific development,
Reaffirming its belief that it is in the interest oí all
countries, and oí the developing countries in particular,
that knowledge and understanding of the achievements
of space science and technology should be more widely
disseminated and that international co-operation in the
9

General Assembly-Twenty-third Session

to arrange panel meetings, fellowships, surveys and
technical assistance ;1
5. Further welcomes the decision of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space to examine the
proposal made by Sierra Leone that arrangements
should be made for the use of expert services through
a United Nations centre for information and consultation in the field of practica! application of space technology ;2
6. Urges all Member States, in carrying out their
national programmes, to avail themselves to the fullest
extent possible of the information contained in the
papers presented and the discussions held at the Conference;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the
attention of all Member States, in particular the developing countries, the information contained in the papers
presented and the discussions held at the Conference;
8. E.rpresses its appreciation of the participation in
and contribution to the work of the Conference by the
International Labour Organisation, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, the World Health Organization, the International
Civil Aviation Organization, the International Telecommunication Union, the World Meteorological Organization, the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative
Organization, the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the Committee on Space Research of the International Council of Scientific Unions and invites those organizations to consider the work of the Conference and
to take the necessary follow-up steps to ensure the future
progress of the work in their respective areas of competence;
9. Requests the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space to report to the General Assembly at its
twenty-fourth session on the steps taken pursuant to
the present resolution.
1750th plenary meeting,
20 December 1968.

B
The General Assembly,
RecaJling its resolutions 2260 (XXII) of 3 November 1967 and 2345 (XXII) of 19 December
1967.
Having considered the report of the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space,3
W elcoming the entry into force on 3 December
1968 of the Agreement on the Rescue of Astronauts,
the Return of Astronauts and the Return of Objects
Launched into Outer Space,4
Reaffirming the common interest of mankind in
furthering the exploration and use of outer space for
peaceful purposes,
Believing that the benefits of space exploration 'can
be extended to States at ali stages of economic and
scientific clevelopment if Member Sta tes· conduct
their space programmes in a manner designed to
promote the maximum international co-operation and
widest possible exchange of information in this field,
1 See Official Rccords of the General Assembly, Twentythird Sessio11, agenda item 24, document A/7285, para. 22
2 I bid., para. 23.
a !bid., document A/7285.
4 General Assembly resolution 2345

(XXII), annex.

Rccogní::ing the importance of international cooperntion in developing the rule of law in this new
area of human endeav-our,
l. Endorses the recommendations and decisions 5
contained in the report of the Committee on the
Peaceful U ses of O uter Space;
2. Requests the Committee 011 the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space:
(a) To complete urgently the preparation of a draft
agreement 011 liability for damage caused by the
Jaunching of objects into outer space and to submit it
to the General Assembly at its twenty-fourth session;
( b) To continue to study questions relative to the
definition of outer space and the utilization of outer
space and celestial bodies, including various implications of space communications, as well as those comments which may be brought to the attention of the
Committee by specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency as a result of their
examination of problems that have arisen or that may
arise from the use of outer space in the fields within
their competence;
3. Urges those countries which have not yet become parties to the Treaty on Principles Governing
the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use
of Outer Space, including the Moon and Other
Celestial Bodies,6 and the Agreement on the Rescue
of Astronauts, the Return of Astronauts and the
Return of Objects Launched into Outer Space, to
give early consideration to ratifying or acceding to
those agreements so that they may have the broadest
possible effect ;
4. Reaffinn.s its belief, as expressed in resolution
1721 D (XVI) of 20 December 1961, that communication by means of satellites should be available to the
nations of the world as soon as practicable on a global
and non-discriminatory basis, and recommends that
States parties to negotiations regarding international
arrangements in the field of satellite communication
shou\d constantly bear this principie in mind so that
its ultima te realization may not be impaired;
5. Approves the establishment by the Committee on
the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space of a working group
to study and report on the technical feasibility of communication by direct broadcast from satellites and the
current and foreseeable developments in this field, including comparative user costs and other economic considerations, as well as the implications of such developments in the social, cultural, legal and other areas, and
expresses the hope that interested States Members of
the United Nations and members of the specialized
agencies will contribute comments and working 1;apers
to the working group for its information and gmdance
in the performance of its task ;
6. W elcomes the decision of the Committee on the
Peaceful U ses of Outer Space to take up at its next
session serious consideration of suggestions and views
regarding education and training in the field of exploration and peaceful uses of outer space that were expressecl in the General Assemhly and in the Committee,
as requested by the Assembly in paragraph 11 of
resol11tion 2260 (XXII);
7. Áf'Proves the continuing sponsorship by the
United Nations of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket
Launcbing Station ancl recommends that Member States
ó See Official Records of the General Assemb/y, Twentythird Session, agenda item 24, document A/7285, paras. 11-38.
6 General Assembly resolution 2222 (XXI), annex,

11

Re•olutions adopted on the reporta of the First Committee

should give consideration to the use of these facilities
for appropriate space research activities;
8. Endorses the recommendation of the Committee
on the Peaceful Uses of Outer Space that. upon notification of the United Nations hy the Government of
Argentina that the Mar Chiquita station near l\far del
Plata is operative, the Secretarv-General, in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee, should
appoint a small group of scientists, drawn from States
which are members of the Committee and are familiar
with space research and facilities, to visit the station in
Argentina and report to the Committee on its eligibility
for United Nations sponsorship, in accordance with the
basic principies endorsed by the General Assembly in
its resolution 1802 (XVII) of 14 Decemher 1962;
9. W elcomes the efforts of a number of Member
States to keep the Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
Outer Space fully informed of their activities and
invites other :Member States to do so :
10. Notes with appreciation that, in accordance with
General Assembly resolution 1721 B (XVI) of 20
December 1961, the Secretary-General continues to
maintain a public registry of objects launched into
orbit or beyond on the basis of information furnished
by Member States;
11. Requests the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency to examine the particular problems which arise or which may arise from
the use of outer space in the fields within their competence and which should in their opinion be brought
to the attention of the Committee on the Peaceful Uses
of Outer Space, and to report thereon to the Committee
for its consideration, as indicated in paragraph 2 ( b)
of the present resolution;
12. Invites the specialized agencies concerned and
the lnternational Atomic Energy Agency to furnish the
Committee on the Peaceful U ses of Outer Space with
progress reports on their work in the field of the
peaceful uses of outer space ;
13. ReqW?sts the Committee on the Peaceful U ses
of Outer Space to continue its work as set out in the
present resolution and in previous General Assembly
resolutions, and to report to the Assembly at its twentyfourth session.
1750th plenary meetinr,,
20 December 1968.

2454 (XXID), Que1tion of general and complete
dlsarmament
A

The General Assembly,
Reaffirming the recommendations cont:iined in its
resolutjon 2162 B (XXI) of 5 December 1966 calling
for stnct observance by ali States of the principies and
objectives of the Protocol for the Prohibition of the
Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisunous or Other
Qases, and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare,
stg?ed at Geneva on 17 June 1925, 7 condemning ali
act1ons contrary to those objectives and inviting all
States to accede to that Protocol,
Considering that the possibility of the use of chemical
and bacteriological weapons constitutes a serious threat
to mankind,
1 League

No. 2138.

of Nations, Treaty Series, vol. XCIV (1929),

Belie·ving that the people of the world should be
made aware of the consequences of the use of chemical
and bacteriological weapons,
H aving considered the report of the Conference of
the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarma111ent which
recommended that the Secretary-General shoul<l appoint
a group of experts to study the effects of the possible
use of such weapons, 8
:V oting the interest in a report on nrious aspects
º! th~ problem of cbemical, bacteriological and other
b10log1cal weapons which has been expressed bv many
Goyernments and the. welcome given to the recÓmmen<lat10n of the Conference of the Eighteen-N ation Committee on Disarmament by the Secretary-General in
the introduction to his annual report on the work
of the Organization submitted to the General .\ssembly
at its twenty-third session, 9
Believing that such a study would provide a valuable
contribution to the consideration by the Conierence
of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Disarmament of
the problems connected with chemical and hacteriological weapons,
Recalling the value of the report of the SecretaryGeneral on the effects of the possible use of nuclear
weapons, 10
l. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a con~ise report in accordance with the proposal contained
111 paragraph 32 of the introduction to his annual report
on the work of the Organization submitted to the
General Assembly at its twenty-thir<l session and in
accordance with the recommendation of the Conference
of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on Di,armament
contained in paragraph 26 of its report ;
2. Recommends that the report should be based on
accessible material aná prepared with the assistance of
qualified consultant experts appointed by the SecretaryGeneral, taking into account the views expressed and
the suggestions made during the discussion of this
item at the twenty-third session of the General Assembly;
3. Calls upon Governments, national and inte.rnational sci~ntific institutions and organizations to cooperate w1th the Secretary-General in the preparation
of the report ;
4. Requests that the report be transmitted to the
CC?nference of the Eighteen-Nation Committee on
Dtsarmament, the Security Council and the General
Assembly at an early date, if possible by 1 July 1969,
and to the Governments of Member States in time to
permit its consideration at the twenty-fourth session
of the General Assembly ;
5. Recommends that Governments sbould give the
report wide distribution in their respecti\'e languages,
through various media of communication, so as to
acquaint public opinion with its contents;
6. Reiterates its cal! for strict observance by all
States of the principies and objectives of the Protocol
for_ the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Po1sonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological
8 See Official Records of the Disarmanwnt Commission Supplement for 1967 and 1968, documcnt DC/231, para. 26.'
9 See Official Records of the General Asstmblv Twtntythird Session, S14pp/ement No. lA (A/7201/ Add.
'para. 32.
IO Effects of the Possible Use of Nuclear Weapons and lht
Security aná Econ~c lmplications for States of tht Acq,,isition and Further Devtlopnunt of Thue WeapoJ1s (United
Nations publication, Sales No.: E.68.IX.l).

1);
