38

General Assembly-Twenty-seventh Session

the central responsibilities of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization for co-ordinating
action in the field of industry, as entrusted to it by
the General Assembly;
( c) Requests for Special Industrial Services project
approvals will be forwarded simultaneously by the
resident representatives of the United Nations Development Programme to the headquarters of the Programme
and to the headquarters of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization;
(d) Most projects, including plans for their implementation and level of financing, will be approved
jointly by the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the Executive Director of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization; in the remaining small number of cases, especially
when another agency is proposed as an executing
agency, the system of joint approval of the Special
Industrial Services projects will be followed with appropriate flexibility by agreement between the Administrator
and the Executive Director;
( e) The executing agency will be authorized to
commence project operations upon the issuance of
financial authorization by the Administrator;
(f) The programme of Special Industrial Services
will be financed on a continuing basis from the resources
of the United Nations Development Programme; the
level of maximum annual expenditures will be fixed
from time to time by the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme, taking into
account current programme requirements as well as
desirable growth in the light of demonstrated needs;
(g) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will report regularly to thdr respective governing bodies
on the activities carried out under the programme;
(h) The Administrator and the Executive Director
will jointly establish detailed working arrangements and
procedures designed to give effect to the principles
herein established;
6. Welcomes the system of consultation machinery
and periodic meetings between the Administrator of
the United Nations Development Programme and the
Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization referred to in paragraphs 20
to 24 of the report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Cooperation between the United Nations Development
Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization;16
1. Invites the Industrial Development Board and
the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme to take the necessary measures on the
basis of the progress reports and consultations' by the
Administrator and the Executive Director, as provided
in paragraph 22 of the ,report of the Ad Hoe Committee on Co-operation between the United Nations
Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, to ensure the most
harmonious and effective co-operation in their common
objectives of assisting the developing countries in their
industrialization;
8. Stresses the need to strengthen the links of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
with the developing countries through the programme
of industrial field advisers, whose increasing importance
for the development of operational programmes has
been fully recognized, particularly in connexion with
16 A/8646.

the formulation and implementation of the long-term
country programmes and the development of special
measures of assistance to the least developed among
the developing countries, as envisaged in Indust,rial
Development Board resolution 31 (VI) of 2 June
1972;17
9. Urges the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to provide at its next
session additional financing necessary to increase the
number of industrial field advisers of the United Nations
Industrial Development Organization serving the developing countries, in order to achieve in 1973 the
level envisaged by the Goveming Council at its
thirteenth session. 18
2106th plenary meeting
11 December 1972

2969 (XXVII). Reports of the Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme

The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development Programme on its thirteenth 19 and fourtccnth 20
sessions.
2109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2970 (XXVII).

United Nations Volunteers
programme

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 2659 (XXV) of 7 December
1970, by which it established the United Nations
Volunteers programme within the United Nations
system, and its resolution 2810 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Expressing its satisfaction with the efforts directed
towards the implementation of its resolution 2659
(XXV),

Taking note of the decision adopted by the Economic
and Social Council at its fifty-third session, 21
Noting with appreciation the statement of the Coordinator of the United Nations Volunteers programme,22
Convinced that the United Nations Volunteers programme has the potential to render valuable service
to the d~velopment needs of the developing countries,
and particularly of the least developed among them,
Reaffirming that the involvement of youth in the
collective efforts of the United Nations system will
enhance international understanding and co-operation
between nations,
17 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentvseventh Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/8716), an~ex II. ·
18 See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2 (E/5092).
'
19 Ibid.
2 0 Ibid., Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1).
21 Ibid., Supplement No. 1 (E/5209), Other decisions, p. 12.
22 See Official Records of the General Assembly Twentyseventh Session, Second Committee, 1478th meeti~g paras
68-78.
'
.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

I. Takes note with appreciation of the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Volunteers
programme23 and expresses satisfaction with the progress
of the programme;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Administrator
of the United Nations Development Programme for
the measures being taken by him in providing volunteers
through United Nations-assisted projects to the least
developed countries free and without charge against
their indicative planning figures;
3. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Prngramme and the Governing Council of
the Programme to continue to provide the United
Nations Volunteers programme with every possible
assistance to ensure its progressive integration into
United Nations-assisted projects in order to make the
programme fully operational;
4. Requests the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme and the specialized agencies
and organizations of the United Nations concerned, as
well as the resident representatives of the United
Nations Development Programme, to promote with the
agreement of the countries concerned the use of United
Nations volunteers in United Nations-assisted projects
and to co-ordinate all voluntary activities within United
Nations-assisted projects with the Co-ordinator of the
United Nations Volunteers programme;
5. Requests Governments, international organizations and individuals to contribute in every way possible to the Special Voluntary Fund for the United
Nations Volunteers;
6. Requests the Co-ordinator of the United Nations
Volunteers programme to make renewed efforts for
recruitment of a larger proportion of volunteers from
developing countries;
7. Requests the Secretary-General and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to report, through the Governing Council of
the Programme and the Economic and Social Council,
to the General Assembly at its twenty-eighth session
on the progress made in implementing the provisions
of the present resolution.
1109th plenary meeting
14 December 1972
2971 (XXVII). Special measures related to the
particular needs of the land-locked developing countries

The General Assembly,
Recalling resolution 63 (III) of 19 May 1972,
adopted by the United Nations Conference on Trade
and Development at its third session, 24 concerning
special measures related to the particular needs of
the land-locked developing countries,
Recognizing that the position of the land-locked
developing countries, in particular owing to the high
costs of transportation, the poor development of their
infrastructure, inadequate and inconvenient transport,
storage and port facilities in most transit countries and
the unfavourable trend of transport tariffs and charges,
23 E/5146.
24 See Proceedings

of the United Nations Conference on
Trade and Development, Third Session, vol. I, Report and
Annexes (United Nations publication, Sales No.: E.73.11.D.4),
annex I.A.

39

is a factor seriously inhibiting the expansion of their
t•rade and economic development,
Recognizing the need for the international community and the international organizations concerned
to take co-ordinated action in order to secure more
rational treatment< for the land~lockced developing
countries,
Recognizing that investments in the field of transport
often affect investment decisions in other fields,
Conscious of the urgent need for national and international financial institutions to accord appropriate
attention to the special needs of the land-locked developing countries by extending adequate financial and
technical assistance to projects designed for the development or improvement and maintenance of the
transport and communications infrastructure needed
by these countries,
Recalling the relevant provisions of the International
Development Strategy for the Second United Nations
Development Decade 25 recommending financial and/ or
technical assistance for these countries, particularly
with respect to infrastructure of all kinds,
1. Invites the developed countries, the United
Nations Development Programme and other competent
international organizations to provide technical and/ or
financial assistance to the land-locked developing countries for feasibility studies and investment to assist them,
at their request, in their economic development, so as to
adapt it to their particular geographical situation, and
requests the Secretary-General to report periodically
to the General Assembly through the Economic and
Social Council;
2. Further invites the United Nations Development
Programme, in close collaboration with the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization, to undertake operational activities in the field of industrial
surveys to help these countries, at their request, on a
national, subregional or regional basis to evaluate
structure, operation, development possibilities and their
future needs in the field of industrial development,
with particular attention to the specific industries
outlined in paragraph 3 of resolution 63 (III) of the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development;
3. Invites the Economic and Social Council, in consultation with the appropriate organizations of the
United Nations system, to study the desirability and
feasibility, including possible ways and means, of establishing a special fund for defraying the additional
transport costs of land-locked developing countries and
to report its findings to the General Assembly at its
twenty-eighth session.
2109th plenary meetinf?
14 December 1972
2972 (XXVII).

Review of criteria for calculating

indicativP planning figures

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the Governing
Council of the United Nations Development Programme
on its fourteenth session, 26
Noting the report of the Governing Council's Working Group on Review of Criteria to be Followed in
~5 Resolution 2626
26 Official Records

(XXV).

of the Economic and Social Council,
Fifty-third Session, Supplement No. 2A (E/5185/Rev.1 ).
