United Nations

S/PV.5508

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5508th meeting
Tuesday, 8 August 2006, 3.30 p.m.
New York

President:

Nana Effah-Apenteng . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Ghana)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Ikouebe
Ms. Løj
Mr. De La Sablière
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Pereyra Plasencia
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr
Al-Thani
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Bolton

Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-45832 (E)

*0645832*

S/PV.5508

The meeting was called to order at 3.40 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President: In accordance with the
understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I invite His Highness Sheikh Abdullah
Bin Zayed Al-Nahyan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the United Arab Emirates, to participate in this
meeting, pursuant to rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I invite His
Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa, Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States, to participate in this meeting,
pursuant to rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
On behalf of the Council, I extend a warm
welcome to His Highness Sheikh Abdullah Bin Zayed
Al-Nahyan and His Excellency Mr. Amre Moussa.
I should like to inform the Council that I have
received letters from the representatives of Israel and
Lebanon, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Council is
meeting in accordance with the understanding reached
in its prior consultations.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Kofi Annan, at this meeting.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Sheikh
Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr Al-Thani, First Deputy
Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
State of Qatar.

2

Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to express my thanks and appreciation to
you, Mr. President, for convening this important
meeting. I also thank the Secretary-General and his
staff for the efforts being made to contain the current
crisis in the Middle East.
We are participating in this important Security
Council meeting in the hope that the Council will
carefully consider the delicate situation in Lebanon and
in the Middle East, whose extraordinary circumstances
and events are affecting peace, security and stability in
the region. The current crisis in sisterly Lebanon comes
at the expense of its people, its land, its infrastructure
and its political stability.
When the United Nations was established, it was
meant to save succeeding generations from the scourge
of war, as provided by the Charter of the Organization,
which entrusted the Security Council with the
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security. That is a major responsibility that
must be taken seriously, because it directly affects the
lives and the livelihoods of innocent people. Therefore,
it is most disheartening that the Security Council has
stood idly by, unable to stop the bloodbath that has
become the bitter daily lot of the defenceless Lebanese
people.
The draft resolution now before the Council
requires careful consideration that takes into account
the Arab position as expressed at the extraordinary
meeting of the Council of Ministers of the League of
Arab States held yesterday in Beirut. At that meeting,
the seven-point plan of the Prime Minister of Lebanon,
which has been endorsed by all Lebanese political
parties, was unequivocally adopted. The Council’s
consideration of this issue should also take into
account the socio-political structure of Lebanese
society as well as the interests, unity, stability and
territorial integrity of Lebanon. Our presence at today’s
meeting is an explicit expression of the collective Arab
position, which fully reflects Lebanon’s position on the
draft resolution.
Accordingly, we draw the Security Council’s
attention to the repercussions of adopting a nonenforceable resolution. That would further complicate
the situation on the ground and have grave
ramifications for Lebanon, for other Arab countries and
for all the countries of the region. How often has the
Council adopted resolutions to establish benchmarks

06-45832

S/PV.5508

and lay the groundwork for peace in the region —
resolutions that were not accepted by some parties and
therefore were never enforced or implemented? An
example can be found in the resolutions relevant to the
primary question — the Palestinian question — and the
repercussions of the conflict that has engulfed the
region, leading to instability and to this spiralling cycle
of violence.
It is a mistake to believe that pursuing a policy of
violence against Lebanon will put an end to this
situation and provide security for Israel or help to
restore the stability we all desire. To the contrary, what
is now occurring will sow the seeds of hatred and
extremism in the area and provide a pretext for those
who believe that the international community is taking
sides and lacks fairness with regard to this dispute.
We believe that establishing a just, lasting and
comprehensive peace is the only way to achieve
stability in the region. We have expressed that strategic
position again and again, and we remain committed to
it. However, peace has requirements and commitments
that all parties in the region must respect: everyone in
the region must live within safe and recognized
borders, and the Palestinian people must obtain their
legitimate rights, including the right to establish their
own independent State, living side by side in peace
with the State of Israel.
We continue to have faith in the Security
Council’s ability to shoulder its Charter responsibilities
to ensure the achievement of security, peace and
stability in the region. The stakes are high; so are the
hopes that the Council will adopt a decisive,
substantive and clear resolution that serves not only
Lebanon and the Arab community, but also a peace
built on justice and equity and that takes into account
the interests of all parties concerned without any
discrimination. That can be achieved through an
immediate comprehensive ceasefire, a withdrawal of
Israeli forces to behind the Blue Line, a strengthening
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
through an increase in the Force’s strength and material
support and an expansion of its mandate to enable it to
play the role entrusted to it, and support for the
Lebanese Government’s stated decision to extend its
authority throughout its territory by deploying the
Lebanese army.

06-45832

The President: I now give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Tarek Mitri, Minister of Culture and
Special Envoy of the Lebanese Council of Ministers.
Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): We have come to this body,
to the international community, asking for an
immediate and comprehensive ceasefire. Twenty-seven
days ago, we asked for an immediate ceasefire. More
than 900 lives ago, we asked for an immediate
ceasefire. More than 3,000 injured civilians ago, we
asked for an immediate ceasefire. We asked for a
ceasefire when the 1 million Lebanese who are now
sleeping on the floors of schools, public buildings and
welcoming homes were still sleeping in their own
homes — homes that, for many, no longer exist.
Eight days ago, in the shadow of the massacre of
Qana, we pleaded again for an immediate and
comprehensive ceasefire. We are meeting today in the
shadow of yet more massacres — “mistakes”, as Israel
calls crimes against civilians. Twenty-eight farm
workers were killed in Qaa, and yesterday, 38 civilians,
at last count, were killed in the bombing in Al Shiyah,
a residential area in Beirut.
I shall now quote from a report released by
Human Rights Watch:
“The pattern of attacks during the Israeli
offensive in Lebanon suggests that the failures
cannot be explained or dismissed as mere
accidents; the extent of the pattern and the
seriousness of the consequences indicate the
commission of war crimes.” (Human Rights
Watch, vol. 18 no. 3 E, August 2006, summary)
Today, we received the draft resolution with
acknowledgement of the efforts expended by many
members of the Council to come to an agreement. We
acknowledge their determination to end the violence,
and we appreciate the concern expressed by the
international community for the future of Lebanon,
supporting our democratic Government and its attempt
to provide a framework for peace and stability.
Regrettably, the draft resolution not only falls short of
meeting many of our legitimate requests but also may
not bring about the results that the international
community hopes it will achieve.
We requested an immediate ceasefire; what has
taken so much time is still not an immediate ceasefire.
It is neither immediate nor a ceasefire: the draft
resolution calls for a “cessation of hostilities”, laying

3

S/PV.5508

out some principles. Some of those principles Lebanon
affirms and embraces. But greater clarity is needed on
many other issues; that clarity is crucial for Lebanon.
The draft resolution calls for a cessation of
attacks by Hizbollah and for Israel to stop all
“offensive actions”. Members of the Council all know
that Israel has never conceded that its actions in
Lebanon have been anything but “defensive”. All the
wars launched by Israel against our country have been
claimed to be “self-defensive”. In this respect, the draft
resolution leaves Lebanon vulnerable to the whims of
Israel. How can this be viable? How can a resolution
provide for a cessation of hostilities and then in fact
carry the great risk of continued violence and
destruction?
Thus, for a cessation of hostilities to be viable,
Israel has to start withdrawing immediately from
Lebanese territory. This should not be postponed. The
Lebanese armed forces, with the assistance of United
Nations forces, should be the only ones to deploy
throughout Lebanon, including in the area between the
Blue Line and the Litani river. Our Government
reaffirms its immediate readiness to deploy an
Lebanese army force of 15,000 troops in the south as
the Israeli army withdraws behind the Blue Line, and it
expresses as well its readiness to request the assistance
of additional forces to enhance the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon, all on the basis of the sevenpoint plan that was unanimously approved by the
Lebanese Council of Ministers yesterday.
Moreover, a serious move forward in dealing with
the issue of Sheba’a farms is necessary for a durable
and long-term political settlement. To be frank, we
have had indications that the international community
is ready to move on this issue, but the draft text before
us does not sufficiently reflect such indications and
such readiness.
Our people need an explicit and firm assurance
from the international community that the integrity of
our borders — ground, sea and air — finally will be
respected by Israel. We do not need to list Israel’s track
record in refusing to comply with many Security
Council resolutions. Suffice it to refer to Israel’s 22year delay in complying with resolution 425 (1978).
Since its “withdrawal” in the year 2000, Israel has not
respected Lebanese sovereignty. Frequently it has
ignored the Blue Line, in both Lebanese territory and
airspace, with impunity.

4

For its part, the Lebanese Government reaffirms
its long-standing and consistent respect for
international resolutions, and also reaffirms its
determination
to
preserve
its
independence,
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We have laid
before the Council what we think are the necessary
prerequisites that will empower our Government to
preserve our national unity as a people, to defend our
right to live in peace and to rebuild our devastated
country. To achieve those priority goals we need the
sustained support and solidarity of the Security
Council.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Gillerman (Israel): For the past four weeks,
the peoples of Israel and Lebanon have been caught up
in a brutal and tragic conflict. It has caused unbearable
loss and suffering on both sides. It is time to bring this
conflict to an end.
But speeches and resolutions do not themselves
end conflicts. Neither do good intentions. Conflicts are
ended by actions, not by words. They are ended when
those who sparked the conflict and those who seek to
continue to threaten the region are confronted and
overcome. The critical test that the Security Council
faces is not whether it can adopt a resolution. The
question is whether the Council and the international
community can adopt a course of action, a blueprint for
change, which will end the threat that Hizbollah and its
sponsors pose to the peoples of Israel and Lebanon and
to the region as a whole.
That is the test, and both the forces of terror and
the forces of moderation in the Middle East are looking
to the Council to see if it is up to that challenge.
Neither the people of Israel nor the people of
Lebanon have any wish to be in this conflict. There is
no quarrel between us. Six years ago, Israel withdrew
its forces from every inch of Lebanese territory, as the
Council has emphatically confirmed.
It could not be clearer: the issue in this crisis is
not territory, but terror. During the past six years,
Hizbollah terrorists, funded, trained, armed and
directed by Iran and Syria, have dug their roots deep
into Lebanese soil and have spread their poisonous
branches throughout its towns and villages. The evil
fruit of this growth has been over 13,000 deadly
missiles murderously directed at the people of Israel.

06-45832

S/PV.5508

And over the past four weeks, Hizbollah has viciously
implemented its threats, launching those lethal missiles
directly and indiscriminately at the towns of Haifa and
Afula, Nahariya and Hadera, Kiryat Shemona and Kfar
Giladi, Carmiel, Metulla and Akko, and the holy cities
of Nazareth and Tiberias, targeting men, women and
children, Jewish, Muslim and Christian alike.
No country in the whole world would, or should,
allow a terrorist organization to publicly threaten its
destruction and to develop a vast infrastructure of
terrorism unimpeded on its borders. No State
represented in this Organization would, or should, sit
passively while over 3,500 missiles are fired at its town
and villages deliberately targeting homes and hospitals,
at schools and kindergartens. No Government would,
or should, do less to protect its people than the
Government of Israel has done in the face of this
Hizbollah campaign of terror, and no people would, or
should, be satisfied unless their leaders did the same.
Israel, like any State, has done and will continue
to do whatever is necessary to protect the lives of its
citizens. It has the right and the duty to act in selfdefence, and it will spare no effort to bring its abducted
soldiers home.
In fulfilling this responsibility to protect its
citizens, Israel’s task is doubly complicated. It must
defend itself against an enemy that not only
deliberately targets civilians but that also hides among
them, concealing its weapons and rocket launchers at
the heart of civilian communities, as well as in
mosques and United Nations compounds. For
Hizbollah, civilians are not just a target, but also a
shield.
In this impossible situation, in which Hizbollah
openly flouts the fundamental humanitarian principle
of distinguishing combatants from civilians, Israel has
made strenuous efforts to defend itself in accordance
with the principles of international law, to direct its
attacks against military targets and to avoid
disproportionate damage to the civilians used as cover
by the terrorists. At the same time, even as the
terrorists’ missiles fly, Israel has worked to ensure that
the humanitarian needs of the population can be met,
enabling convoys carrying aid and supplies to reach
those who need them and facilitating evacuation of
foreign citizens and United Nations personnel.
Could there be a difference more striking or
profound than that between Israel and the terrorists it is

06-45832

confronting, between those who equip their residential
buildings with bomb shelters and those who fill them
with missiles, between those who drop leaflets
entreating civilians to leave the terrorist strongholds
and those who hide rocket launchers beneath
unknowing apartment dwellers, or between those who
mourn the death of every civilian, Lebanese or Israeli,
as a tragedy and a failure and those who see in it a
victory and a cause for celebration?
I believe that the people of Lebanon, through all
the pain and anguish of these past few weeks, have
seen through the callous disregard of Hizbollah, which
claims to fight their cause but places a weapon next to
a sleeping child. I believe that one courageous
Lebanese youngster was speaking for many when he
wrote in his Internet blog, “It is not only Israeli
soldiers that Hizbollah has taken hostage. It is us, the
people of Lebanon”. I believe it has never been clearer
that, for all its talk of bravery, Hizbollah has
demonstrated the lowest form of cowardice, cowering
behind the weakest members of society. Indeed, in
many cases, Hizbollah’s lethal missiles are fired on
timers, so that the terrorists can flee the launching site
while leaving helpless families behind to shield the
military target. And this the terrorists have learned well
from their sponsors: from Iran and Syria. Just as
Hizbollah chooses to hide behind others and fight from
within their homes, so do Iran and Syria demonstrate
cowardice and disdain, fighting their wars through
proxies, on Lebanese soil. Perhaps more than anything
else it is this disdain for the lives of those they claim to
be fighting for, this chain of cowardice, which unites
Iran and Syria, Hizbollah and Hamas: the quartet of
terror.
These past four weeks of violence have taken a
painful toll on the Lebanese and Israeli peoples. But
they have also created a new opportunity. After six
years of inaction that allowed Hizbollah, with the
backing of Syria and Iran, to develop a lethal capacity
to destabilize the region, a significant part of that
capability has been destroyed. Hizbollah bases have
been dismantled, missile launchers and stockpiles of
weapons have been removed, and the area of south
Lebanon has been substantially cleared of the
infrastructure of terrorism. As a result, for the first time
in six years, there is a possibility that Lebanon and the
international community can begin anew and repair the
omissions that led to the current crisis.

5

S/PV.5508

But this requires determined and forceful action.
It requires a strong, robust and effective international
force which will ensure the dismantling and disarming
of all terrorist groups and the implementation of
resolution 1559 (2004) in all its parts. It also requires
enforceable and effective measures that will prevent
the continued supply and rearmament of weapons and
ammunition from the merchants of terror in Damascus
and Tehran, which continue on a daily basis, even as
we speak. And it requires the Government of Lebanon
to show the will and the courage to retake control of its
destiny, to confront the terrorists that have wreaked
havoc on its society and to meet the basic obligations
placed by international law and by the Council on
Lebanon to end the use of its territory as a base to
threaten the territory of others. These are fundamental
and unconditional obligations expected of any
Government, and they are not dependent on its assent.
These are practical measures needed to lead us
out of this crisis. Israel is ready to cease hostilities and
to withdraw its forces if these effective measures come
in its place, so that the terrorist threat on its citizens is
finally brought to an end. We want a ceasefire, but a
ceasefire that sows the seeds of future peace, not of
future conflict.
The test of any resolution or proposal must be
whether it will effectively bring about those practical
changes on the ground. Let us not forget that a
resolution is not an end, but a means to achieving our
end: a new and sustainable situation in which the
peoples of Lebanon and Israel are freed from the threat
of terror and have the chance to live a normal life in
peace and prosperity.
I am sure that my Arab colleagues who have
spoken today, and who I believe are sincere in their
desire for peace and stability for the region, do not
want a resolution to create a vacuum that Hizbollah
will fill. I am sure that they do not want a return to the
status quo ante, in which the terrorists and their
sponsors can hold a region and the prospects for peace
hostage. And I am sure they do not want a resolution
that demonstrates impotence rather than action.
The terrorists are watching. If the Security
Council adopts the path of half-measures, concessions
and mere declarations, they will be emboldened, and
we will find ourselves back at this table a week, a
month or a year from now, facing a tragedy of similar,
or even greater, proportions. But if the Council adopts

6

a path of action and takes the measures necessary to
ensure that its own resolutions are implemented,
terrorists and their masters in our region and
throughout the world will know that they have come
face to face with the will and resolve of a united
international community. And, as a result, the forces of
peace and moderation in the Middle East will have won
a crucial battle for the future of our tortured region.
We ask only that the international community
stand by those forces of peace; that it understand that
by fighting against terrorism, we fight for peace; and
that it have the courage, the wisdom and the conviction
to ensure that the end of this conflict creates a new
pattern of behaviour — a reality in which the
moderates prevail and the extremists meet with the
justice and isolation they so clearly deserve.
I turn once again to my Lebanese colleague and,
through him, to the Lebanese people. There is no
dispute between us. The horrendous violence and
suffering of these past few weeks have been fuelled not
by any interest or agenda of either of our States. They
have been fuelled only by the cynical and genocidal
intent of extremist regimes that wish to destroy any
possible prospect that we might turn their culture of
hate into a culture of hope. We must change their
culture of hate into a culture of hope — a culture in
which Lebanese and Israeli children can go to school
rather than cower in bomb shelters. We must do so
today in order to bequeath to them the tomorrow they
deserve.
I believe that this culture of hope can and will
prevail. Children are not born wanting to be shahids or
murderers of the innocent. Ultimately, the innate
human desire to create a better life for ourselves and
those around us will prove stronger than the hatreds
that have manipulated and fuelled this conflict.
For the people of Lebanon, this is a critical
moment of decision — whether to cast their lot with
those who will work to promote peace and prosperity
or with those committed to undermining any chance of
such progress. The choice, quite simply, is between
those who build and those who destroy. For the sake of
our peoples, for the sake of our children, I beg them to
choose the builders.
The flags of our two States, which show the
cedars of Lebanon and the Star of David, remind us
that the common history of our peoples is one of
building together. The biblical Book of Kings recounts

06-45832

S/PV.5508

that King Hiram of Tyre, in Lebanon, sent cedar trees
and expert craftsmen to King Solomon, son of David,
to join him in building the holy temple in the city of
peace, Jerusalem. Our people have a long and glorious
history of building together. Let us find the courage to
rise from the ashes of war and the ruins of conflict, and
to build together once again.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Sheikh Hamad bin Jassem bin Jabr Al-Thani, First
Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the State of Qatar, to make a further
statement.
Sheikh Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): I
apologize for seeking the floor again.
I am happy to hear the representative of Israel
express the wish for a ceasefire and speak so positively
of the Lebanese people. Whether or not we agree with
respect to the recent aggression, what has happened is
the result of the violations committed by Israel against
Lebanon before Hizbollah existed. Those include the
repeated occupation and devastation of Lebanon.
Frankly, I am not defending any party, and what I
know about Hizbollah I have learned through the
media. We all know that this tragedy could have been
averted by the granting of legitimate rights through the
resolutions of the Security Council and agreements
reached in Madrid and Oslo. Many factors have
accumulated in favour of giving terrorists the
opportunity to pursue acts that threaten international
peace and security, precisely because we have been
unable to ensure the implementation of Security
Council resolutions, particularly on the issue of
Palestine.
Many efforts have been made and many
international peace conferences convened. Who is
impeding peace today? Who is delaying the granting of
rights today? All such factors are enflaming the region
and encouraging the establishment of a society rife
with unbridled terrorism, regardless of the legitimacy
or lack thereof of its cause. We do want a cessation of
hostilities and a ceasefire, but we want it to be just and
established by a resolution of this Council, and not
imposed exclusively from an Israeli perspective.
If we adopt resolutions without taking the reality
of Lebanon fully into account, we will face a civil war
there. Instead of helping Lebanon, as the representative
of Israel has claimed to wish to do, we will destroy it.

06-45832

Many wars have raged there. My Lebanese colleague
knows full well what he wants and what can be
implemented on the ground. Let us do something to
maintain peace and security in the region. Let us focus
on who has implemented and who has failed to
implement the Council’s resolutions. Who is strictly
subject to the resolutions of international legitimacy
and who is not? Who has helped to create the
phenomena of terrorism and jihad, cited by the
representative of Israel, in the Arab world? The
jihadists have seen weak Governments fail to obtain
peace with Israel.
I speak on the basis of my faith in peace and our
sincere wish to coexist in peace with Israel in the Arab
region, but not in the way Israel wants. It must be on
the basis of the restoration of the legitimate rights of
the Palestinian people and adherence to the resolutions
of international legitimacy.
The President: I shall now give the floor to
Mr. Tarek Mitri, Minister of Culture and Special Envoy
of the Lebanese Council of Ministers, to make a further
statement.
Mr. Mitri (Lebanon): It pains me to hear the
reference to Tyre cited from the Bible. Tyre is now a
city of desolation. Tyre has been bombarded and
pounded almost uninterruptedly for the past 10 days or
so. King Hiram of Tyre sent cedar trees to build, and
the Israelis are destroying Tyre today. It pains me to
hear the reference to Tyre at this point in time.
The “campaign against terror”, as the Israelis like
to call their all-out war against Lebanon, has been
perceived, felt and lived by the Lebanese as horror —
nothing but horror. In Israel’s wanting to destroy the
infrastructure of terrorism, as we heard, it is the
infrastructure of Lebanon that is destroyed.
All in this body know that, in international law,
there are two principles regarding civilians: the
principle of distinction and the principle of
proportionality. I am afraid that those two principles
have been systematically violated since 12 July. Be that
as it may, I will end with these few words.
I am here — we are all here — to find a way out.
Yesterday’s proposal by our Government is a viable
option and should be looked at as a viable option. It
allows for a true and effective cessation of hostilities.
It will lead to a durable ceasefire. It opens the way
forward: it opens the way forward towards a more

7

S/PV.5508

durable solution. I hope that the opportunity that this
option offers is not missed.

that Hizbollah has taken Lebanon, including Tyre,
hostage.

The President: I now wish to give the floor to
the representative of Israel to make a further statement.

It is actually the Ambassador of Lebanon, who is
sitting behind Mr. Mitri, who said on United States
television that in Lebanon you cannot distinguish
between the Lebanese and Hizbollah. In his words,
Hizbollah is everywhere in Lebanon. Hizbollah has
infiltrated every fibre of Lebanon and, in his words,
become part of Lebanese society. To address this
painful problem, including the pain of Tyre, without
mentioning Hizbollah borders on — I will not use the
word that I wanted to use.

Mr. Gillerman (Israel): I would like to reply to
Mr. Mitri’s, I believe, genuinely expressed pain about
Tyre. We share that pain; we share that pain very much.
We grieve for the destruction of Tyre. But I listened
very, very carefully to the statement made by the
Lebanese representative, and there is one word which
was curiously missing from that statement. That word
is “Hizbollah”. We did not hear that word once, as if
Tyre were just a quiet peaceful town and not a hub of
terrorism from which rockets and missiles have been
fired at Haifa and other Israeli cities — as if there were
no Hizbollah, as if this all came out of nowhere. I think
that there should be at least some mention of the true
root cause of this horrible conflict, which is the fact

8

The President: There are no further speakers on
my list. The Security Council has thus concluded the
present stage of its consideration of the item on its
agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.25 p.m.

06-45832
