XII
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE JOINT SECOND AND
THIRD COMMITTEE
CONTENTS

Page

531 (VI). Relations with the World Meteorological Organization (20 December
1951) (item 57) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
532 (VT). Organization and operation of the Economic and Social Council and
its Commissions (4 February 1952) (item 11) .. .. .. .. . . . . .. .. . .. .. . . . . . .

29
29

tries as a basis for the activities of non-governmental
organizations working for the improvement of the
status of women,
Considering tJ:iat the task of the Commission is not
yet completed since the principle of equal rights for
men and women has not yet achieved universal recognition, and that in many countries women have not yet
been granted equal rights with men,
Considering that the Commission is at present engaged in important studies and has important commitments in carrying out its tasks,
Considering that to enable it to pursue these tas_ks
without undue delay it is important that the Commission should continue to hold yearly sessions,
Resolves to request the Economic and Social Council
to reconsider its resolution 414 (XIII), section B, I,
(g), of 18, 19 and 20 September 1951 with a view to
continuing to convene the Commission on the Status
of Women for one session every year.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 February 1952.

531 (VI). Relations with the World Meteorological Organization

The General Assembly,
Having considered resolution 403 A (XIII) adopted
by the Economic and Social Council on 22 August 1951
and, the Agreement 1 entered into between the Council
and the World Meteorological Organization,
Approves this Agreement.
356th plenary meeting,
20 December 1951.
532 (VI). Organization and operation of the
Economic and Social Council and its Commissions
A
COMMISSION ON THE STATUS OF WOMEN

The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights affirm
the principle of equal rights of men and women, and
aim to promote respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to sex,
Considering that the terms of reference of the Commission on the Status of Women, as defined by the
Economic and Social Council at its second session
(resolution 11 (II) of 21 June 1946) are "to prepare
recommendations and reports to the Economic and
Social Council on promoting women's rights in political,
economic, social and educational fields" and to "make
recommendations to the Council on urgent problems
requiring immediate attention in the field of women's
rights",
Considering that during the past five years the Commission on the Status of Women held five sessions and
that the value of its work has been proved by the fact
that the Economic and Social Council has adopted
numerous recommendations made to it by the Commission,
Considering that the recommendations of the Commission since its creation have served in many coun-

B
SUB-COMMISSION ON THE PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION AND THE PROTECTION OF MINORITIES

The General Assembly,
Noting that at its thirteenth session the Economic
and Social Council decided to discontinue the SubCommission on the Prevention of Discrimination and
the Protection of Minorities until 31 December 1954
(resolution 414 (XII), section B, I, ( d)).
Recalling that the functions of the Sub-Commission
are:
(a) To undertake studies, with particular reference
to the principles of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and to submit recommendations to the
Commission on Human Rights relating to the prevention of discrimination of any kind incompatible with
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and to the
protection of racial, national, religious or linguistic
minorities, and
( b) To discharge any other task which might be assigned to it by the Economic and Social Cn11'.1cil or the
Commission on Human Rights,

' See annex to Economic and Social Council resolution 403
B (XIII).

29

30

General AHembly-Six»t Se111ion

Noting that the General Assembly (resolution 217
C (III) of 10 December 1948), the Economic and ~ocial Council (resolution 191 (VIII) of 9 February
1949) and the Commission on Human Rights (resolution C) 2 had asked the Sub-Commission to make a thorough study of the problem of minorities, in order t~at
the United Nations might be able to take effective
measures for the protection of racial, national, religious
or linguistic minorities,
Mindful of the extreme complexity and delicacy of
these questions, as recognized by the General Assembly
in its resolution 217 C (III),
Emphasi,zing that the full application and implementation of the principle of non-discrimination recommended in the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights are matters of
• See Official Records of the Economic and Social Council,
Ninth Session, Supplement No. 10, chapter IV.

supreme importance, and shoul~ constit~te the primary
objective in the work of all Umted Nations organs and
institutions,
Considering that the prevention of discriminati~n and
the protection of minorities are two of the most important branches of the positive work undertaken by the
United Nations,
Invites the Economic and Social Council:
(a) To authorize the Sub-Commission on the Pr~vention of Discrimination and the Protection of Minorities to continue its work so that it may fulfil its
mission, and especially to convene a session in 1952;
( b) To take any practical steps that may be necessary for the continuance, within the framew_ork of t~e
United Nations, of the work on the prevention of <l1scrimination and the protection of minorities.
373rd plenary meeting,
4 Febrnary 1952.
