S/PV.7432

United Nations

asdf

Security Council

Provisional

Seventieth year

7432nd meeting

Thursday, 23 April 2015, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II/Mr. Judeh/
Mr. Hmoud/Mrs. Kawar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Jordan)

Members:

Angola. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Chile . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Lithuania .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Malaysia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
New Zealand. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Spain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Augusto
Mr. Cherif
Mr. Barros Melet
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Kanner
Ms. Murmokaitė
Mr. Zainuddin
Mr. McLay
Mrs. Ogwu
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Ybáñez
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Power
Mr. Ramírez Carreño

Agenda
Maintenance of international peace and security
The role of youth in countering violent extremism and promoting peace
Letter dated 27 March 2015 from the Permanent Representative of Jordan to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2015/231)

15-11474 (E)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

*1511474*

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Maintenance of international peace and security
The role of youth in countering violent
extremism and promoting peace
Letter dated 27 March 2015 from the
Permanent Representative of Jordan
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2015/231)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I wish to
welcome the Secretary-General, Ministers and the
other representatives present in the Security Council
Chamber. Their participation is an affirmation of the
importance of the subject matter under discussion.
In accordance with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional
rules of procedure, I invite the representatives of
Albania, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belgium,
Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Croatia, Egypt,
Gabon, Georgia, Germany, Guatemala, Hungary, India,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Italy, Japan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Maldives,
Malta, Montenegro, Morocco, the Netherlands,
Pakistan, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, the Republic of
Korea, the Sudan, Sweden, Switzerland, the Syrian
Arab Republic, Thailand, Turkey, Ukraine and the
United Arab Emirates to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this briefing: Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Téte António, Permanent Observer of the African
Union to the United Nations; His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; and His Excellency
Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser, United Nations High
Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations, to
participate in this meeting.
I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of the Holy See to
the United Nations to participate in this meeting, in
accordance with the provisional rules of procedure and
the previous practice in this regard.
2/80

23/04/2015

There being no objection, it is so decided.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2015/231, which contains the text of a letter
dated 27 March 2015 from the Permanent Representative
of Jordan to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General, transmitting a concept paper on the
item under consideration.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General.
The Secretary-General: I am honoured by the
presence of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II of Jordan, whose delegation
has so ably led the Security Council this month. His
Royal Highness is the youngest person ever to preside
over a meeting of the Council. That is perfect for
today’s discussion. He is not yet 21 years old, but he is
already a leader in the twenty-first century. I thank him
for presiding over this important meeting.
I am deeply grateful to Jordan for its many
contributions to the United Nations on peace,
development and human rights. I especially appreciate
the many Jordanians serving as my senior advisers,
including the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights, Mr. Zeid Ra’ad Al Hussein; the
Executive Secretary of the Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia, Ms. Rima Khalaf; the
Assistant Secretary-General at the United Nations
Development Programme, Ms. Sima Bahous; and my
Envoy on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi, who is with
me here today.
The role of youth lies at the heart of international
peace and security. We have to encourage young people
to take up the causes of peace, diversity and mutual
respect. Youth represent promise, not peril. While some
young people do commit heinous acts of violence, the
overwhelming majority yearn for peace, especially in
conflict situations.
Many of those who commit violence are victimized
by depraved adults who abuse youthful innocence.
Over and over, we see young people bearing the brunt
of violent extremism. We cannot forget the girls in
Chibok, Nigeria. We remember the students killed
by Al-Shabaab in Garissa, Kenya, as well as those
massacred by the Taliban in Peshawar, Pakistan.
Violent extremists deliberately target youth for
exercising their human rights. I am distressed by the
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

tragedy of young people who are conscripted, kidnapped
and killed. But I am also impressed by young people
who survive war and champion peace.
In Sierra Leone a few years ago, I cheered at a
football match of amputees who had lost limbs in the
conflict. They taught me the true meaning of recovery.
Earlier this year, the Security Council heard from a
young woman named Ilwad Elman (see S/PV.7374),
whose father was a peace activist in Somalia. When
he was assassinated, she had to move to Canada. She
could have enjoyed a comfortable life there — but
she went back to Somalia to lead a non-governmental
organization that helped victims of gender-based
violence.
I met a Syrian girl in a refugee camp who dreamed
of becoming a doctor so that she could help others. My
Envoy on Youth, Ahmad Alhendawi, says that young
people drive change but they are not in the driver’s
seat. I agree, and I call for giving them the licence
to steer our future. They have idealism, creativity
and unprecedented powers to network. They often
understand the complexities of war and the requirements
for peace.
Here is a message recently posted on Facebook by
the Dream Achievers Youth Organization in Kenya:
“Let all youth across East Africa turn away from
joining militia groups and rather focus on solidarity,
tolerance and intercultural understanding.”
There are countless youth groups that want to wage
peace, not war. They want to fight injustice, not people.
I applaud those heroes, and especially the heroines.
Gender equality is fundamental to combating violent
extremism.
Youth suffer on the front lines of war, but they are
rarely in the back rooms where peace talks are held. I
call for giving young people a seat at the negotiating
table. They pay a price for the fighting, and they deserve
to help structure the healing. That is essential to lasting
stability.
Youth organizations can help in peacebuilding if
we scale up their activities and invest in their ideas.
Education is critical. I join the call of United Nations
High Commissioner for Human Rights Zeid Al Huessein
for deploying “weapons of mass instruction” to foster a
culture of peace. That is more than a clever slogan, it is
an effective strategy.

S/PV.7432

Youth peace groups, especially in conflict-torn
areas, deserve our unstinting support. Even in peaceful
countries, youth policies are underfunded, and they
are not applied to security issues. Young people are
inheriting the world. With more resources, they can
be a force for peace, reconciliation and democratic
governance.
The United Nations is working to listen to youth
and to respond to their concerns. We have launched
the Guiding Principles on Young People’s Participation
in Peacebuilding. I thank the Peacebuilding Support
Office, the Alliance of Civilizations and the United
Nations agencies and partners that contributed. I am
also developing a comprehensive plan of action to
prevent violent extremism that will seek to engage and
empower youth, which I will submit it to the General
Assembly later this year.
Too often, the speeches in the Security Council
focus on problems in the search for solutions. Today, let
us see young people as the solution to our most vexing
problems. They yearn for a more just and peaceful
world, and, with our help, they can create it.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
Secretary-General for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Neumann.
Mr. Neumann: My name is Peter Neumann. I am
a professor of security studies Kings College, London,
and I am also Director of the International Centre for the
Study of Radicalization. I appreciate this opportunity
to talk about the causes of youth radicalization, and
I commend the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
holding today’s debate.
I have dedicated the past 17 years of my life to
studying and understanding the process and the causes
of radicalization. It is what I have been doing day in
day out. It is what has kept me awake many nights. I
was born in Germany, and I have always struggled to
understand how people from my own country, with the
history we have and the atrocities and wars that we have
caused, how young people from my country — a very
small number, but still, some of my compatriots — could
still be attracted to a neo-Nazi ideology.
When I was a student, I spent a year studying in
Belfast, Northern Ireland. It was 1997-1998, the last
year of the conflict. The conflict was winding down
and peace was coming. Yet the scars of conflict were
everywhere, and I was looking for the cause.

15-114743/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

When 911 happened, in this city, it seemed far away
to me. But, four years later, in 2005, terrorists struck
in London, where I was by then living and working as
an academic. The terrorists who attacked London were
not from the Middle East, they were not from a zone of
conflict, they were from England. They had bee been
born in England, they grew up and went to school there,
they had British passports and they spoke English with
a better accent than I do, even when I try. What made
them do it?
Let me say straightaway — and I am now speaking
as an academic — that there is not a single reason why
young people radicalize. There is not a single root
cause. Radicalization is a process. It is the process
whereby people, often mostly young people, turn to
extremism — sometimes violent extremism. It is a
process that can occur in any society, and as such it
does not have a specific cause. It is conflicts that have
causes.
If you make a list of every grievance expressed
in every conflict in which youth radicalization has
occurred, you end up with a very long list indeed. You
will end up with a list that includes, in essence, every
problem in the world. At that point it becomes difficult,
because — as I know and as the members of the
Security Council know better than everyone else — it
is neither possible nor realistic to expect politicians,
policymakers, diplomats or even the United Nations
to solve every problem in the world. Let me say it one
more time: youth radicalization as such does not have
one specific cause everywhere, but conflicts do.
Instead of talking about the causes of radicalization
in general, what I would like to talk about one specific
conflict, and one specific population within that
conflict. The people I want to talk about are foreign
terrorist fighters from my continent, the continent of
Europe. They are foreign fighters who have gone to
Syria and Iraq to join the organization that calls itself
Daesh. They are mostly young people from cities like
Berlin, Paris, Stockholm and London — citizens of
our countries, up to 4,000 of them who have joined a
totalitarian organization that chops off people’s heads
and burns them alive.
My colleagues and I at the International Centre
for the Study of Radicalisation and Political Violence
in London have been interested in these people for
over two years. We know many of them. We have
found 700 of them on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram
and Tumblr — social media platforms where they are
4/80

23/04/2015

posting news and updates, comments and pictures. We
have spoken to nearly 100 of them — some over the
course of several months — and we have met face to
face with many facilitators, transporters, sheikhs and,
of course, the fighters themselves on the ground in the
border towns from where they enter Syria.
We know these people. We know their stories,
and we know that there is not just one story. There are
many stories. Some of them are pious, but others not.
Many have troubled histories, but some would have
had decent prospects had they stayed in their European
home countries. Some were driven by the humanitarian
suffering of the Syrian people; others were seeking thrill
and adventure. And, of course, many were extremists to
begin with; they had been extremists long before the
conflict in Syria started. So when it comes to their basic
characteristics and, if you will, socioeconomic profiles,
we are dealing with an incredibly diverse group of
people — more diverse than any extremist population
that I have seen. It is so diverse that it now includes, for
the first time in this particular group, large numbers
of women: 10, 15 and, in some countries, 20 per cent
females. So what do they have in common?
There is an uncomfortable truth here for my
European compatriots. However different the foreign
fighters my colleagues and I have found and spoken
to may be; however different their profiles and
characteristics, what many, if not most of them, have in
common is that they do not feel that they have a stake
in their societies. They have often felt that, because of
who they are, how they look and where their parents
or grandparents came from, they still were not part of
us, they were not European, they did not belong, and
they would never succeed in Europe however hard they
tried. And if you do not feel you belong; if you do not
feel that you are part of your society, it becomes easier
to leave and it becomes easier to hate, and it becomes
easier to go against the very society whose passport you
hold and whose language you speak.
Let me make this very clear. Feeling excluded on
its own does not explain why you become a foreign
terrorist fighter, and it certainly does not justify it.
Nothing justifies terrorism. Just because you have been
discriminated against, just because you lack economic
opportunity, or just because people insult your religion
does not automatically, by osmosis, make you go to
Syria and chop people’s heads off. If it were that simple,
we would have not 4,000 Europeans down there, but
4 million And I thank God we do not.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

There are a lot of other factors involved in youth
radicalization. An ideology needs to come in, make
sense of the grievance and channel it into a particular
direction. Groups, social dynamics and charismatic
leaders play an important role too. But what I am trying
to say is that exclusion — that sense of not feeling
you belong or part of your own society — opens your
mind. It opens your mind to an ideology that says, “The
West is at war with you; Europe is at war with you;
your country is at war with you; you cannot live among
these people; you cannot be European and Muslim at
the same time.”
Because that is exactly what the recruiters are
saying; that is what Daesh videos on the Internet are
saying. And it resonates with some. It resonates not
because Daesh has magical powers of persuasion or
because the videos are produced so well. It resonates
because it makes sense of people’s state of mind. It
gives them the answer they were looking for. It turns
a grievance into a cause — one that gives meaning
and significance. It is weirdly empowering, as hard as
that may be for a lot of us her today to understand. A
sense of exclusion is not what causes it, but it is the
precondition for everything that follows.
How do we stop it? There are lots of things we
need to do. There is a lot of firefighting — stopping
people from travelling, arresting them, and sharing
information. Some of these measures are outlined in
resolution 2178 (2014), which I had the honour to work
on with Ambassador Power and her team. We need to
empower young people to make their own choices as
full members of their societies, but we also need to
empower parents, especially mothers. They are our
strongest allies, and they are often the last ones who
still have a degree of influence over their kids. We have
often seen how parents have managed to stop their kids
from going abroad. We need to create deradicalization
programmes that deliver tailored interventions, either
when people are on the brink of joining extremist
groups, before they travel to Syria, or when they come
back. We need to challenge extremist ideas on the
Internet, where extremists are incredibly effective and
we are not.
But firefighting is not enough. If we want to stop
this from happening again and again, we need to work
on creating more inclusive societies and more inclusive
identities. It is the toughest part of prevention; it is the
most costly and the most long-term. But we must do it,
because only if more people feel that they belong — that

S/PV.7432

they truly belong — to their European home countries,
however they look and whatever religion they practice,
only then will we succeed in reducing the pool of people
from which violent extremists recruit.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Neumann
for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Atran.
Mr. Atran: I thank the Security Council and the
Government of Jordan for letting me try to help.
I am an anthropologist. Anthropologists, as a group,
study the diversity of human cultures to understand
our commonalities and differences, and to use the
knowledge of what is common to help us bridge our
differences. My research aims to help reduce violence
between peoples by first trying to understand thoughts
and behaviours as different from my own as any I can
imagine, such as suicide bombings that kill masses
of people innocent of direct harm to others. The key,
as Margaret Mead taught me long ago when I worked
as her assistant at the American Museum of Natural
History here in New York, was to empathize with
people without always sympathizing; to participate in
their lives to the extent you feel is morally possible, and
then report.
I have spent much time observing, interviewing and
carrying out systematic studies among people on six
continents who are drawn to violent action for a group
and its cause, most recently with colleagues last month
in Kirkuk, Iraq, among young men who had killed for
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS), and with
young adults in the banlieus of Paris and the barrios
of Barcelona who seek to join it. With some insights
from social science research, I will try to outline a few
conditions that may help move youth from taking the
path of violent extremism.
But first, who are these young people? None of
the ISIS fighters we interviewed in Iraq had more
than primary school education; some had wives and
young children. When asked “What is Islam?” they
answered “my life”. They knew nothing of the Quran or
the Hadith, or of the early caliphs Omar and Othman,
but had learned of Islam from Al-Qaida and ISIS
propaganda, teaching that Muslims like them were
targeted for elimination unless they first eliminated the
impure. This is not an outlandish proposition in their
lived circumstances; they told of growing up after the
fall of Saddam Hussein in a hellish world of constant
guerrilla war, family deaths and dislocation, and of not

15-114745/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

being even able to go out of their homes or temporary
shelters for months on end.
In Europe and elsewhere in the Muslim diaspora,
the recruitment pattern is different. About three out
of every four people who join Al-Qaida or ISIS do so
through friends; most of the rest do so through family
or fellow travelers in search of a meaningful path in
life. It is rare that parents are ever even aware that
their children desire to join the movement. In diaspora
homes, Muslim parents are reluctant to talk about
the failings of foreign policy and ISIS, whereas their
children often want desperately to understand.
Most foreign volunteers and supporters fall within
the mid-ranges of what social scientists call “the normal
distribution” in terms of psychological attributes like
empathy, compassion, idealism and wanting mostly to
help people rather than to hurt them. They are mostly
young people in transitional stages in their lives:
students, immigrants between jobs or mates, having
left or about to leave their native family and looking
for a new family of friends and fellow travelers with
whom they can find significance in life. Most have had
no traditional religious education, and are often “born
again” into a socially tight, ideologically narrow but
world-spanning sense of religious mission. Indeed, it is
when those who do practice religious ritual are expelled
from the mosque — not in it — for expressing radical
political beliefs, that the move to violence is most likely.
Last summer, a poll by ICM Research revealed
that more than one in four French youth — of all
creeds — between the ages of 18 and 24 had a favourable
attitude towards ISIS. In Barcelona just this month, 5 of
11 captured ISIS sympathizers who planned to blow up
parts of the city were recent atheist or Christian converts.
The unholy alliance of narrow xenophobic nationalism
and militant jihad, which play off one another’s fears,
are beginning to destabilize the European middle class
much as fascism and communism did in the 1920s and
1930s, while inciting willingness to sacrifice among
both nationalist xenophobes and militant jihadis. By
contrast, our own research shows that even among
native Western youth, ideals of liberal democracy no
longer elicit willingness to make costly sacrifices for
their defence.
Europe has a birth rate of 1.4 per couple, which
means that without massive immigration it cannot
sustain a viable middle class, upon which every
successful democracy depends. Yet Europe is arguably

6/80

23/04/2015

further from effectively dealing with problems of
immigration than ever before. As one young woman
from the Paris banlieu of Clichy-sur-Bois told us, she,
like so many others she hung out with, felt neither
French nor Arab, and because she will always be looked
on suspiciously for the acts of others, she would choose
the caliphate to help create a homeland where Muslims
could pool their resources, be strong again and live in
dignity.
But the popular notion of a clash of civilizations
between Islam and the West is woefully misleading.
Violent extremism represents not the resurgence of
traditional cultures, but their collapse, as young people
unmoored from millennial traditions flail about in search
of a social identity that gives personal significance
and glory. That is the dark side of globalization. They
radicalize to find a firm identity in a flattened world:
where vertical lines of communication between the
generations are replaced by horizontal peer-to-peer
attachments that can span the globe. Young people
whose grandparents were Stone Age animists in
Sulawesi, far removed from the Arab world, told me
they dreamed of fighting in Iraq or Palestine in defense
of Islam.
Although typically viewed in military terms,
Al-Qaida, ISIS and related groups pose the greatest
threat as the world’s most dynamic countercultural
movement, one whose values run counter to the
nation-State system represented here in the United
Nations, and to its Universal Declaration of Human
Rights. It has drawn youth from many places into the
largest, most potent extraterritorial fighting force since
the Second World War. Just as it took more than a decade
for Al-Qaida to mature into a global menace, it may be
many years before we see the full effect of ISIS, even
if it is kicked out of its current territorial base. Unless
we understand those powerful cultural forces, we will
fail to address the threat. When, as now, the focus is on
military solutions and police interdiction, matters have
already gone way too far. If that focus remains, we lose
the coming generation.
What might therefore be done? Foremost,
Governments should continue their important work
on problems of development, and on immigration and
integration, with a goal of transforming the muchlamented youth bulge into a youth boom by unleashing
youth’s inherent energy and idealism. But let me
propose three conditions that I believe young people
need, with brief illustrations. Each country will have to

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

create and mobilize those conditions, suited to its own
circumstances.
The first condition is to offer youth something that
makes them dream of a life of significance through
struggle and sacrifice in comradeship. That is what
ISIS offers. The Idarat Al-Tawahhush manifesto — The
Management of Savagery — states,
“Fly to us youth from the regions we manage. For
the youth of the nation are closer to the innate nature
of human beings on account of their rebelliousness
within them. And the inert groups, they only try to
suppress this.”
When I hear yet another tired appeal to moderate
Islam, usually from much older folk, I ask, “Are you
kidding? Don’t any of you have teenage children?
When did ‘moderate’ anything have wide appeal for
youth yearning for adventure, glory and significance?”
Members of the Council should ask themselves,
“What dreams may come from most current Government
policies that offer little beyond promises of comfort and
security?” Young people will not choose to sacrifice
everything, including their lives — the totality of
their self-interests — just for material rewards. In
fact, research shows that offering material rewards or
punishments, carrots or sticks, may only push truly
devoted actors to greater extremes. Research also
shows that the greatest predictor of willingness to
sacrifice and join comrades in a sacred cause, one that
provides a sense of special destiny and the will to fight,
is what initially enables initially low-power insurgent
and revolutionary groups to resist and often prevail
against materially more powerful groups that depend
on material incentives, such as armies and police, which
in turn rely mainly on pay and promotion rather than a
heartfelt duty to defend the nation. Sacred values must
be fought with other sacred values, or by sundering the
social networks in which those values are embedded.
The second condition is to offer youth a positive
personal dream, with a concrete chance of realization.
The appeal of Al-Qaida and ISIS is not about jihadi
websites, which are mostly blather and bombast,
although they can be an initial attractor. It is about what
comes after. There are nearly 50,000 Twitter hashtags
supporting ISIS, with an average of 1,000 followers
each. They succeed by providing opportunities for
personal engagement, where people have an audience
with whom they can share and refine their grievances,
their hopes and their desires. In contrast, Government

S/PV.7432

digital outreach programmes typically provide generic
religious and ideological counter-narratives, seemingly
deaf to the personal circumstances of their audiences.
They cannot create the intimate social networks that
dreams need.
Moreover, counter-narrative messaging is mostly
negative: “So Daesh wants to build a future?” Well, is
beheading a future you want, or someone controlling
details of your diet and dress? Can anyone not know
that already? Does it really matter to those drawn to the
cause despite, or even because of such things? As one
teenage girl from a Chicago suburb retorted to United
States Federal Bureau of Investigation agents who
stopped her from flying to Syria, “Well, what about
the barrel bombings that kill thousands? Maybe the
beheading helps to stop that.” For some, strict obedience
provides freedom from uncertainty about what a good
person is to do. Besides, once a person is convinced of
the mission’s moral virtue, then spectacular violence is
not a turn off, but sublime and empowering, as Edmund
Burke noted about the French Revolution, which
introduced the modern notion of terror as an emergency
defence of radical political change.
Make no mistake: few if any of those who join
militant jihad, or xenophobic nationalisms for that
matter, are nihilists. Nihilism is an accusation levelled
by those who wishfully refuse, ostrich-style, to consider
the moral appeal, and hence the real danger, of such
movements. Being willing to die to kill others requires
a deep conviction of moral virtue. In Singapore last
week, some speaking for Western Governments argued
that the caliphate was mythology, covering traditional
power politics. Research with those drawn to the cause
show that this is a dangerous misconception. The
caliphate has re-emerged as a mobilizing cause in the
minds of many Muslims. As one imam in Barcelona
told us,
“I am against the violence of Al-Qaida and ISIS,
but they have put our predicament in Europe and
elsewhere on the map. Before, we were just ignored.
And the caliphate, we dream of it like the Jews
dreamed of Zion. Maybe it can be a federation,
like the European Union, of Muslim peoples. The
caliphate is here, in our hearts, even if we don’t
know what real form it will finally take.”
Without recognizing those passions, we risk
fanning them. Any serious engagement must be attuned
to individuals and their networks, not to mass marketing
of repetitive messages. Young people empathize with

15-114747/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

each other; they do not lecture at one another. From
Syria, a young woman messages another,
“I know how hard it is to leave behind the mother
and father you love, and not tell them until you are
here, that you will always love them but that you
were put on this Earth to do more than be with or
honour your parents. I know this will probably be
the hardest thing you may ever have to do, but let
me help you explain it to yourself and to them.”
We need that kind of engagement.
A third condition is to offer youth the chance to
create its own local initiatives. Social science research
shows that local initiatives, begun with small-scale
involvement, are better than national and large-scale
programmes in reducing violence. It does not matter
which Government agencies we want to help facilitate
this. Let youth engage youth in the search for meaningful
ways to make sense of the issues on their personal
agenda, whether that be about oppression and political
marginalization, lack of economic opportunity, the
trauma of exposure to violence, or problems of identity
and social exclusion. Most of all, we must support
personal engagement, through mutual support and
community-based mentors — because it is almost
always a particular personal circumstance, shared with
friends, that radical extremism probes for, draws out
and tries to universalize into moral outrage and violent
action.
Allow me to close with this consideration. At just
16, Gulalai Ismail and her sister Saba set up the Seeds of
Peace network with a group of school friends to change
the lives of young women in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa,
North-West Pakistan. They began by focusing on
women’s place in society, and as their membership
has grown, they are now training young activists to
become local peace-builders, challenging violent
extremism. They trained 25 young people in each of
the past two years to join together to promote tolerance,
non-violence and peace. The initiative is proving so
popular that last year they had over 150 applicants. The
50 trained young volunteers are now, in turn, reaching
out to people in their communities who are vulnerable
to radicalization. They hold study circles and one-onone meetings with those people to develop and promote
ideas for a peaceful future.
Still in its early stages, the programme will
reach almost 1,500 young people in the next three
years — building a movement of activists against

8/80

23/04/2015

religious and political extremism. The results are really
a lot more remarkable than that, but Gulalai Ismail will
not claim credit publicly. Imagine a global archipelago
of such peace-builders: if you can find concrete ways
to help and empower them, without trying too hard to
control them, they could well win the future.
In sum, what is most important is quality time and
the sustained follow-up of young people with young
people, who understand that motivational factors can
vary greatly with context and despite commonalities,
whether it be for a young father from Kirkuk, a teenage
girl from Paris, neighbourhood friends from Tetuan,
Morocco, or high-school soccer fans from Fredrikstad,
Norway — all seeking and yearning for ISIS. It takes
a dynamic movement, at once intimately personal and
global — involving not just entrepreneurial ideas, but
also physical activity, music and entertainment — to
counter the growing global counterculture of violent
extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank Mr. Atran
for his briefing.
I would like to express my deepest thanks and
appreciation to His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon for
his efforts to realize the goals of the United Nations.
It is an honour to be with other Council members
today while my country, the Hashemite Kingdom of
Jordan, assumes the presidency of the Security Council
for the second time during our current term. I am
particularly pleased to be attending this debate on youth
in conflict zones and the role of youth in peace-making.
The world is facing a formidable challenge, namely,
terrorism and extremism, which may be the greatest
challenge to world peace and security — with youth
being their prime victims.
Today, we are facing a scourge that threatens the
entire world. No country is immune from the threat
of terrorism, whose enemy is humanity, regardless of
religion, gender, age or nationality. The war on terror
concerns us all. In the past few decades, the world has
witnessed events and conflicts and their consequences
that have made an increasing number of young people
more susceptible to fall into the darkness of extremism
and the traps set by deceitful people. Young people
are the most susceptible to voluntary or involuntary
recruitment by military, terrorist and extremist groups.
Accordingly, urgent measures must be taken to put an
end to that bloodshed.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

More than half of the world’s population is below
the age of 30, the majority of whom live in developing
countries. Studies show that poverty, unemployment,
ignorance and weak familial ties create fertile ground
for extremist thought and dismal ideas. If we examine
the relevant data, we will find that youth are facing a
decisive challenge: across our globe, there are nearly
73 million jobless young men and women and more than
14 million young refugees and displaced persons. In
addition, the majority of the victims of armed conflicts
are young people.
While youth represent the most vulnerable group in
the present situation with its attending consequences,
they can also have the strongest impact on the present
and the future. That has been evident in the recent
events in my region — the Arab region. As a young
man who is part of that generation, I take part in
debates about the challenges facing my generation and
the need to empower youth. There is much talk about
youth being a marginalized segment of society. Allow
me to say that they are not a marginalized group, but
rather a targeted group. They are targeted for their
huge self-confidence and potential ability to change the
world. With that drive, they look for opportunities to
invest their potential, but when they face a dead-end,
their ambition is transformed into frustration, which
other groups use to fuel their own agendas. We have
to fill that vacuum that is being exploited by enemies
of humanity, by building on the potential of youth and
empowering them to achieve their ambitions. That
can be accomplished by equipping young people with
quality education, proper job opportunities and a
decent living.
We are in a race to invest in the hearts and minds
as well as the capabilities of youth. The ideologies of
darkness can reach where armies cannot, as modern
communications have provided all voices with an
opportunity to reach every ear willing to listen. Young
people comprise the largest group of Internet users,
and extremist groups spread their poisonous ideology
across social media platforms — luring victims into
their dark world under religious pretexts and promises
of heavenly rewards. To that end, they use appealing
high-tech videos that fascinate and mislead young
people by glorifying the crimes of terrorist as great
achievements. We have to stand up to that threat, which
takes advantage of our youth’s potential to create an
inhumane world. We have to direct our energies away
from answering the question “What should we do?”
toward the question of “How should we do it?” We must

S/PV.7432

empower young people to fight for their own future
by giving them the tools to address their generation
through electronic communication platforms. They
need to form intellectual networks and alliances that
can reach their peers and lead the youth to adopt
the values of co-existence, respect for diversity and
rejection of violence.
Allow me to declare the readiness of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan to host the first international
conference on the role of youth in building sustainable
peace, in partnership with the United Nations, in August.
The goal of the event is to enhance the capacity of young
people to build peace, and confront extremism and
terrorism. The youth of today need all of those gathered
around this table, who are the policymakers who can
impact world peace and security, the decision makers
who can partner with young people in peacebuilding
efforts. We must not allow them to become the targets
of violence and destruction.
The generation represented here is also in charge
of developing education, development and economic
policies. We have before us the largest generation of
young people in history, and the greatest opportunity
to build and empower communities where reason
is law and ethics are the constitution, where peace,
equality, respect, dialogue, coexistence and acceptance
of differences are all core values. Those are the
foundations of our common humanity.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I give the floor to the members of the Council.
I give the floor to the Minister for Cities, Youth and
Sports of France.
Mr. Kanner (France) (spoke in French): At a time
when France has probably just managed to escape
another deadly attack, this time targeting churches
and Christianity, I would like to extend my heartfelt
gratitude to the Jordanian presidency of the Security
Council for organizing this debate. I am convinced that
the subject of youth should receive greater focus in our
exchanges. I have no doubt that the Crown Prince of
Jordan shares that belief, as he has just expressed.
France is an old country, but its population is
young. We have the highest birthrate in Europe. Our
demographic is our strength. It is also our responsibility.
It is our responsibility to provide our young people with
prospects, to give meaning to their life and, perhaps

15-114749/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

even more importantly, to give meaning to life in
general. The ideology that threatens the world today is
a morbid one that seeks to repress our desires, condemn
our joy, and extinguish our vital energy.
The international community was struck by the
horror of the massacre in Garissa, in which 148 Kenyans
were killed for their beliefs. And let us not forget the
murder of Christians in the Middle East. Let us not
forget the plight of the 276 Nigerian highschool girls
kidnapped one year ago from Chibok by Boko Haram.
Extremists hate the otherness of women. Let us not
forget either the atrocities committed against children
and youth by Daesh in Iraq and Syria, or the martyrdom
of Syrian youth by the regime of Bashar Al-Assad.
Young people are on the side of life and, as such,
should be the best shield against obscurantism. It is
necessary to both work with young people and also to
protect them from the machinations of the extremists.
The latter are extremely active on social networks
and disseminate conspiracy theories that undermine
institutional authority. They feed on the helplessness of
the young. Girls and boys as young as 13 or 14 years
old have been recruited from a number of countries,
including my own. In France, we speak of several
hundred young people, perhaps more. That is very few,
but far too many. Even just one would be one too many.
Therefore, my mission is to show each young person
in France that the Republic remains valid; it is still our
future and our ideal. I must convince my young fellow
citizens that is in the Republic, and therefore in liberty,
equality and fraternity that they will find the best
conditions for their fulfilment and happiness.
The Jordanian initiative is right to remind us that
the struggle against extremism cannot be military
alone. It is a wider political and moral struggle in which
society as a whole has a role to play. That is why France,
after the terrible attacks in January, which both injured
and killed, has decided to launch a national campaign
for republican values. It is in that spirit that the Prime
Minister, Manuel Valls, just announced a major national
plan to combat racism and anti-Semitism with a special
emphasis on the youth.
Starting in school we wish, through specific
teachings, to focus on the concepts of citizenship and
secularism, the French model that strikes a balance
between fundamental freedoms, which allowed for
the peaceful exercise of freedom of all religions and
the conditions that enable us to live together since its
consecration 110 years ago this year. Secularism is not
10/80

23/04/2015

an opinion; it is the freedom to have one. It is essential
that every child understands the foundations of our
collective foundation, that which makes us a nation, and
beyond that, which signals our belonging to the same
human community. Young people must understand that
this is not just a matter of fact, but one of determination
and responsibility.
School is a central institution in France, but
other actors are mobilized with the same objective.
Associations that do the same job of providing
citizenship education in neighbourhoods where despair
is the greatest have seen a considerable increase in their
numbers. The State and associations are bringing this
republican discourse to the Internet. We are launching
a counteroffensive campaign against the arguments of
our opponents in order to prevent the most absurd and
dangerous theories from spreading.
On a large scale, we are developing mechanisms for
citizen engagement, such as civic service. For 6 to 12
months, young French people who are interested will
be compensated for accomplishing a mission of general
interest within an association or administration.
As such, 150,000 young people in France will be
involved by the end of 2016. We now wish to develop
this mechanism at the international level. The best
ambassadors of humanist values ​​among young people,
are the young people themselves. In that regard, I
welcome the remarkable work of UNICEF and its
national committees, in particular UNICEF France,
which, through its Youth Ambassador Programmes,
turns young people into veritable global citizens that
carry a message of solidarity and humanity.
Finally, let us not abandon those who have gone
astray or have made a mistake. Everyone is capable of
realizing their mistakes and to make sincere amends.
We would like to show radicalized youth who return
from combat zones their terrible mistake and offer them
the possibility of reinsertion into their home countries
in accordance with the values of those countries.
France is aware that its response cannot be confined
within its own borders; we are acting in concert with
our European partners. My country took the initiative
by, for example, convening a meeting of the Ministers
of Education of the 28 member States of the European
Union in Paris on 10 March. Measures need to be
adopted to improve coordination aimed at combating
terrorist propaganda and recruitment over the Internet
through collective pressure on providers, to harmonize
legislation with respect to the removal of online illegal

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

material and to adapt the international legislative
framework that governs the increasingly globalized
flow of information.
Along with our fight to combat violent extremism,
we want to bring to the United Nations the struggle to
restore hope to our youth, as the Organization is the
premiere venue of multilateralism. The anti-terrorist
strategy defined by the United Nations remains more
relevant than ever, and the World Programme of Action
for Youth will doubtless take on new momentum. Next
month will mark 20 years since that programme was
established — a good age at which to become involved.
It is crucial for that anniversary to be more than a mere
formality. It should rather be seen as an opportunity for
Member States to show youth around the world that we
believe in them.
Ms. Power (United States of America): I thank
His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein Bin
Abdullah II for joining the Council to preside over
today’s meeting. His presence here is yet another
testament to Jordan’s deep commitment to combating
violent extremism among youth and people of all ages.
On Monday, 20 April, six young Somali-American
men, aged 19 to 21, were charged in Minneapolis
with terrorism-related offenses. They had planned to
travel to Syria to join the Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant (ISIL). Five of the six were United States
citizens, and one was a permanent resident. The young
men had reportedly been inspired in part by another
young Somali-American, Abdi Noor, who left the same
city in May 2014 shortly after his twentieth birthday
and joined ISIL in Syria. They had also in part been
encouraged by one another, in what is known as peerto-peer recruitment, through regular meetings to plan
their trip and discuss their violent ideology. Their case
is just one of the many recent instances in which young
people have attempted to join ISIL or other terrorist
groups. In some instances, as with the Minneapolis
arrests, we have succeeded in stopping youth before
they could reach their destination. In other instances,
we have not, as happened in February, when three
British girls of ages 15 to 16 travelled to Turkey and
likely onwards to ISIL-controlled territory, where they
presumably remain.
ISIL is showing increased sophistication in
recruiting young people, particularly in virtual spaces.
The group disseminates some 90,000 tweets each day,
Its members and supporters routinely co-opt trendy
hashtags to disseminate their messages. ISIL even

S/PV.7432

reportedly developed a Twitter app last year that allows
Twitter subscribers to hand over control of their feed
to ISIL, allowing ISIL to tweet from the individual
subscriber’s account, thereby exponentially amplifying
the reach of its messages. In February, ISIL published
a polished 50-page online guide called the Hijrah to
the Islamic State, which instructs potential recruits
on how to make the journey to its territory, including
everything from finding safe houses in Turkey to what
kind of backpack to bring and how to answer questions
from immigration officials without arousing suspicion.
It is not just ISIL that is aggressively targeting
children and youth, but Al-Qaida, Boko Haram,
Al-Shabaab and other groups as well. There is a clear
consensus that we — and by we, I mean, of course, not
just the United States but all countries committed to
combating terrorist groups — must make countering
violent extremism a central part of our counter-terrorism
efforts. That is particularly true among children and
teens, whose youth makes them especially vulnerable
to recruitment. Yet even with increased attention to
the problem, the reality is that we are being outspent,
outflanked and out-innovated by terrorist groups intent
on recruiting new young members. We have to catch up,
for their welfare and our collective security. That is one
of the reasons why we look forward to the SecretaryGeneral‘s plan of action to counter violent extremism,
which will, we hope, galvanize the United Nations to
take a leading role in empowering and uniting Member
States to tackle this very grave problem.
That is also one of the main reasons that President
Barack Obama convened a White House summit to
counter violent extremism on 19 February. More than
60 Governments took part in the summit, including
most of the members of the Council, together with
civil-society representatives from over 50 countries
and private-sector leaders. As many members know,
we look forward to a leaders’ summit on the margins
of the General Assembly in September to evaluate the
progress that has been made and the challenges that
most definitely remain to implement the White House
agenda to combat violent extremism.
One of the participants in the White House summit
was a young Moroccan woman, Zineb Benalla. Zineb
works for the Arab Center for Scientific Research and
Humane Studies, a non-governmental organization
that, with support from the United States Agency
for International Development, has helped lead an
innovative effort to counter violent extremism in

15-1147411/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

northern Mali. As Council members know, terrorist
groups seized large swaths of the region in 2012 and
continue to carry out attacks and recruit young people.
Zineb’s project was focused on reaching vulnerable
youth studying in the region’s madrassas. Research
showed that madrassa instructors were teaching
only religious texts and focusing mainly on rote
memorization. Zineb’s programme aimed at broadening
the curriculum to foster more critical thinking and
reasoning skills, which help young people question,
and ultimately reject, the narrow ideologies of terrorist
groups. Zineb did not go directly to the schools,
knowing that she would be turned away. Instead, she
met repeatedly with imams and elders in Timbuktu
and Gao, gradually earning their trust over cups of tea.
When she eventually laid out the proposal to start book
clubs in the madrassas, they accepted. With the backing
of those imams and elders, students and teachers were
given e-readers and allowed to download books that
would previously have been considered haram, or
sinful, such as works of philosophy and novels. She
then organized workshops where she trained dozens
of educators in how to teach the new material. While
that is a narrow programme designed for a specific set
of circumstances, Zineb’s story nevertheless illustrates
several key lessons about how to build efforts to counter
violent extremism among young people.
First, education is of course essential to developing
the critical thinking skills that can empower youth
to challenge violent extremist ideologies. We have
seen similar efforts undertaken on a broader scale by
the Government of Morocco and others. Morocco is
working to replace teachers and imams who promote
violent extremist ideologies with ones who uphold the
values of respect and dignity and who preach more
moderate interpretations of Islam.
Secondly, the trust and support of local actors is
critically important. That includes not only Government
officials but religious and civil-society leaders and
even families. As the first and most important line
of defence in protecting youth, communities need the
tools to do their part. The Safe Spaces Initiative, a
guide created by the Muslim Public Affairs Council
to help communities implement a multi-tiered strategy
of prevention, intervention and the ejection of violent
extremist elements, is just one example of a resource
that informs communities about how to be more active
partners.

12/80

23/04/2015

Thirdly, as others here have stressed today, we
need to enlist youth themselves in leading this effort.
Research shows that young people are more likely to
listen to, and be influenced by, their peers. Yet too
often we approach youth as the passive recipients of
campaigns to counter violent extremism, rather than
as active participants in shaping their strategy and
spearheading their implementation.
We have seen how powerful youth-led initiatives
can be, including those that use satire. That was the
approach Karim Farok adopted. An amateur Egyptian
musician, Karim took an ISIL chant and remixed it into
a pop song, posting his version on social media sites.
While his action may at first glance look like a way
of amplifying ISIL’s message, in reality Karim’s remix
was a form of protest because ISIL’s fundamentalist
interpretation of Islam forbids music with instruments.
By transgressing the groups rules, Karim’s song
encouraged others to express criticism as well, rather
than be silenced by fear. Not only did his remix go viral,
garnering hundreds of thousands of views, but it also
spawned countless other musical and dancing spoofs
of ISIL chants, a potent form of counter-extremist
messaging that kids can relate to.
Of course, we must pursue other lines of effort in
countering violent extremism in youth as well, such
as strengthening laws and international coordination
to stop the flow of young foreign terrorist fighters to
battlefields, as we committed to do under resolution
2178 (2014), and enlisting the private sector in
amplifying our message, as Google Ideas has done
through the launch of its Against Violent Extremism
Network, which has given a platform to more than 500
rehabilitated former extremists. We need to do more on
all of these fronts.
At the beginning, I spoke about the six young men
from Minneapolis who were detained earlier this week.
One of the main reasons that they were stopped from
joining ISIL was that a young man who had originally
planned to join with them experienced a change in
conscience. He took a step back; he saw the group’s
violent intentions for what they were and he decided
to report the group to law enforcement. Without his
action, those young men may well have made it to
ISIL-controlled territory, where they could have taken
part in the group’s horrific atrocities. That young
man’s choice shows how a single changed mind — just
one person who starts to think differently and more
compassionately — can disrupt and ultimately stop a

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

dangerous action by many people. That is a valuable
lesson in countering violent extremism and, ultimately,
it is what our efforts are all about.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to the Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs of Spain.
Mr. Ybáñez (Spain) (spoke in Spanish): I would
like to begin by thanking His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Al Hussein Bin Abdullah II of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, for convening this debate. Our
Minister wanted to be here, but unfortunately the
difficult situation in the Mediterranean has prevented
him from coming. I would also like to thank the
Secretary-General for his presence and briefing and the
key note speakers for their interesting statements.
The Security Council needs to play an important
role in the face of the episodes of radicalization that
are taking place in many places around the world.
Extremist and violent ideologies have penetrated
many levels of our society. The world is witnessing the
unprecedented growth of this threat. Terrorist groups
established on the basis of extremist and dehumanizing
terrorist ideologies, such as Daesh, Al-Qaida and Boko
Haram, have demonstrated a great recruitment capacity,
including among young people.
When we analyse the role of young people in the
radicalization process, we tend to refer to them either as
a problem — they are perpetrators and terrorists — or
as an intrinsically vulnerable group — they are victims,
without addressing the participation of youth in
peacebuilding. Young people are not a homogenous
group with an intrinsic vulnerability and they do not
usually begin armed conflicts. This problem concerns
all of us in the Chamber equally.
In Europe, we have been struck by the fact that, of
the 20,000 foreigners who are part of Daesh, at least
one-fifth are from Europe. The vulnerability of certain
social groups, their socioeconomic situations, their level
of education or their condition as minorities in which
they feel marginalized are factors that can have an
impact on feelings of alienation and exclusion, turning
these groups into fertile grounds for the emergence of
hatred, resentment and radicalism. The high rates of
unemployment, in particular among young people, no
doubt contribute to this phenomenon.
In other parts of the world, this hatred and
resentment have different origins. That is the case
in conflict zones. We often see the international
community withdraw from conflicts too early when

S/PV.7432

there is believed to be a sufficient level of economic
and social functionality. The international community
therefore often withdraws without addressing and
solving the post-conflict trauma experienced by part
of the local populations. Sometimes these populations
try to seek revenge while other populations, owing to
the lack of means to support themselves, are led to
use violence again. We are focusing on responding to
the emergency without dealing with the deep-rooted
causes and consequences of the conflict. There is no
doubt that the time has come to focus more attention
on the medium to long-range dimension of conflict
management.
The complexity of the radicalization processes
described requires a multifaceted approach. Youth and
education are two closely linked areas for intervention.
Approximately 1.8 billion young people around the
world should and can play an important role in our
societies. We need to underscore their added value and
promote the complete social integration of those with
immigrant backgrounds.
Unfortunately, the facts have demonstrated
that education is indeed a necessary but not always
sufficient condition to prevent adherence to extremist
and violent ideologies. That is why I want to underscore
the importance of intercultural and interreligious
education. We need to promote an education based on
universal values and respect for diversity and human
rights. Sports can also be a very useful tool for peace
and development. Athletic activities among young
people from different countries, cultures or beliefs and
the participation of the most well-known athletes and
sports teams in campaigns aimed at young people to
promote tolerance can be very effective tools. There
are many examples of athletes who cooperate with the
United Nations in awareness-raising campaigns. That
is the case of basketball player Pau Gasol, who is a
goodwill ambassador of UNICEF in Spain.
We need to ensure that increasingly more young
people are leaders in their communities in peacebuilding,
reconciliation and post-conflict rebuilding. It would
be useful to have training projects in this area. The
agenda of the Peacebuilding Commission, which is
being reviewed this year, should include strategies that
prevent radicalization.
The media play an important role in awarenessraising in society and among young people in particular.
We need to foster a partnership with as many media
outlets as possible in combating violent extremism.

15-1147413/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

Media literacy for young people will form critical and
peaceful perspectives.
Authorities and religious leaders play an important
role in preventing radicalization. Schools of religion
have a great deal of authority and capacity to influence
their students’ concept of life. As representatives of
Governments, we have a responsibility to ensure that
all religious schools teach tolerance and respect for
others and to take the legal and judicial measures that
are necessary against those who do not comply with
them. There should be a network of pro-peace religious
leaders in the areas of conflict where it is most urgent
to take action. The King Abdullah bin Abdulaziz
International Centre for Interreligious and Intercultural
Dialogue, whose Board of Directors is made up of
religious leaders, is working in this direction.
I would also like to underscore the work carried
out by the Egyptian university Al-Azhar, which has
established an observatory to analyse all the fatwas
that have been issued over the past year. That centre
found that 200 fatwas could incite young people to
join terrorist groups. To counter that, it has launched a
campaign in the media and on the Internet in which it
explains that Daesh is a terrorist organization. We need
more actions of this kind.
Women in general and young people in particular
can also play a crucial role through their participation
in any strategy against violent extremism and in peace
processes. The empowerment of women diminishes the
probability that violent extremism will expand.
The main source for the recruitment of young
people by radical groups takes place through the
Internet. We have many examples of good practices
to counter their propaganda, examples of messages of
tolerance and understanding towards other cultures.
For example, I could mention the video disseminated by
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya through
Twitter prior to the recent round of negotiations among
Libyans in Skhirat. We need to strengthen international
police, judiciary and legislative cooperation so as to
ensure that terrorists do not use modern media for their
purposes without consequence.
I also want to emphasize the importance of civil
society and, in particular, the role that victims of
terrorism can play as a moral reference for young
people. The 2014 revised United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy Review refers to this.

14/80

23/04/2015

In my view, it is essential to share good national
practices. We support the process established by the
United States in this regard at the recent Washington,
D.C., Summit Against Violent Extremism. In
February, Spain approved a national strategic plan to
counter violent radicalization, which recognizes the
vulnerability of young people to radical discourse.
We also have a resource centre for cultural diversity
in education and a fund to support the reception and
integration of immigrants, most of whom are young
people.
The time has come to move to a new phase in
the fight against terrorism and violent extremism. A
month ago, Spain requested that the Secretary-General
consider appointing, within the Secretariat and with
existing resources, a special representative mandated
to combat violent extremism. Such a representative,
in addition to promoting the coordination of policies
against violent extremism, should make it a priority
to prevent the radicalization of young people and
work, together with the Secretary-General’s Envoy on
Youth, to integrate young people in the development of
relevant policies. Such a special representative would
coordinate her actions with all bodies, funds and
programmes of the United Nations whose work touches
on this agenda. The Alliance of Civilizations should
undoubtedly be at the centre of this process. Likewise,
regional organizations should be involved, as should
the Union for the Mediterranean, which already works
in this area.
Your Royal Highness, I thank you for having
convened this debate. The commitment of the
international community and the Security Council
to the fight against violent extremism, especially as
it affects young people, will be key to safeguarding
humankind’s greatest treasure: our diversity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Secretary of State for External Relations
of Angola.
Mr. Augusto (Angola): Allow me, on behalf of the
Republic of Angola, to extend a warm welcome to your
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II and to express our appreciation to the delegation of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing this
very important debate. We would also like to reiterate
our support and appreciation to Secretary-General Ban
Ki-moon for his tireless efforts to promote peace and
justice throughout the world. We welcome and thank

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Mr. Peter Neumann, Director of the International Centre
for the Study of Radicalization and Political Violence
at King’s College, and Mr. Scott Atran, Director of
Research in Anthropology at the Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, for their briefings.
Over the past few years, we have witnessed an
alarming increase in the number of young men and
women, many of them well-bred and -educated, joining
forces with terrorist armed groups, contrary to the
traditional stereotype idea of terrorism as a product of
disadvantaged, marginalized people. This phenomenon,
along with the increasing influence of such terrorist
networks around the world, should serve as a warning
to the international community that the root causes of
this issue must be identified and dealt with effectively.
Today’s debate is therefore very timely.
Although the reasons driving young people to
become radicalized vary, we believe that there are some
common traits.
First, identity crisis, exclusion, misinformation
and a discrepancy between expectations and reality are
factors that young people can experience, irrespective
of geographic location or social condition. During this
stage of life, young men and women are rebellious,
tend to vent their frustration at the community and are
vulnerable to violent extremist propaganda, in virtual
networks, youth clubs or places of worship. It is therefore
important that local communities engage with young
people and provide positive outlets for expression,
through sports, the arts or any other programmes that
provide a safe and nurturing environment.
Secondly, the evolution of technology and the
rapid spread of information through such means of
communication have provided greater awareness among
young people of political events around the world. In
addition, political and military interventionism, often
sustained by double-standard approaches, breeds
resentment that leads to various forms of violent
extremism.
These realities make it absolutely imperative to
find ways to deal with such critical issues, address
the spiritual and material fundamental needs of young
people and promote their political, economic and social
inclusion, in a manner whereby no one is left behind
in enjoying the common good and the outstanding
achievements of our contemporary world.
On the other hand, the world’s political and strategic
outlook must change so that, at the international level,

S/PV.7432

peoples and countries are treated equally, and policies
contributing to exacerbating tensions and humiliating
peoples are definitively set aside.
In Angola, around 60 per cent of the population is
young, and as in many African countries they are faced
with various obstacles and challenges in their selfrealization. We have many young people who either
actively participated or were indirectly affected by the
long and bitter civil strife. They are the object of concern
to the Angolan Government, which has established as a
central objective of its economic policies the generation
of qualified, competitive and adequately remunerated
employment for young people. Angola’s 2013-2017
national development plan gives a central role to youth,
who are considered promoters of modernization and
major agents of change. As such, the plan aims not only
to improve the living conditions, but also to strengthen
capacity building for Angola’s youth.
An equally important aspect consists in promoting
effective participation by young people in the democratic
process for social change and the development of the
country. Such participation is based on the promotion
of youth and student associations, and the strengthening
of social, community-based projects directed at young
people.
Recently, due to the increasing threat of international
terrorist groups and the more sophisticated recruiting
methods used by them to attract disenchanted youth to
their evil causes, the Angolan Government created the
National Counter-Terrorism Observatory, comprising a
multisectoral technical group, joining the Ministries of
Foreign Affairs, the Interior, and Defence, and the State
security services, in the main objective of monitoring
and combating any potential threats.
Angola, which has enjoyed steady economic
growth in recent years, is an attractive destination for
many illegal immigrants. That is of great concern to our
authorities, and is seen as a real threat to the country’s
security and stability.
In February 2015, our Government invited experts
from 11 countries in Central Africa for a seminar to
debate issues related to terrorism around the world and
to seek proposals for a common strategy to combat the
threat in the region. Promoted by the Ministry of Justice
and Human Rights and the Ministry of the Interior, in
partnership with the United Nations, issues related
to terrorism and human rights were discussed during
the seminar, including, inter alia, violent extremism,

15-1147415/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

terrorism and the phenomenon of foreign terrorist
fighters in the Central African region; the question of
development and social inclusion in the fight against
terrorism; measures to guarantee respect for human
rights and the rule of law as the fundamental basis
of the fight against terrorism; and strengthening the
international legal architecture to promote respect for
human rights and an effective justice system.
Mr. Judeh took the Chair.
We stress once again the importance of today’s
debate and of the effective implementation of national
and international policies to tackle this problem at its
roots. Young people are increasingly interconnected,
and we must promote the means for bringing them
even closer together. However, young frustrated men
and women without a purpose in life and deceived by
the promise of fighting for a just cause are extremely
vulnerable to recruitment by these increasingly
sophisticated terrorist networks. We must, at all
levels of society — at home, at school, in grass roots
organizations, at places of worship, in academia, at
social networks at the local, national, regional and
international level — conduct an energetic and creative
ideological struggle against terrorism. It is high time
that, going beyond military means, we engage not only
with Governments and international organizations
but also with large movements and grass-roots groups
to foster a dialogue and a mutual understanding to
promote democratic principles and defeat radicalism
and extremist violence.
Some concrete steps that could facilitate this
process are, in our view, strengthening the role of local
Governments in addressing community problems, in
coordination with local authorities and civil society;
developing projects that seek to reduce inequality and
promote the active participation of youth in social
projects for peacebuilding; creating opportunities
for young people’s sustained and institutionalized
participation, ownership and leadership in local,
national, regional and international decision-making
processes; supporting innovative ideas of youth-led
organizations and young people who are influential
among their peers to improve the daily security
situation and safety within communities; ensuring
access to quality education, health-care services and
justice and judicial systems and supporting youthoriented organizations; and fostering increased
information-sharing and transparency with national

16/80

23/04/2015

and international networks that seek to combat violent
extremism.
In conclusion, we would like to reiterate that we
strongly believe that the youth of the world can be
agents of development for social inclusion, tolerance
and peace. We will therefore continue to work to
implement all the programmes and initiatives that
we have delineated and work with our partners in the
international community to stop the violent extremism
that is spreading so dangerously throughout the world.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor the Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Malaysia.
Mr. Zainuddin (Malaysia): At the outset, I would
like to express my delegation’s great appreciation for the
unique opportunity afforded by the participation of His
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II as he shared his perspective on the important and
timely topic of today’s open debate. We also wish to
thank Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their
comprehensive and illuminating briefings.
The international community is witnessing an
increasingly dramatic trend towards radicalization
and violent extremism among youth, perpetrated by
terrorist groups that are manipulating grievances and
religion to achieve their political aims. Unfortunately,
these groups’ calls for violent extremism have attracted
supporters and sympathizers worldwide, in developing
and developed countries alike, particularly among the
young. The youth are our future, and we therefore cannot
afford to stand aside and watch as they are increasingly
affected by extremism and violence, whether as victims
or as perpetrators.
Based on various studies conducted in Malaysia
and other parts of the South-East Asian region on
the factors that contribute to radicalizing youth,
socioeconomic aspects such as poverty, deprivation,
unemployment and a lack of education are not the only
factors contributing to the rise of extremism among
youth. This is evident from the fact that large numbers
of the militants in the South-East Asian region who
have joined such terrorist groups in the Middle East as
Al-Qaida and the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant
are professionals and from the middle class, including
academicians, engineers and students.
The main motivation seems to be political in nature,
be it a reaction to prolonged or grievous injustice,

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

gross violations of human rights, foreign occupation
or systematic discrimination. Their despair and anger
are effectively exploited by terrorist groups, which
instil a sense of purpose and identity in impressionable
young people. While these youth may not suffer
personal trauma and sufferings from grievous injustice
or violation of human rights first hand, they strongly
identify with others who do, especially those sharing
the same religion, ethnicity or ideology. This is the
so-called secondary trauma symptom.
In that context, religion or ideology becomes
a convenient tool to justify and legitimize violent
actions. Meanwhile, the advent of information and
communication technology and the Internet brings
sufferings from far-flung regions of the world to youth
as never before, and makes it easier for the extremists
to reach out globally to promote their cause, gain
sympathizers and spread terror.
We must acknowledge that terrorists groups and
extremists wield not only hard power — that is, the
ability to use force to pursue their agendas — but
also considerable soft power in terms of ideology or
narrative that is attractive to impressionable youth.
In addressing youth radicalization, the international
community has developed comprehensive counterterrorism strategies that largely focus on the military,
strategic and financial aspects of countering terrorism.
However, unless we address the appeal of extremists’
soft power, we will not be able to effectively stem the
tide of youth radicalization in the long run.
Malaysia strongly believes that the international
community needs to develop a comprehensive counternarrative that would address extremist ideologies,
counter violent propaganda and win the hearts and minds
of the people. The counter-narrative must be able to set
forth a substantive, convincing and feasible concept
that could be used by youth when they are confronted
with the perception of injustice, discrimination and
suffering in the world today.
We have to create awareness among youth that
violence is not the answer in addressing injustice and
sufferings and is contrary to the basic tenet of every
religion. Instead of resorting to aggression, the counternarrative should focus on non-violent yet powerful
means to effect change, such as peaceful protest,
persuasion, diplomatic and political pressure, boycotts
and sanctions.

S/PV.7432

As part of Malaysia’s efforts to provide a counternarrative for challenging the soft power of extremists,
five years ago, here at the United Nations, the Malaysian
Prime Minister initiated the Global Movement of
Moderates. The idea was to provide a platform for the
silent majority to counter extremism in all its forms.
Central to the initiative is the value of moderation
as an approach and a guide for action that strongly
emphasizes tolerance, understanding, dialogue, mutual
respect and inclusiveness. With those key values and
objectives, moderation is undoubtedly an important
tool and approach to bridging differences and resolving
disputes.
We also believe in rehabilitation, and not just
punitive action, in dealing with youths who, whether
due to their sense of adventure, idealism or frustration,
have fallen for the narrative of extremists. For instance,
as part of the efforts to win the hearts and minds of
misled youth, the Royal Malaysian Police plays a
critical role in engaging with detained terrorists, with
the aim of rehabilitating and returning them as useful
members of society.
Malaysia has also implemented enabling policies,
including the National Youth Development Policy,
since young people are assets that should be nurtured
and empowered to realize their full potential and
contribute to nation-building. Through the Policy, our
country aims to produce a holistic and harmonious
Malaysia youth force imbued with strong spiritual and
moral values. It is our hope that the Policy will mould a
generation of youth who are educated, progressive and
competitive, as well as tolerant and with a deep sense of
responsibility, drive and vision.
In that regard, there is an urgent need to conduct
research into the drivers and the trigger factors that
lead young people to extremism and terrorism. Unless
solid baseline data is obtained, there is a danger that
we will craft policy based on anecdotal evidence
that will subsequently be the basis of designing and
implementing intervention programmes that do not
address the root problems. Therefore, Malaysia has
conducted qualitative studies in the region with regard
to reaching out to youth and countering the terrorists’
narrative, which we have published and disseminated.
We are also in the process of looking into
undergraduate radicalization in our region, with the
aim of understanding the pathway that university
undergraduates take before they are indoctrinated and

15-1147417/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2015

radicalized. On another level, realizing the tremendous
potential and creative energy of youth, we are also
designing a peer-to-peer module that will be used by
young people to reach out to other young people. The
purpose of the module will be to encourage young
people to critically analyse the rhetoric and propaganda
spread by the extremists and terrorists. Subsequently,
that would serve to build a mental fire wall that negates
and nullifies the claim that indiscriminate violence
practiced by terrorists is an effective method of
resolving conflict.

destruction, instability and human suffering and to
acquire territory. In pursuit of their hideous agenda,
they radicalize and recruit young people. The inevitable
consequence is an increase in the number of young
people who become foreign terrorist fighters. That is
evidently a cause-and-effect relationship. It is therefore
crucial that any attempt to address the problem of
violent extremism needs to begin with an in-depth
assessment of the options available to prevent the
radicalization of young people and their recruitment by
extremist groups.

Last but not least, in order for the counter-narrative
to work, it has to be based on facts on the ground.
Therefore, in the long run, the international community
must strive to remove the grievances and injustice
that constitute great motivations for young people to
become radicalized. We should also focus on building
sustainable and inclusive economies that provide
opportunities for young people. We must give them
hope for their futures. We need to promote the right
path in a relentless manner. Youth must understand
that violence and brutality committed in the name of
religion are abhorrent and unacceptable in any civilized
society.

In his profound briefing this morning, Mr. Neumann
reminded us that there is no single reason that young
people become radicalized. Indeed, various reasons
have been adduced to explain why young people are
readily enlisted into extremist groups. Some of those
reasons include the quest for recognition, fellowship
and identity. Young people also join extremist groups
in search of financial gain, protection and solidarity.
Those are some of the pull factors that lure young
people into extremist groups.

While addressing such grievances might not resolve
the problem of extremism overnight, it will go a long way
in removing the motive manipulated by the terrorists
to gain sympathy among impressionable youths and
to recruit foreign terrorist fighters worldwide. Let
us all not forget that, while young people make up
approximately 25 per cent of the world’s population,
they make up 100 per cent of our future.
Mrs. Ogwu (Nigeria): Nigeria welcomes Crown
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II to New York. We
also thank the delegation of Jordan for organizing this
important and timely debate. We want to acknowledge
the presence of participating Ministers and to welcome
them to the Security Council. Our appreciation also
goes to the Secretary-General, Mr. Neumann and
Mr. Atran for their insightful briefings.
Violent extremism is one of the greatest threats to
international peace and security; combating it is one
of the most urgent challenges facing the international
community. The most violent extremist groups
operating across the world today — the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Sham, Al-Qaida, Boko Haram and
Al-Shabaab — dominate the headlines with atrocities
that shock our conscience as the human race. They
share a common agenda to unleash terror, mayhem,
18/80

The other dimension of the problem is the push
factors linked to the circumstances of young people
in many parts of the world. The disproportionate
impact of the economic crisis in some countries tends
to marginalize and disempower youth. That could in
turn propel them into violent extremism. Poverty and
unemployment could also trigger youth vulnerability to
violent extremism. Those and other push factors often
reflect the dynamics in society.
Ideologically motivated violence begins at the
local and moves on to the national level, eventually
taking on an international dimension. Addressing the
problem will therefore require concerted action at the
local level. That is why the family, community leaders,
teachers and religious leaders — and Mr. Neumann this
morning added the mother — all have a crucial role
to play. Working together in a complementary manner,
they can all help to build safe, secure and resilient
societies where young people are shielded from values
that are alien to their societies. It is essential that all
stakeholders play their roles in the character formation
of youth by building linkages across sectors, sharing
experiences and adhering to best practices.
In Nigeria, youth matters are embedded in
decision-making at all levels of Government, including
at the federal, state and local levels. The vision of our
national policy on youth is to empower Nigerian youth to
become self-reliant and responsible citizens. The policy
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

aims to provide a sustainable framework for integrated
planning and collaboration among stakeholders for
the development of policies, programmes and other
initiatives that promote and enhance the development
of Nigerian youth. For example, the National Youth
Service Corps, a scheme established in 1973, has been
a vital instrument in inculcating in Nigerian youth the
spirit of selfless service to the community. It has also
helped to foster much-needed unity and understanding
among young Nigerians by exposing them to the diverse
cultures in a pluralistic society.
We also have a citizenship and leadership training
centre that has been established to give young people
the experience of self-discovery and self-actualization.
Our Youth Enterprise with Innovation in Nigeria
programme, otherwise known YouWiN!, is a recent
Government initiative designed to generate jobs. It
aims to encourage and support aspiring entrepreneurial
young people in Nigeria in developing and executing
business ideas that could generate employment
opportunities. It is expected that this and similar
Government initiatives will help empower young
people and make them productive members of society.
Given its experience with Boko Haram, Nigeria
understands that countering radicalization and violent
extremism will require more than a military approach
or option. For that reason, the Federal Government
has adopted and institutionalized a soft approach
that encompasses peace, security and development. It
involves a multi-stakeholder approach that has brought
together all levels of Government, the private sector,
academics, civil society and community and religious
leaders in a joint effort to stem the tide of radicalization
that has helped to foil the infamous Boko Haram
insurgency.
The emphasis of the soft approach is on
counterradicalization,
deradicalization,
strategic
communication
and
economic
regeneration.
Counterradicalization aims to stem the flow of
recruits and reduce the potential for indoctrination.
De-radicalization seeks to reintegrate extremists and
their families back into society through a number of
activities, including prison interventions and vocational
training. Strategic communication aims to produce
a narrative that presents moderate religious views in
order to counter the terrorists’ extremist narrative.
Economic regeneration is being pursued in the states
most affected by Boko Haram’s activities, with the

S/PV.7432

aim of improving the local economy in those areas and
raising living standards.
The problem of the radicalization of young people
and violent extremism is one that requires concerted
action at every level and the national, regional and
global levels in particular. Because it is a critical threat
to global peace, terrorism is a multifaceted battle that
must be fought on many fronts, with a determined will
to transform young people all over the world to enable
them to take on their role as trustees of the world’s
future.
Mr. Ramírez Carreño (Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela) (spoke in Spanish): We would first like to
thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for convening
this important open debate, and we salute and welcome
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II. We thank the
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott
Atran for their briefings. We are also very grateful for
the excellent concept paper prepared by the Jordanian
delegation to guide us in today’s debate (S/2015/231).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has given
special attention to this issue in the context of the fight
against the violence and terrorism that are plaguing
the Middle East and major regions of Africa. We
categorically reject and condemn terrorism in all its
forms and manifestations. That is why we believe it
cannot be encouraged or aided financially or militarily
with the aim of destabilizing or overthrowing a
Government. There is no good or bad terrorism; its
culture is always one of death.
Young people constitute the most mobile sector of
society. They have always been politically mobile and
a barometer for the political ideas that change history.
If today we are acknowledging that young people in
significant parts of the world are mobilizing in support
of fascism, intolerance, racism and extremism, we must
also acknowledge that the problem is rooted in society
as a whole. These young people are the victims of a
sick system or society. Thus if we are to address the
root causes of young people’s attraction to extremism
and their active involvement in terrorism, we must
make a comprehensive, critical assessment of the crisis
embodied in a way of life that is marked by violence,
exclusion, poverty and a profound spiritual void in the
face of the triumph of the material world.
According to the United Nations Population Fund’s
State of World Population 2014 report, today there are
more young people — about 1.8 billion of them aged

15-1147419/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

between 10 and 24 years old — than there have ever
been. Young people constitute about a quarter of the
world’s population. The report also states that about
500 million of those aged between 15 and 24 live on
less than $2 a day, and more than 74 million of them are
unemployed.
Since poverty and exclusion among young
people are a global phenomenon and a challenge
that every nation must deal with, we wonder why
the phenomenon of terrorism is worse in particular
regions such as the Middle East and Africa. On the
strange and incomprehensible world chessboard that
is the scene of the great Powers’ struggle for their
interests, vast areas of conflict have been created,
sometimes bloody and tragic, as in the Middle East and
North Africa, and at others chronic and permanent,
as in central Africa. In those areas of conflict, the
great Powers, with their immense military, economic
and propagandistic communications resources, have
focused their extraordinary power on promoting war,
violence, sectarianism, hatred, religious intolerance
and extremism.
The experts on social behaviour undoubtedly
bring many more elements to bear in the study and
understanding of how such factors influence young
people. But what is clear is that from their earliest years
of life, when a person’s world view and spirituality are
formed, the children who have grown up in and been
exposed to the brutality of war in Iraq, Libya, Syria,
Yemen and Palestine are now the most likely to be those
young people who are flocking to join extremist and
terrorist groups in large numbers. It is highly probable
that the children in some regions of Africa who have
lived in a permanent atmosphere of social violence,
exclusion and severe poverty have become the young
people who, sadly, are joining terrorist groups today.
The hopelessness and lack of opportunity felt by the
millions of young people living amid war, sectarianism,
colonialism or foreign occupation create the conditions
that enable extremism to appear, grow and develop.
The emergence of extremist and terrorist groups has
changed the face of societies that previously were
tolerant and amicable towards their ethnic and religious
minorities.
We should be asking ourselves in this debate how
it is possible that terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State in Iraq and Syria, Al-Qaida and the Al-Nusra
Front have the capacity to act that they do. So much
military capability. So many weapons. Such mobility.

20/80

23/04/2015

Such communications capability. Who is funding
them? Who is arming them? Who is encouraging them?
If we want to protect young people from involvement
in extremism and terrorism, there can be no double
standards on this issue. All support to terrorist groups,
direct or indirect, must end. The flow of weapons must
be stopped.
Another aspect, no less important in addressing
the problem, relates to the institutional capacity of
States to prevent the propagation of extremism and
of terrorism among young people, especially in postconflict situations. The various State institutions
need to coordinate their work of incorporating young
people and introducing them to the possibilities of
political, economic and social participation. Inclusive
processes, literacy, education, work and attention to
their spiritual and social needs are fundamental in
combating hopelessness and emotional distress among
young people. Nation States and the United Nations
could coordinate across agencies, such as the UNESCO
and the United Nations Development Programme,
the promotion of zones of peace, tolerance, culture
and socioeconomic development with the active
participation of youth in the social fabric. That task is
much more urgent and important in those countries that
have developed or are exposed to armed conflict. In
war-torn areas where children and youths are exposed
to the trauma of violence and sectarianism, the absence
or weakness of State institutions in the countries leaves
room for extremism and terrorist groups.
Mrs. Kawar took the Chair.
Venezuela, like other countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean, is a zone of peace. The Bolivarian
Revolution led by President Hugo Chávez began, and
President Nicolás Maduro Moros has continued to
develop, a vast programme of inclusion of all sectors of
society, with particular emphasis on youth. A massive
literacy campaign in our country, which has allowed
UNESCO to declare Venezuela a territory free of
illiteracy, has developed missions of basic education
that include more than 850,000 young people who
had been outside the formal education system, and in
municipalities, more than 2.5 million young people
have had access to universities or higher education.
Furthermore, we have established the Ministry of
Popular Power for Youth, which directly serves the
needs and addresses the problems of that sector of
the country, and we have enacted laws specifically
designed to ensure youth employment. The inclusion

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

of young people as actors in society — their active
participation, their protection as a vulnerable sector and
their sociopolitical empowerment — are fundamental
elements to successfully develop in society a culture of
peace and tolerance that will triumph over a culture of
violence and death.
Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I would
like to thank His Royal Highness the Crown Prince of
Jordan for convening this important debate. Countering
violent extremism is one of the most pressing
international challenges that we face. It is a priority for
my Prime Minister and for my Foreign Secretary, and
we greatly appreciate the leadership shown by Jordan
on this issue.
The past 12 months have been horrifying for young
people across the world — hundreds of students brutally
murdered in Kenya and Pakistan, scores of children
abducted and enslaved by Boko Haram, and countless
young people manipulated and exploited by the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) and Al-Qaida,
including some from my own country, tempted to
join ISIL’s murderous causes in Syria. The blame for
these atrocities and many more lies in the generational
scourge of violent extremism. We all have a role to play
to defeat it, but we must particularly harness young
people to aid us in the fight if we are to reach a longterm solution. They are the victims, but they are also
the solution, as His Royal Highness pointed out. I will
cover three areas where I think that together we can
make a difference.
First, we must resolutely counter the narrative
of extremism. It is incumbent upon all political, and
particularly religious, leaders to speak out clearly with
the message “not in my religion’s name”. But as others
have pointed out, a counter-narrative is not enough.
We need to promote a positive alternative narrative of
tolerance and inclusion. We must support those brave
youth advocates who stand up to extremism and promote
this alternative narrative. We all recall the bravery and
leadership shown by the 2014 Nobel Peace Prize winner,
Malala Yusafzai. Her speech at the General Assembly
calling for global education, even for those who sought
to kill her, was a powerful message against extremism.
Her story gives hope and inspiration to young people
everywhere.
Supporting youth advocates goes beyond just giving
them a platform; it is also about supporting countries to
provide education for all so that others have a chance
to follow Malala’s lead. The United Kingdom is proud

S/PV.7432

to have supported more than 4.5 million children in
primary school education, mainly in South Asia and
Africa. As Malala herself said, extremists attack schools
because they are afraid of the change and equality we
will bring to our society. It is partly through education
that we can help expose the lies of Al-Qaida, ISIL, Boko
Haram and others. It can help us to see how they hijack
religion for their own violent aims. It is partly through
education that we can give opportunity to vulnerable
young people still searching for their place in the world.
But education is not the whole answer. As we have
heard, the link between educational attainment and
extremism is not at all straightforward. In the United
Kingdom, many academically gifted young people
have also been radicalized.
Secondly, we must look at the factors that push
youths to extremism in our own communities. We must
protect young people in our schools, universities and
prisons from the influence of extremism. The United
Kingdom has trained over 130,000 public-sector
workers with that objective. We have a team of regional
coordinators that help universities manage the risk
of extremism. Our schools have clear safeguards to
prevent the promotion of extremist views incompatible
with our values. Our prisons protect vulnerable young
inmates during and after their sentences to prevent
radicalization.
This is not about curbing free speech. Extremist
ideas can be defeated only when people are free to
challenge them. But we must recognize that not just
violent extremism but non-violent extremism, whether
Islamist or neo-Nazi, can also incite hate and breed
violence. The Internet of course plays a crucial role
in that. ISIL and others have hijacked social media to
propagate abhorrent propaganda. Since 2010, the United
Kingdom has had to remove 75,000 pieces of content
encouraging or glorifying violent extremism. But civil
society and industry can play a role, too. They must
take a zero-tolerance approach to the abuse of their
platforms by extremism. The Internet can be a powerful
means of standing up to extremism; we must not let
extremists use it unchallenged. Be it the Government,
civil society or industry, we must ensure that young
people are at the front and centre of our approach, so
as to present a credible, hopeful alternative to the hate
speech of extremism — the dream that Mr. Atran spoke
of earlier today.
Thirdly, another strand for making a difference,
lies with the Council. Over the past six months, we have

15-1147421/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

adopted resolutions that target the financing of ISIL and
resolutions that oblige States to curb travel by foreign
terrorist fighters. Through the Jordanian presidency,
we have held important gatherings of religious leaders,
Foreign Ministers and experts to discuss practical steps
to address the challenge. But we can and we need to
do more. As Mr. Neumann said, we still have much to
learn about the root causes of extremism. Fragile and
conflict-affected States can provide the conditions for
violent extremism to take hold. Conflicted identity and
economic and social marginalization can also play a part.
Effective United Nations peacebuilding can therefore
play an important role. By promoting inclusive political
and economic institutions and encouraging democratic
processes, we can help present young people with an
alternative to turning to extremism. And in doing so, we
have the chance to make the Security Council relevant
to a new generation. Whenever the Council fails to act
on an issue of global concern, we undermine the faith
of young people in our work, and whenever we allow
narrow national interests to hold international priorities
to ransom, we erode confidence in the Council and our
Governments. In this generational challenge against
extremism, we simply cannot afford that.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to the Jordanian delegation for
its initiative to hold this meeting on such an important
topic.
Although people of any age are subject to
radicalization, young people, with their unformed
outlook and search for identity, are the most vulnerable
to the ideas of violent extremism. Terrorists are actively
involving minors in their heinous crimes. On the
one hand, the joint task of the State is to prevent the
influence of terrorists and radicals over young people
by suppressing extremist propaganda and strengthening
the resilience of young people to it. On the other hand, it
is necessary to use the potential of young people, their
activity, mobility and ability to navigate the information
space with ease so as to create an atmosphere of social
intolerance of violence and rejection of the ideas of
extremism and terrorism.
The issue of young people cannot be considered in
isolation from the overall context of the fight against
the challenges of extremism and terrorism in the
modern world. We see the basis for the work in this
area in an equal and fair partnership of all countries
under United Nations auspices. Its centre must lie in
the comprehensive implementation of the resolutions of

22/80

23/04/2015

the Security Council and in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in particular its first area
focus on providing conditions conducive to eradicating
the spread of terrorism. We must reject any attempt to
use violent extremism as an instrument of geopolitics
and the redistribution of spheres of influence.
Connivance with the activities of extremist groups
has already allowed them to threaten the future of
entire nations, whose societies have been plunged into
a morass of social, economic and political chaos. That
is particularly clear in the examples of Iraq, Syria
and Libya and the threat posed to other States in the
region. Particular attention should be paid to the use
of technology by extremists, including young people
indoctrinated in extremism, to achieve domestic goals.
We recently saw how insurgents were used in Central
Europe as a spearhead to overthrow a democratically
elected Government, when Molotov cocktails and
snipers’ bullets became the main vehicles of debate.
We must be more dynamic in using modern
information and communications technologies to
combat extremism. It is well known that young people
fall easy prey to radical extremist content flooding
popular social networks. Pursuant to resolution 1624
(2005), which is marking its tenth anniversary this year,
States should prohibit by law any incitement to commit
terrorist acts. Extremists’ calls for violent actions
on the Internet should be blocked by the competent
Government departments, and their websites shut
down.
The Internet, like traditional media, should be used
to promote a positive agenda as a powerful alternative
to radicalization. It is important to actively disseminate
among young people and with their participation
the ideas of mutual respect and intercultural and
interreligious dialogue, taking local traditions and
specificities into account. Educational institutions
and civil society structures could make a significant
contribution to combating radicalization and extremism.
An important role in the prevention of radicalization
can be played by local religious communities. Their
role is primarily to explain that there is no link between
radicalism and authentic religious precepts, to raise
awareness of the relevant risks, and to take other
preventive steps to prevent young people from engaging
in terrorist and other extremist activities. A set of
agreed recommendations on this subject is contained in
resolution 2178 (2014). Other proven, effective tools are
creative activities and sports, which give young people

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

the opportunity to participate in socially meaningful
activities, help them to improve their own skills and
talents, increase their self-confidence and self-esteem,
and accustom them to peaceful coexistence.
Russia has consistently taken steps to effectively
protect the State and its citizens against extremism and
terrorism. In November 2014, we adopted a strategy
for combating extremism in the Russian Federation up
to 2025, which contains a complex of tasks aimed at
instilling among young people the capacity to resist
socially dangerous behaviour. Under the strategy,
regional and municipal educational programmes and
teaching materials should provide for the shaping
among the younger generation of respect for all ethnic
and religious groups and a rejection of intolerance. The
strategy provides for universal accessibility to culture,
sports and recreation facilities, and improves conditions
for young people to attain their creative and sporting
potential and cultural development. The intention is to
incorporate new educational standards and methods
to counter extremism, for example by formulating
educational standards for journalists.
We call on the specialized counter-terrorism
agencies of the United Nations to actively promote the
dissemination of national practices that have proven
to be effective in this field. We welcome the recent
compilation by the Executive Director of the CounterTerrorism Committee of a set of best practices of
international and regional organizations in countering
violent extremism and incitement to terrorism in the
context of the implementation of resolution 1624 (2005).
We expect a list of national practices in this area to be
drawn up as soon as possible. We are ready to share our
experiences with our partners at the international and
bilateral levels.
Mr. Barros Melet (Chile) (spoke in Spanish):
Peace, stability and intercultural harmony are closely
interrelated and key to achieving an environment
conducive to promoting universal values and full
respect for human dignity.
While we in our region have undertaken the difficult
task of bridging the gap between wealth and poverty and
are seeking to build a brighter common future among
different traditions, cultures and nations, the Middle
East is fighting an even more pressing struggle that
poses a challenge to civilizations and faiths. Humankind
must preserve the multicultural, multi-ethnic and
multi-religious character of that region. Multiple crises
show how the stresses associated with cultural and

S/PV.7432

religious identity can generate destabilizing cycles that
affect international peace and security.
Chile thanks Jordan for organizing this debate,
which gives us the opportunity to share our views
and experiences and to define how the international
community can help to overcome the conditions that
promote violent extremism. The attraction of young
people to radical extremism has become a threat to
the democratic societies, respectful and tolerant of
diversity, that we all want to build. The emergence
of certain groups, including jihadist ones, can be
directly linked with the identity crisis that affects both
generations that have remained in their countries of
origin as well as those that have been woven into a new
social fabric.
Leaders and societies from all regions of the
world have been struck by the number of young people
drawn to extremism, and are being called upon not
only to punish such behavior but, rather, to address
the root causes of the phenomenon. Media outlets
have publicized the crimes of young people recruited
by terrorist organizations, including the Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab, Ansar
Al-Sharia and the Al-Nusra Front. Faced with those
acts, the international community cannot remain
indifferent, and the Council has both an ethical and
political responsibility to counter acts that deny
fundamental human values.
In some West African countries, youth as young as
15-years of age have been recruited through powerful
persuasion, mainly via social networks, which have
helped to attract a significant number of followers.
The new communication and information technologies
should not serve such purposes.
We believe it is necessary to identify the underlying
causes attracting youth to follow violent terrorism and
related doctrines. Inevitably, there must be a focus on
young people’s motivation to erroneously seek that
sense of identity and belonging. It is due to a number
of factors, including feelings of alienation, exclusion
and marginalization and insecurity and vulnerability,
which can stimulate violent extremism. Several reports
have been drafted in the context of United Nations
missions in the Middle East and Africa, explaining the
importance of implementing appropriate measures to
counteract the frustration of those who rebel against
social and cultural structures that do not satisfy their
hopes and aspirations.

15-1147423/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

As noted by President Michelle Bachelet Jeria in
the debate on inclusive development of 19 January,
“We believe that closing gaps in income and
position in the social structure is as important
as promoting equal opportunities. It is not only
a moral imperative, but also a requirement for
medium-term and long-term development, for
political stability and for peace.” (S/PV.7361, p. 7)
Our country has promoted the concept of inclusive
development, with the key participation of young
people, as a transformative mechanism underlying
causes of conflict. Identifying the youth involved in
such behaviour and punishing them is insufficient.
We must seek effective solutions through inclusive
development strategies that will pave the way for
opportunities for youth.
In the same vein, those strategies must address
gender issues and, in particular, the situation of women
who are recruited by armed groups and subjected to
violence, including sexual violence as a war tactic.
Women are victims of actions by non-State armed
groups that are used to spread terror and suffer not only
the scourge of gender aggression, but also, and worse,
stigmatization by religious extremism.
Tackling the factors that lead to radical violence by
youth requires strategies to prevent the socioeconomic
exclusion of young people. We urge the international
community to continue promoting the effective
implementation of resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178
(2014), which send clear messages on the prevention of
incitement to terrorism and confronting the phenomenon
of foreign terrorist combatants.
The question must be asked about ways in which the
United Nations and the Council can help to prevent and
reduce young people’s membership in violent groups.
In Jordan’s letter to the Secretary-General (S/2015/231)
and the annexed concept paper, a set of actions has
been identified constituting a holistic response to the
situation which seriously affects the system’s values.
Young people must become protagonists in developing
responses based on profound respect for and knowledge
of human rights, tolerance and democracy.
We consider it essential to empower youth and
enhance their skills, through participation that would
ensure their capacity to influence practices and
policies affecting them, including those aimed at
countering violent extremism. That is how we view the
social, political, economic and cultural participation
24/80

23/04/2015

of youth. Young people can provide sustainable ways
of combating the phenomenon, using information
technology and questioning the narratives, either online
of offline. That is part of the right to have rights under
democracy.
The Alliance of Civilizations 2013-2018 action plan
provides a road map with specific recommendations
to promote understanding, in line with strengthening
a cosmopolitan view of democracy based on human
rights and international law, as suggested by Jürgen
Habermas, and thereby prevent false perceptions that
threaten stability and fuel conflict.
We support the initiative of Spain to convene a
high-level regional conference of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1373
(2001), concerning counter-terrorism, in Madrid,
next July. We believe it would serve as a political
opportunity to contribute to halting the recruitment
and flow of foreign combatants, with the goal of having
States adopt measures on domestic and international
cooperation.
We join those calling for building public-private
partnerships designed to counter the messages of
radical organizations for recruiting new youth.
Chile has undertaken significant reforms to
eradicate exclusion and discrimination of youth, one
of which resulted in the enactment of a law against
discrimination. Our young people have gone into the
streets and prompted massive demonstrations to demand
a transformation of the education system, which then
led to a reform process that is currently under way.
We wish to conclude by thanking the presidency
of Jordan for convening this meeting to consider
a topic that involves those who will shoulder the
future responsibility of guiding our societies. Our
response must be commensurate with the values we
defend — those that respect identity and diversity.
Mr. McLay (New Zealand): I thank the delegation
of Jordan for convening this truly important debate.
Indeed, I think I can say at this stage that it is a quite
extraordinary event, for all sorts of reasons. You, Sir,
have emphasized the importance of the occasion by
bringing your Crown Prince to the table: your country’s
future, your kingdom’s future.
Allow me also to thank our two briefers — Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran — for their quite
remarkable presentations. As I listened to the two

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

gentlemen I could not help but ask why I have had to sit
for four months, at this particular table, before I heard
an outside contribution of that sort of value and that
sort of experience. The Security Council needs to hear
more of such wisdom and such knowledge.
Through you, sir, may I thank His Royal Highness
for his presence today and for his insightful comments:
not commentary on youth — which is all that I can
offer — but commentary by youth, and extraordinarily
valuable for that reason, alone.
As others have done, we should start by
acknowledging that youth has been radicalized
throughout history, but in times past, the dissemination
of radical ideas, radical advocacy and any radical
recruitment took weeks, months and even years. Today,
those same messages are transmitted with instant
effect. The social media and communication skills of
groups like Daesh have accelerated and globalized the
dissemination process and made it even more difficult
to undertake effective counter-measures. Too often, the
damage has been done; the evil has been spread before
we even know it. The tools of this modern world that we
now take for granted, combined with the increasingly
young demographic of many countries, contribute to
an environment where those with ill intent can target,
exploit and radicalize the young with previously
unimaginable speed and previously unparalleled
intensity.
It is wrong to lay blame for violent extremism at the
feet of the young; indeed, we are grateful to Jordan for
focusing today’s debate on the role that youth can play
in combatting violent terrorism. New Zealand therefore
takes this opportunity to offer just three suggestions for
better tackling the radicalization of youth.
First, Governments must recognize that national
and local contexts really do matter. Even if sometimes
presented as an international message and package, the
real factors that motivate young people to follow an
extremist path are almost always local, as Mr. Atran
emphasized in his presentation. If we are going to
address youth radicalization successfully, we must
identify the domestic or local pressures that marginalize
our vulnerable youth. We must ask how terrorist groups
are so successful in exploiting and manipulating these
pressures in order to radicalize and recruit. Do they
make youth dream, as Mr. Atran suggested?
We must then specifically tailor our responses to
those factors, with Governments, communities and

S/PV.7432

young people all working together in partnership. The
resulting counter-violent extremism programmes must
demonstrate to our young people that they can have
a real stake in their society and must help to develop
trust in State authority, and — again, as Mr. Atran
emphasized — getting young people to trust State
Authority is never going to be easy. It never has been
easy. They are not necessarily attracted by any notions
of the modern nation State. These partnerships of trust
should be based on an understanding of radicalization
that goes far beyond the security lens, so we thank
Jordan for giving this debate that broader perspective
as well.
If we treat at-risk young people only as the objects of
security concern, we grossly oversimplify the issue and
perpetuate the marginalization that often contributes
to violent extremism. Partnerships with young people
and their communities must be based on inclusion and
respect. Families are often the first responders to those
starting down the path to violent extremism, and those
families must be supported in their efforts to challenge
propaganda, provide leadership and offer credible,
alternative narratives to give them that stake in society
of which Mr. Neumann spoke, reversing that sense of
exclusion.
Secondly, we must empower our young people to
create a social force — their own social force, not one
that we control — which rejects violence as a means
of achieving their goals. Mr. Atran described such a
programme in North-West Pakistan. The Council
emphasised that very point last year in resolution 2178
(2014), which encourages States to empower community
leaders, families, parents and fellow youth to meet the
challenge of violent extremism. Too often, families and
communities have watched helplessly as groups like
Daesh spread their message of hate by using the tools
of the modern age with skill and sophistication. As
Mr. Neumann urged, we need tailored solutions using
those very tools.
But even as young people are the targets of
radicalization and violent extremism, those same young
people are also well equipped to combat that messaging,
and they can do so at a technological, ideological and
social level that they know, understand and can use to
great advantage. The most effective counter-violent
extremism programmes are those that harness the
energy, passion and creativity of young people, who are
already collaborating online and who naturally respond
to that sort of challenge.

15-1147425/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

Thirdly, we urge States to contribute to and draw
from the experience of others, not least, in respect of
effective measures initiated by young people themselves.
We welcome recent efforts to coordinate international
activity and to share experiences, such as the White
House Summit on Countering Violent Extremism and
the work of the Global Counter-Terrorism Forum,
in particular the Abu Dhabi Memorandum on Good
Practices for Education and Countering Violent
Extremism.
As the Council and United Nations counter-terrorism
entities focus on supporting States to implement
resolutions to counter violent extremism, we strongly
urge that we make building durable partnerships with
our young people — partnerships that promote peace
and combat violent extremism — an essential feature
of the measures that we adopt. The Secretary-General
reminded us that young people represent promise, not
peril. We should never regard youth as a problem; we
should regard it as a solution.
This is the last time that I will speak in the Security
Council Chamber, so want to thank my colleagues for
their friendship, collegiality, support and — I suspect
sometimes — for their patience. I wish the Council well
as it deals with the many threats to international peace
and security.
The President: I can assure Ambassador McLay
that it is not goodbye but farewell, and we look forward
to his future contributions in any capacity. His wisdom
and experience are much needed in today’s volatile
world. I thank him sincerely and I am sorry that we
worked him very hard right to the end, but that was
intentional.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Jordan for its initiative in convening today’s
open debate, and we welcome Crown Prince Al Hussein
bin Abdullah II and Minister for Foreign Affairs Judeh
to New York to preside over the Security Council. I
would like to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
for his briefing.
In recent years, terrorism and violent extremism
have run rampant in some regions of the world. Some
young people have been deceived, incited or coerced by
terrorist organizations and violent extremist ideologies,
and become the tools and victims of terrorist and
extremist activities, attracting the heightened attention
and awareness of the international community. Young
people are the future of the world. Protecting them from

26/80

23/04/2015

the dangers of terrorism and violent extremism is the
common responsibility of the international community.
China believes that the international community should
take the following measures.
First, we should resolutely fight terrorism and violent
extremism. Terrorism and extremism are the public
enemies of humankind. The international community
should make concerted and determined efforts in
countering all forms of terrorism and violent extremist
activities and create a peaceful and stable environment
for the development of young people. Counter-terrorism
activities should abide by the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations — respect for the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of
the countries concerned — and give full play to the
leading role of the United Nations and the Security
Council. Anti-terrorism efforts should not adopt double
standards, much less associate terrorism with a specific
ethnicity or religion.
Secondly, the channels through which terrorists
and extremist force deceive and incite youth must
be cut off. At present, terrorists and extremist forces
use the Internet and other new media to propagate
terrorist and extremist ideologies and to deceive and
incite young people, causing serious harm. The United
Nations counter-terrorism mechanisms should actively
promote strengthened cooperation on the part of the
international community; adopt effective measures to
resolutely counter attempts by terrorists and extremist
forces to use the Internet for such activities as
recruitment, incitement and planning and fund-raising;
frustrate their attempts to target young people.
Thirdly, the root causes of terrorism and violent
extremism must be eliminated. Poverty, unemployment
and underdevelopment are fertile ground for terrorism
and violent extremism, and major factors that make
youth susceptible to the misguidance of those forces.
The international community should pay close
attention to the issue of development and actively help
the countries concerned with their economic recovery
and development. All countries should strengthen
their efforts to educate and provide employment
opportunities for youth. The United Nations and other
international organizations should also continue to play
an active role in helping the countries concerned, in
particular developing countries, upgrade their capacity
to nurture and assist young people.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7432

Fourthly, dialogue among civilizations should
be strengthened to combat terrorist and extremist
ideologies. Diversity among civilizations is the
basic feature of human society, and dialogue among
civilizations is an important path to achieving mutual
understanding, respect and peaceful coexistence among
different ethnicities, cultures and religions. It is also an
effective tool for helping the youth reject violence and
eschew terrorist and extremist ideas. The international
community, including the relevant United Nations
agencies, should vigorously advocate the spirit of the
dialogue of civilizations, namely, respect, openness
and inclusiveness; promote enhanced exchanges and
mutual learning among people in all circles of society,
including young people; and foster an enabling social
environment in which all ethnic groups, cultures and
religions are treated as equals and coexist harmoniously
and peacefully.

people from embarking on the path of violence.
Indeed, young people constitute a breeding ground for
extremist group recruitment; however, at the same time,
they are the victims of such groups. The conditions
that foster their radicalization change from one
country to another, but, according to many observers
of the phenomenon, the main factors include poverty,
ignorance, inequality, injustice, unemployment and
exclusion from social, political and economic life,
whether actual or perceived. Even though some reject
the idea that poverty can lead to radical extremism, the
gap between the expectations and the socioeconomic
realities of an individual or community can create an
environment that is conducive to radicalization. In that
regard, as far as Africa is concerned, the report of the
Secretary-General on the causes of conflict in Africa
and the promotion of durable peace and sustainable
development there (S/2013/475) is very edifying.

Youth represent the future of the world’s
development and peace. China is ready to join the
international community in actively fighting terrorist
and violent extremist actions, safeguarding world peace
and stability, and creating a harmonious, peaceful and
stable environment for the healthy development of
young people.

Some, rightly or wrongly, consider religion to be
a factor in radicalization. However, no religion in the
world encourages its followers to commit violent acts on
its behalf. For that reason, violent extremism cannot and
should not be associated with any religion, nationality
or civilization. Moreover, military intervention carried
out in violation of international law and the sovereignty
and political independence of States can be found among
the causes of radicalization. Such interventions not only
often provide a breeding ground for violent extremism,
but also only bring about more war, oppression and
violence, thereby destabilizng entire regions.

Mr. Cherif (Chad) (spoke in French): First, I
would like to welcome Crown Prince Al Hussein bin
Abdullah II, and to thank Jordan for having organized
this meeting on the role of youth in countering violent
extremism and promoting peace. I also welcome the
presence of the ministers who have joined us. I also
thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, Mr. Peter
Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their interventions.
Chad would like to associate itself with the
statement to be made by the representative of the
African Union.
The global security context has been characterized
by an increase in terrorism, which is one of today’s
most serious threats to international peace and security.
The recent plethora and barbarity of violent terrorist
acts have plunged us into sadness and despair. Chad
condemns terrorism in all its forms and manifestations.
I will focus on the issues raised in the concept paper
(S/2015/231, annex) on this very important topic.
With regard to young people and the factors that
lead to their radicalization, understanding the process
of radicalization is crucial to our being able to react
properly to violent extremism and to prevent young

Terrorism, as a threat to international peace and
security, does not recognize any borders. Terrorist
groups have well organized networks that span the
entire world. The fact that groups active in Africa,
such as Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb, Al-Shabaab,
Boko Haram and others, are affiliated with Al-Qaida or
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant is an excellent
illustration of that fact. The main responsibility for
addressing that situation rests on the shoulder of States
and international organizations. It is urgent that they
take the measures needed to eliminate the conditions
conducive to the spread of terrorism, in accordance with
the first pillar of the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy.
With regard to how we can go about decreasing
radicalization and the recruitment of young people, it
is extremely important to prevent terrorists from using
modern information and communications technologies
for the purposes of recruitment and propaganda. The

15-1147427/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

Internet, social networks and television are among their
preferred platforms. It is essential to take measures to
limit the use of those technologies for criminal and
terrorist purposes, while still respecting the rights of
individuals. The combat against violent extremism
also requires a focus on the education of young
people, who must be inculcated with the values, tools
and skills essential for individual success, and on the
promotion of economic opportunities for groups at risk.
Emphasis must also be placed on programmes for the
deradicalization, disindocrination and reeducation of
youth, including reintegration and rehabilitation. Youth
organizations themselves can be enlisted in activities
aimed at combating violent extremism.
With respect to foreign combatants, it is normal
to be worried by the departure of foreign nationals
from various countries for the conflict zones of Syria
and Iraq. We encourage international cooperation
to strengthen exchanges in intelligence and border
control, so as to bring terrorists to justice. We believe
that the best policy for discouraging the outflow of
foreign combatants towards Syria and Iraq is to resolve
the conflicts in those countries.
With respect to national efforts to combat terrorism
and youth recruitment, Chad supports the culture of
peace, tolerance and religious pluralism. In that vein,
a number of measures have been taken in line with
resolution 1624 (2005), including the establishment of
an annual day of prayers for peace, bringing together the
three principal faiths practiced in our country, namely,
Islam, Catholicism and Protestantism. Moreover,
the leaders of those three faiths have created an
inter-religious platform to promote peaceful coexistence
and are represented in all regions. Furthermore, within
the framework of subregional and regional strategies,
Chad is reinforcing its security cooperation with its
neighbours and has deployed large contingents to
neutralize terrorist groups in the north of Mali, while
continuing its contribution to the fight against Boko
Haram in Cameroon, the Niger and Nigeria at the cost
of enormous human and material sacrifice.
Concerning the role that the United Nations, in
particular the Security Council, can play to strengthen
efforts to combat violent extremism, we support the
proposals of the Jordanian delegation in its concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex). We hope that they will
strengthen the goals of preventing incitement to
terrorism and of stemming the flow of foreign
combatants, in accordance with resolutions 1624 (2005)

28/80

23/04/2015

and 2178 (2014). We also welcome Jordan’s initiative to
organize an international conference in August 2016 on
the role of youth in promoting world peace.
To conclude, the threat of violent extremism is by
now abundantly clear. The fight against that threat must
be shared by all States and international organizations,
including the United Nations, which can and must
strengthen their cooperation by pooling efforts and
resources and putting youth at the heart of their agendas.
It is urgent for us to collectively prevent and resolve
conflicts, promote socioeconomic development and
foster dialogue by stressing education and tolerance.
Ms. Murmokaitė (Lithuania): We thank the
delegation of Jordan for organizing this timely debate
and the briefers for their presentations.
Radicalization and violent extremism pose an
increasingly pressing threat to international peace and
security. Today, foreign terrorist fighters have come
from some 100 States, as recruitment networks expand
their global reach. Young people fall into the trap of
those networks for multiple reasons, as diverse as the
individuals themselves. Identity issues, peer pressure,
online and personal connections, the failure to see the
distinction between the violent world of video gaming
and reality, alienation, social exclusion, a misguided
search for the meaning of life, and perceived injustices
in the world — many things can trigger radicalization.
Many have little if any idea about the faith that they
claim to defend.
Some are abducted, forcefully converted and
forced to fight, like the Yazidi victims of Daesh or
the girls, some as young as eight years old, turned by
Boko Haram into suicide attackers in Nigeria. Some
are pushed onto the deadly path by circumstances
of extreme desperation and hopelessness. Some are
radicalized in prisons. Many even come from normal
families and safe environments where they enjoyed all
the comforts of life and opportunities for the future.
It is particularly troubling that such young people
should reject all that society has to offer and choose
the obscurantist, murderous ideologies that radical
extremists and terrorists profess. It is even more mindboggling to think that, while many girls and women
across the globe are fighting against abuse and for their
rights and human dignity, girls from normal families
would willingly choose to become jihadi brides, serving
those who abuse and rape and sell women into slavery.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

While it is obvious that the causes are as diverse
as the individuals, it remains important to establish
at least some patterns in order to counteract violent
extremism and radicalization. There is no one-size-fitsall model of how and why a young person is radicalized.
Correspondingly, there is no one-size-fits-all way of
addressing the issue. As we seek to develop effective
counter measures against that highly dangerous
phenomenon, it is important to make sure that we
avoid profiling people on religious, ethnic or any other
grounds. Since violent extremism is multifaceted
and multidimensional, our responses too must be
multidimensional and multifaceted, and they must
be articulated at all levels, from local to national to
regional to international, with the involvement of role
models, moral authorities, religious and community
leaders, former recruits who have managed to escape
and reintegrate, civil-society groups, the private sector,
academia and Governments.
We do not need to start from scratch. Violent
extremism has been high on the agenda of the United
Nations for some time. Last year, for instance, concern
about the spread of the violent extremist ideologies
that underpin the terrorist narrative was reiterated
both during the United Nations Global CounterTerrorism Strategy Review and in resolution 2178
(2014) on foreign terrorist fighters. The CounterTerrorism Committee, with the support of its Executive
Directorate, has developed a wealth of expertise over
the past decade with regard to associated risks, gaps
and recommendations on future actions. The Executive
Directorate’s recent creation of a network of academic
partners can play an important role in support of the
work already carried out. Joint efforts by the United
Nations machinery, along with regional, national and
local actors, are needed, based on the comparative
strengths and expertise of each partner involved, to
develop effective, target-specific antidotes to violent
extremist propaganda. Rule of law institutions also have
a critical role to play. Border and security cooperation,
as well as information- and intelligence-sharing to
facilitate the tracking of the cross-border movements of
young people, need to be strengthened, since stopping
potential recruits at the border can often be the last
line of defence for preventing them from falling into
terrorist hands.
As recruitment flourishes on the Internet, it is
essential, as others have said, to engage with Web
professionals and the wider community of Internet
users in order to develop adequate security measures

S/PV.7432

without impinging on the freedoms of expression and
opinion.
Education is highly important, and the education of
girls in particular. No wonder terrorists are attacking
girls’ schools and their teachers with such fury. They
know that an educated girl, conscious of her choices
and rights in life, is an excellent antidote against the
blind subservient ignorance that they are seeking to
impose. Fostering critical thinking is key to cutting
through extremist narratives. Human rights and
tolerance education should be part and parcel of broader
education efforts. Clear perspectives for the future,
through education, skills development and job and
entrepreneurship opportunities, matter everywhere,
but they are especially important in conflict-affected
areas, including among internally displaced persons
and refugees, so that in their desperation such people
do not fall prey to radicalization. Particular attention
should be paid to juvenile and young prison inmates,
since prisons and detention centres are often prime
locations for recruitment.
It is imperative that we improve strategic
communication at all levels and that we develop
effective, targeted messages that demolish the gloss
and false righteousness of the narratives of the likes
of Daesh and Boko Haram. We must expose their
hypocrisy and the monstrosity of the crimes that they
commit under false pretexts. Since terrorists like to hide
behind a veneer of faith, it is also key to cut through that
veneer and expose the abysmal gap between what faith
really is and what is being done in its name by violent
extremists. We have to be very clear that, whatever
the ills or injustices in the world the extremists claim
to be rectifying by their deadly choices, beheadings;
maiming; throwing people from high towers; burning
them alive, such as the monstrous murder of a Jordanian
pilot; or stoning to death do not address any injustice or
ill. On the contrary, such depraved acts add in a most
brutal and sick way to the ills of this world and are
nothing but the most brutal and cynical criminality.
While all levels should be involved in tackling
the issue of youth radicalization, the grass-roots level
is particularly important. It is at the grass-roots level
in local communities that vulnerabilities are felt
and exposed, and disaffections and marginalization
take place, providing fertile ground for recruiters.
Non-governmental organizations, volunteer groups
and civil-society activism offer important ways to
strengthen the connection between young people and

15-1147429/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

the communities they live in, foster a sense of belonging
and ownership, help overcome a sense of alienation and
provide positive life models for young people to follow.
The President (spoke in Arabic): Before moving on
to the next item, I would like to thank all the members of
the Security Council for their statements. In particular,
I would like to thank the Ministers, Ministers of State
and the Deputy Minister who have taken the trouble
to travel to come and be with us today in view of the
importance of our subject.
I now wish to remind all speakers to kindly limit
their statements to no more than four minutes in order to
enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
Delegations with lengthy statements are kindly
requested to circulate their texts in writing and deliver
a condensed version when speaking in the Chamber. It
is our intention to use the flashing light on the collar
of the speakers’ microphones to indicate when the
time allocated has elapsed. I would also like to appeal
to speakers to deliver their statements at a reasonable
speed so that interpretation can be accurately provided.
I also wish to inform all concerned that we will be
carrying on this open debate through the lunch hour in
view of the large number of speakers.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Sameh
Hassan Shokry Selim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Arab Republic of Egypt. I would like to thank him
for having taken the trouble to travel to be with us in the
Chamber today in person.
Mr. Selim (spoke in Arabic): At the outset, I would
like to extend our thanks to the Hashemite Kingdom
of Jordan for its initiative to convene this important
meeting. We greatly value the presence of His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II of
Jordan, presiding over this Security Council meeting
on a very important issue that all of our countries must
seriously address, as well as the consequences that
could ensue and threaten the security of our citizens
and even international peace and security.
A number of factors together have led to the fact
that our communities are now afflicted with currents
in the form of groups and factions that have embraced
extremist ideas and views that have nothing to do with
religion and tolerance. What is worse is that they have
started imposing those views on people, in particular
youth. That reveals the nature of their clash with
society, which is, in essence, nothing but an intellectual
aberration, as they refuse to live or coexist with other

30/80

23/04/2015

segments of society. They do not wish to integrate
into society, and they focus on and magnify points of
discord. That leads to friction and strife, and impedes
the progress of the State and individual citizens. Those
individuals thereby isolate themselves by believing that
the community in which they live is a pagan one that
does not deserve to be lived in.
Within that context and taking into consideration
the various aspects of terrorism, we must give priority
to addressing extremism wherever it is found, because
it paves the way for terrorism. In all our actions we
must give particular attention to young people and
always keep them in mind. One of our priorities should
always be to keep them from falling into the clutches
of extremism and terrorism in particular, because
the youth in many of our States constitute the largest
proportion of the population. We must also take into
account the ferocious campaigns against youth in
all States, in particular campaigns that have been
orchestrated recently in an attempt to recruit young
people as fighters in terrorist groups by using religion
as a means to ends that have no connection whatsoever
to any religion.
At the outset, it is necessary to recognize that the
phenomenon of extremism is a reality that we cannot
overlook and that we must counter. In that regard, we
have to address its causes. That is something that we
have recognized in Egypt, where the President has
recently called for the renewal of religious dialogue
aimed at countering extremism and ensuring the
necessary and appropriate interpretation of Islam and
its tenets. We have taken serious steps in that direction.
First, we must analyse extremism and terrorism
and counter them with irrefutable arguments and
evidence. The matter cannot be restricted to taking
security measures. In that respect, we must adopt a
consensus-based and tolerant method that leads not
to half solutions, but to tolerant and consensus-based
solutions. We must also avoid all obscurantist views
that lead people who embrace such ideas to believe that
the world is divided into only two groups — those who
believe what they do and those who are infidels — only
good and evil. In that regard, we must make sure that
youth, who do not have the ability to correctly interpret
those views themselves, are always informed by
those who are able to provide them with appropriate
interpretations, and that they are made aware of the
nature of the exigencies of such interpretations with
regard to their circumstances, so that there would

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

be no discord or contention. In addition, there have
been a number of economic and political reasons
that have led to extremism among youth and to their
resorting to violence, including access to adequate
education, the lack of opportunities to make a decent
living, unemployment, poverty, the marginalization
of foreigners, foreign occupation and the lack of
recognition of a people’s right to self-determination.
All of those factors must be addressed very seriously
by strengthening cooperation, by adopting relevant
strategies, by implementing the relevant Security
Council resolutions and by refraining from extending
support to extremists and terrorists.
I would like to underline that the fact that today we
see more youth from the Muslim and other minorities
in Western States who seek to join terrorist groups as
foreign combatants, especially in Iraq, Syria, Libya
and in Africa, makes it necessary for those States to
review their policies so as to integrate Muslims into
their communities, curb transgressive acts against
religion and prophets and adopt the necessary steps that
would put an end to the recruitment by those terrorist
organizations. On the other hand, it is necessary to
implement the various relevant Security Council
resolutions and hold accountable those States that
instigate and provide support and funding to those who
use foreign terrorist combatants.
We must also recognize that this phenomenon is
capable of refuting the argument that the reason for
terrorism is the system of government and the economic
and social pressures that bear upon society. The fact
that this phenomenon is spreading in countries where
remarkable gains have been made is itself testimony to
the fact that there are organizations that are seeking to
use religion for other objectives.
We in Egypt have for many years understood and
recognized the dangers of extremism and terrorism
and the need for joint international efforts to address
them. We need to adopt a comprehensive strategy
in this regard. In addition to our international and
regional efforts, we have taken a number of effective
steps at the national level, including the numerous
initiatives of Al-Azhar, with its moderate, tolerant and
enlightened views, to refute mendacious ideas that are
affecting young people. These steps include various
cultural events explaining the fundaments of the
tolerant religion of Islam so that young people do not
fall prey to those who spread violence and the takfiris.
Moreover, this mission has not been limited to Egypt;

S/PV.7432

many Al-Azhar scholars have visited a number of other
countries to explain the moderate and tolerant Islamic
way of thinking. Moreover, the Department of Fatwah
in Egypt has created an observatory that uses scientific
methodologies to monitor takfiri fatwahs and expose
their defective nature.
The Government of Egypt has also made great
efforts to raise the standard of university and vocational
education so as to nurture young people and help them
to find decent work opportunities, which in turn will
reduce unemployment and enable young people to
engage in the attainment of sustainable development
objectives. In political terms, young people are being
invited to join the political arena.
Once again, it is extremely important for us to
continue discussing this issue and to build on efforts
that have already been made, including those of the
United Nations. In this context, it could be useful
consider the possibility of the Secretary-General
preparing a comprehensive report considering this issue
from all points of view, including recommendations on
a programme of work to be implemented.
I would like once again to thank the Jordanian
presidency of the Security Council this month for
having convened this important meeting.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Justice and Migration of
Sweden.
Mr. Johansson (Sweden): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the Nordic countries, Denmark,
Finland, Iceland, Norway and my own country, Sweden.
At the outset, let me thank the Jordanian presidency
for taking the initiative to hold this timely high-level
debate and His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein
and Secretary-General Ban for their remarks earlier.
Let me first say a few words about the terrible
tragedy that took place in the Mediterranean last
weekend. On the night between Saturday and Sunday,
900 people, many of them in their youth, drowned. It
is now said that up to 1 million people are waiting in
Libya to try to cross the sea. These people drowned on
their way to Europe to find a better life.
I bring this up because I believe that this issue
is closely linked to what we are talking about today.
As Mr. Scott Atran said, we must offer young people
a positive personal dream with a concrete chance of
realization, or else some young people will turn to

15-1147431/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

radical religious or political movement. Others, I say,
will desperately try to go to other parts of the world,
searching for a better life, even if it means risking
their lives. These issues have common roots in more
ways than one. War and poverty lead to the migrant
situation that we now see, but war and poverty also lead
to political and religious radicalization.
In Europe, the European Council is meeting today
because of the disaster. We say that we must increase
our efforts to save lives at sea. We must fight the
traffickers who are sending people to their deaths on
these boats, but we must also take joint responsibility
for the migrant situation, based on the principle that
applying for asylum is a human right. The international
community must step up its efforts to end the war in
Syria and, more importantly than ever, to stabilize
Libya. If that is not done, I think many thousands
more people, many in their youth, will die in the
Mediterranean this year. The European Union has a
responsibility, but so has the United Nations in trying
to prevent this from happening.
To prevent radicalization, we must stress not only
the importance of peace but also the importance of
economic and social development. His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein pointed out in his speech how
many young people there are in the world today. Today’s
young people — at times called “millennials” — make
up 25 per cent of the world’s population. Many have
faced the harsh realities of terrorist attacks, wars,
economic crises and ensuing unemployment. Millions
of young people are lone migrants, refugees or internally
displaced, uprooted from their homes and families. Not
content to be subjects without a voice, the politically
aware will strive for civil rights and for citizenship, as
they did during the Arab Spring, which appears to have
been a youth-driven movement.
But if the search for identity and belonging — existential
needs of every human person — is not satisfied by
inclusion in a democratic society, frustrated young may
look for recognition elsewhere. Not invited to take part
in building a peaceful social environment, active young
people will find a context and search for a role where
they are allowed to perform, and sometimes this takes
destructive forms. It is therefore very important that we
strengthen the role of young people. Faced with violent
conflict, young people can participate as agents of
positive change and, given the right educational tools,
young people can also be agents of peace.

32/80

23/04/2015

Last year, the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations and Education First once again brought
together 75 young people — a whopping 75,000 had
applied — for an international summer school, where
they learned about the United Nations and discussed
areas where it can better collaborate with youth
organizations to advocate for peace and security around
the world.
It is clear that we need to safeguard our democracy and
make our societies more resistant against radicalization
to violent extremism. This requires local efforts on a
global scale. We support Secretary-General’s initiative
for a United Nations plan of action to prevent violent
extremism. Against this background, it is important to
acknowledge that many young people already play a
role. With courage and dignity, they act as community
leaders in peacebuilding, reconciliation and postconflict reconstruction. However, this is often unseen
or simply overlooked. We need to do more to highlight
their existing contributions to peace. Peacebuilding
is a cornerstone of United Nations systemwide action
plan on youth, and the youth dimension needs to be a
cornerstone of the United Nations plan of action for
preventing violent extremism.
We must recognize young women, like their male
contemporaries, as key stakeholders in countering
violent extremism. They have unique knowledge,
experience and resources that are vital to our efforts.
We must understand the different roles that women play
in conflict, both as fighters and as peacemakers. This
means that young women and young men alike must be
included in analysis of extremism; otherwise, we will
lose important findings that can contribute to countering
extremism and promoting conflict resolution.
The very phenomenon of violent extremism has
served as a reminder to all of us on all continents
that exclusion can breed fanaticism among majority
and minority groups alike. We see Islamophobia and
anti-Semitism, as well as discrimination against
Christians. Young people from many different countries,
including from some of the Nordic countries, have for
various reasons been attracted by terrorist propaganda,
radicalized and turned into foreign terrorist fighters.
This is a serious problem. We need to strengthen
the legislation, for instance, by criminalizing travel
undertaken to fight for terrorist groups, as the Security
Council has called on all Member States to do. But that
is not enough; we need to do more.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Nordic countries believe that our strongest
counter-narrative is our firm commitment to democracy,
human rights and equality as the most effective tools to
prevent radicalization into terrorism. In addition, we
emphasize that economic growth and resolute efforts to
manage rapid population growth alleviate the extreme
poverty that threatens global peace and prosperity. The
White House Countering Violent Extremism Summit
established an ambitious framework for our efforts
against violent extremism, and the Nordic countries
are taking an active part in the follow-up efforts. We
share a common interest in embracing and enhancing
the role of our youth in countering violent extremism
and promoting peace.
I would like to conclude by quoting a young,
second generation Swede who previously harboured
sympathies with radical groups but who has today
renounced these views:
“From wanting to bring terror and chaos
to society, I now want to help others finding
themselves in the same situation as I was. I have
lots of experience. I know the circumstances. And
it is my duty to give something back to our society.”
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Italy.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): I thank the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for organizing today’s open debate
and, in particular His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein for chairing the meeting and for his inspiring
words.
Italy aligns itself with the statement to be delivered
by the Head of Delegation of the European Union.
I wish to make the following remarks in my national
capacity.
Today’s open debate enables us to think more
strategically about the role of youth in countering
violent extremism. According to the latest statistics, the
current youth population — people between the ages
of 10 and 24 — is the largest ever, comprising some
1.8 billion people, 600 million of whom are girls. Most
of these 1.8 billion live in developing countries. They are
the world’s best hope for addressing our most pressing
challenges in the long term, particularly the question
of how to counter violent extremism and promote
peace. As the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation, Mr. Paolo Gentiloni, has
stated repeatedly, the fight against violent extremism

S/PV.7432

has to be waged at different levels — in terms of
narrative, values and financing.
This brings me to the second underlying theme of
today’s debate: the importance of prevention. In the
past decade, extremist ideologies have increased their
appeal to youth through communication campaigns
that target this specific demographic. It is both a moral
obligation and a strategic investment for us to turn the
tide. By countering the appeal of violent and extremist
groups among young people, we will deny these groups
access to their most valuable resource, pulling the rug
out from under their feet. We should therefore not be
asking ourselves what role young people can play in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace. We
should be asking how young people themselves can be
the heart of the solution. To this end, we have identified
areas that we should be targeting.
Our first area of focus should be education. The
abduction of students and the targeting of schools and
universities by violent and extremist groups are a clear
sign of their weakness. Culture and education are their
worst enemy. At the same time, however, they are our
best allies in promoting tolerance, inclusiveness and
open-mindedness. In the wake of the horrific attack on
the Garissa campus in Kenya, Minister Gentiloni paid
an official visit to Nairobi to renew our full support for
Kenya in that hour of tragedy, pay respect to the victims
and signal that the fight against terrorism and the
protection of the right to education are a shared value.
As tangible proof of our friendship, we have offered
scholarships to Garissa campus students in order to
send the message that guaranteeing access to quality
education, no matter what circumstances, is our best
counter-attack to violent extremism.
Secondly, we need to focus on human rights and
justice. To promote peaceful, inclusive and just societies,
we must defend and support the shared values under
attack. Human rights must be returned to the centre of
the agenda. In this respect, we must not underestimate
the preventive power of justice by upholding the rule of
law and accountability.
Thirdly, socioeconomic development is essential.
Unfulfilled expectations, unemployment, underemployment
and inequality are all factors that have the potential
to drive idle and dissatisfied young people down
the path to embracing radical, violent ideologies. In
defining the post-2015 agenda, we must be mindful of
the positive impact that a universal, innovative, easily

15-1147433/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

communicated agenda could have on youth living in
developing countries.
Fourthly, we must focus on private/public partnerships,
including media. The proactive involvement of civil
society is essential for us to succeed. Governments
and the international community have to provide an
enabling environment and lead with projects. But a
joint effort is needed to fill in the framework. Social
media has a special role to play in countering the
narrative proposed by violent extremist groups, which
makes it vital that this issue be addressed through the
Framework of Analysis for the Prevention of Atrocity
Crimes, which Italy supports. Social media can have
both a negative and a positive effect. It can aggravate
the risk of atrocity crimes, by spreading hate speech and
inciting people to commit such crimes, but it can also
curb messages of intolerance, hatred and violence. The
new Framework provides analytical tools for detecting
early warning signs through the examination of the
socioeconomic conditions affecting young people.
Lastly, we need to focus on empowerment.
Sometimes the problem is not the message but the
messenger. Empowerment of youth and youth-oriented
organizations is essential to promoting positive role
models, responding to violence, and delegitimizing
extremist messages. Priority should be given to
empowering those 600 million young women.
It is in this light that Italy proudly supports the
Change the World Model United Nations. Every year,
our Mission organizes a public event that brings together
young people from all over the world to discuss the
three main pillars of the United Nations: international
peace and security, human rights and development.
Just a month ago, more than 1,500 young people from
over 90 countries met at the General Assembly to
discuss how to make the world a safer, better place.
By promoting this event, we are planting a seed for the
future. It is up to us to assure that this seed has the
proper international environment in which to grow and
develop.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Brazil.
Mr. Antonio de Aguiar Patriota (Brazil): Brazil
congratulates Jordan for organizing this meeting. It is
a welcome development that improving prevention is at
the centre of this debate. In order to overcome terrorism,
structural causes, such as exclusion, marginalization
and discrimination, cannot be overlooked.

34/80

23/04/2015

I would like to thank the Secretary-General for his
briefing and extend my thanks to Mr. Peter Neumann
and Mr. Scott Atran as well.
Countering terrorism is a goal that has a galvanizing
potential. This can be demonstrated by the fact that the
Security Council has often been able to reach consensus
on counter-terrorism issues, even as it has remained
divided on other equally important topics. While the
ultimate goal potentially brings us together, some of the
tools chosen to implement counter-terrorism efforts,
particularly the use of force, have been divisive and
ultimately counterproductive.
Counter-terrorism efforts will be effective to the
extent that they are consistent with the Charter of the
United Nations, international refugee and humanitarian
law, human rights. including the freedom of speech and
the right to privacy, and other norms of international
law. If the fight against terrorism takes place at the
expense of international legal parameters, it will have
defeated its purpose.
Unemployment and marginalization are factors
that have contributed to creating a sense of lack of
opportunities for youth. Social inequities and political
injustices have been known to erode young people’s
prospects, thereby increasing their vulnerability to
extremist narratives. As precisely diagnosed in this
debate’s concept paper (S/2015/231, annex), terrorist
entities have been attracting young people by offering
them a false sense of purpose, belonging and identity.
In order to counter these narratives, we must
stand united in underscoring the importance of
dialogue among cultures and religions and promoting
a culture of peace. Initiatives such as the Alliance of
Civilizations, which promotes tolerance and mutual
respect, contribute to dispel the stereotypes that tend
to associate terrorism with specific cultures, religions
or ethnic groups. Initiatives on youth education which
combat the perpetuation of a culture of animosity also
assist in the establishment of an environment less
prone to radicalization. The legitimate grievances that
have been pushing young people towards violence and
extremism need to be tackled with a sense of urgency.
Intolerance thrives where social, political, economic
or cultural exclusion exists. Promoting social justice is
key to eliminating the underlying causes of terrorism.
While it would be erroneous to establish an automatic
chain of causality between poverty and terrorism,
young people are less vulnerable to radicalism in

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

inclusive societies where there is social justice and
there are equal job opportunities.
We also believe that there is a need for a more
comprehensive approach to public policies aimed at
young people and their empowerment. Policies and
programmes focused on the concession of grants
and loans for university studies, access to vocational
training and the creation of decent jobs for youth should
be seriously considered.
We are concerned by the lack of coherence between
the consensus on the need to promote the welfare of
youth and the reduction of the United Nations budget for
development assistance. Any consistent commitment
to protect youth from radicalism will be undermined
if United Nations activities dedicated to promoting
development continue to be the preferential victims of
budgetary cuts.
Countering extremism necessarily involves
diplomatic efforts to bring about peace, founded on
justice, to conflicts that directly or indirectly fuel terrorist
agendas. Our collective failure to deal adequately with
the ongoing crises in the Middle East — including the
Israel-Palestine conflict — deprives us of a powerful
argument to counter the dissemination of radicalization.
The recurrent use of force as a means to solve conflicts,
at the expense of diplomacy and the peaceful settlement
of disputes, has only contributed to generating further
violence and strengthening the discourse of extremism.
There are no excuses for terrorist acts. We reiterate
our commitment to a multidimensional response to
the challenges posed by extremism, and we remain
convinced that cooperation and dialogue within the
United Nations will enhance our capacity to counter
that plague. We will only succeed if we join efforts on
the basis of shared values and enhanced multilateral
cooperation.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of India.
Mr. Bishnoi (India): We thank you the President
for organizing this debate, and we join other speakers in
welcoming the presence among us, earlier today, of His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Jordan. Countering
violent extremism is one of the most important
challenges before the international community note.
We also take the opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral and the others who have provided briefings to
the Council today.

S/PV.7432

The concept paper (S/2015/231, annex) seems to
argue that youth are central to the problem of violent
extremism and that it is somehow through social and
economic development that the challenge needs to be
addressed. I would like to say, with all due respect, that
our understanding is somewhat different. We therefore
welcome this opportunity to share our perspective.
First, in our view, we need to acknowledge that it is
the absence of State authority, or weak State authority,
that provides the breeding ground for violent extremist
organizations to operate. The fact that there are
conditions of poverty and unemployment is secondary.
In fact, those conditions also result from the absence of
strong State authority.
Secondly, religious fanaticism is responsible for
violent extremism. The purveyors of hate and those
who characterize others as infidels are the culprits;
youth are only cannon fodder. While there is indeed
merit in empowering and educating youth, the more
obvious need is to restrain those who engage in the
politics of hate. That is the responsibility of the State
and not one that can be exercised selectively. Terrorism
is evil. There can be no good terrorist or bad terrorist.
In the same way that extremism and violent extremism
are always evil, there should be zero tolerance.
It is the responsibility of States to ensure that their
education systems do not promote hatred and bigotry. It
is important that traditional learning systems promote
harmony and the brotherhood of all humankind. In
India, we seek to ensure that our textbooks reflect our
rich heritage of diversity. Tradition and culture should
be preserved in a spirit of responsibility and tolerance.
It is also the responsibility of States to ensure that the
media, including social media, are not used to incite
and propagate hatred. As was said earlier, States that
do not take such responsibilities seriously do so at their
own peril. In today’s interconnected world, they do so
at the peril of others as well.
Lastly, a truly democratic, inclusive and
participatory form of Government will go a long way
towards preventing conditions that lead to violent
extremism. It is important that no section of society
feel excluded or marginalized. That is certainly be the
surest way of preventing radicalization.
India is one nation, with many faiths and diverse
beliefs. It is a nation whose unity is strengthened by its
pluralism. It is our firm belief that ultimately the values

15-1147435/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

represented by open and tolerant societies will be the
best foil to the forces of violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that the concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex) contains a number of ideas,
including the top-down and bottom-up approaches.
I now give the floor to Mr. Téte António, Permanent
Observer of the African Union to the United Nations.
Mr. António: On behalf of the African Union (AU)
Commission I wish to extend a special welcome to His
Royal Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah
II and to thank him for his presence among us today,
which attests to his personal commitment and that of
his country regarding the critical global phenomenon
of violent extremism. I also wish to extend a special
welcome to the honourable ministers and other highlevel officials who have been present at this meeting.
I also wish to thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon
and Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott Atran for their
comprehensive briefings.
In Africa, terrorism and violent extremism
continue to represent the most serious threat to peace
and security. Terrorist groups, such as Al-Qaida in the
Islamic Maghreb, the Movement for Unity and Jihad
in West Africa, Boko Haram, Les défenseurs des
musulmans en Afrique noire “Ansaru” and Al-Shabaab,
have displayed an increased capacity for enlisting youth
into their ranks.
In the report presented to the meeting of the
African Union Peace and Security Council held on
2 September 2014 in Nairobi, the Chairperson of the
African Union Commission outlined factors that have
contributed to creating a breeding ground for alienation
and radicalization. They include, but are not limited
to, widespread conditions of conflict and poverty,
marginalization, human-rights violations, unresolved
conflicts, ethnic, national and religion-based
discrimination and the lack of employment and
opportunities for youth. Those factors, coupled with the
growing exploitation of technology such as the Internet,
have given the terrorists a wide-ranging reach.
Therefore, while we consider solutions and ways
to counter the threats posed by terrorists, it is equally
imperative to engage in addressing the conditions
that contribute to fuelling radicalization and violent
extremism. Only then can we effectively and sustainably
protect our territories and, more important, our youth
against terrorism and related phenomenona.
36/80

23/04/2015

For Africa, extracting its youth from indoctrinization
and radicalization remains a priority, given that young
people comprise over 60 per cent of Africa’s combined
population and represent a huge potential demographic
dividend, as underlined by Secretary of State Manuel
Augusto of Angola.
Over the past two decades, the relevant AU policy
organs have adopted a number of instruments designed
to facilitate and promote coordinated and effective
action against terrorism and violent extremism.
The 1999 Algiers Convention on the Prevention and
Combating of Terrorism and its 2004 supplementary
Protocol, as well as the 2002 Plan of Action on the
Prevention and Combating of Terrorism and the
establishment of the African Centre for Study and
Research on Terrorism, have provided a sound legal
and institutional basis for enhanced cooperation among
member States. From an operational perspective, steps
have been taken to mobilize member States to fully
and effectively implement the AU’s normative counterterrorism framework.
The African Union’s commitment was further
demonstrated by its holding in Nairobi on 2 September
2014 of a special summit of the Peace and Security
Council dedicated to terrorism and violent extremism.
At the Summit, the Peace and Security Council
emphasized the need to address conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism and violent extremism. It also
stressed the importance of adopting comprehensive
counter-terrorism strategies that empower civil society
organizations, including religious leaders, women and
vulnerable groups, and that cover not only security
and law enforcement but also poverty eradication, job
creation and development. Following the Summit, the
AU Commission convened a forum in Addis Ababa
that brought together the African regional groupings,
relevant United Nations institutions and other
international agencies with the goal of formulating a
coordinated implementation plan.
Efforts to combat terrorism without acknowledging
and addressing the drivers of violent extremism are
likely to be counterproductive. Mindful of that fact, the
AU is actively working with member States to develop
sound national policies and programmes aimed at
countering radicalization, delegitimizing the terrorist’s
narratives vis-à-vis young people, building young
people’s resilience in the face of violent extremism
and renewing their confidence in their Governments’
ability to respond to their needs. In that regard, the

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

initiatives the AU Commission has taken include the
following measures.
First, it is developing and implementing programmes
designed to counter radicalization and violent
extremism in prisons and detention facilities, in order
to rehabilitate disengaged fighters and support their
reintegration into their communities. Initiatives in that
regard are under way in Somalia and will be expanded to
other countries in the future. Secondly, it is facilitating
open discussions between State authorities and civil
society, including religious authorities and women’s
organizations, in order to enable communities to air
grievances and contribute actively to efforts to counter
extremist ideologies. Thirdly, it is engaging the media
in countering terrorist narratives and delegitimizing
violent ideologies. The Network of African Journalists
for Peace is now playing an important role in outreach
efforts in that regard. Fourthly, the AU Commission
is providing a platform for victims of terrorist acts
to contribute to overall efforts to counter terrorism
and violent extremism. In Algiers in October, the
Commission organized the first AU symposium on the
victims of terrorist acts, a very important part of our
strategy. Fifthly, it is encouraging member States to
ensure that their economic development and poverty
alleviation policies and programmes are successfully
implemented. As a follow-up to the Nairobi Summit,
the AU Commission will work with the African
Development Bank and the United Nations Economic
Commission for Africa to provide the necessary support
to member States.
In conclusion, I would like to thank you once again,
Mr. President, for giving us the opportunity to share our
perspectives on this very important matter with Council
members, and to reiterate the AU’s determination to
shoulder its share of responsibility in the fight against
terrorism and violent extremism in all their forms and
manifestations.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Okamura (Japan): At the outset, I would like
to pay tribute to His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II for his initiative in organizing
this open debate. Its focus on the role of young people
in countering violent extremism and promoting peace
is timely and important. I would also like to thank
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his briefing.

S/PV.7432

When young people move, society changes.
Their power is the driving force that pushes the world
forward. That power can promote peace, freedom
and democracy. Look at what happened in Tunisia. It
was the country’s youth who overturned the regime,
bringing about a movement that has changed the whole
face of the Middle East. But at the same time, youthful
power can also lead the world to war and conflict.
Young people can be exploited by political Powers and
even support those who wish to disrupt society.
About four years ago, when Côte d’Ivoire was
in the midst of a political crisis after the presidential
elections of 2010, I was there as Japan’s Ambassador.
A man named Charles Blé Goudé encouraged young
people to support the-then incumbent President Laurent
Gbagbo. He manipulated various youth groups, whose
demonstrations created fear among the people. They
called for withdrawal of the United Nations presence
and even attacked United Nations personnel and
vehicles. Against such a backdrop, it is clear that we
must try as hard as possible to direct young people’s
transformative and potentially explosive power towards
peace, freedom and democracy rather than war and
conflict. That lesson is all the more true today, when
we are seeing so many young people being taken in
by radical terrorist groups such as the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant. We must take a close look at the
frustrations and anger that young people are dealing
with as a result of economic difficulties and social
repression. We must turn their energy and passion into
constructive actions, not destructive ones.
From that perspective, Japan considers the position
of young people in the economic and social spheres
to be directly connected to the issue of peace and
stability. We have been working diligently to empower
young people in order to engage them in development,
economic growth and the promotion of business. A
good example of that approach is our efforts conducted
through the Tokyo International Conference on African
Development (TICAD) process, under which we have
supported capacity-building for young Africans, and
which I oversaw as Director-General for African
Affairs at Japan’s Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
The most recent TICAD conference, TICAD V,
held in 2013, saw the launch of several youth projects
in that area. The projects include the African Business
Education Initiative for Youth, which aims to invite
1,000 African youth participants to Japan over a period
of five years to help them develop effective skills

15-1147437/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

and knowledge in various fields. The objective is to
contribute to the development of industry throughout
Africa. We have already received 155 participants
from Africa in Japan. They are all expected to become
brilliant leaders in business and to further strengthen
the close relationship between Japan and Africa.
Another project launched at TICAD V was the
establishment of human-resource development centres
for business and industry at 10 locations, to serve
25 countries in Africa. These centres, along with other
support programmes, are intended to build the capacity
of some 30,000 young people.
As for the issue of violent extremism, I share
the concern at the fact that the number of victims of
violent extremism around the world is growing. Japan
is not an exception. At the beginning of this year, two
Japanese citizens were murdered in Syria. Immediately
thereafter, Japan announced a policy of assistance to
create societies resilient to radicalization. In essence,
we hope to put into practice the Arab proverb that states,
“the best way is to go in the middle”. Under this policy,
Japan is realizing various projects such as connecting
youth with employment opportunities, correcting
inequalities and supporting educational exchanges and
exchanges of people.
Prime Minister Shinto Abe, on the occasion of his
visit to Africa in January last year, stated, “If we can
reveal a bright future to young people, the future of
Africa will without a doubt also become bright”. Here
we could replace the word “Africa” with “the world”.
We have to reveal a bright future to all young people in
order to make the future of the world bright.
Japan is determined to continue to work closely
with its partners in the international community
towards creating stable and energetic societies all over
the world and giving hope to young people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Colombia.
Ms. Mejía Vélez (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish): I
should like at the outset, Mr. President, to extend my
gratitude to His Royal Highness and to your country
for having convened today’s debate. This issue is of
particular relevance against the backdrop of today’s
world and makes it very clear how closely linked
emerging challenges to international peace and security
are to the needs of one of the most vulnerable population
groups, perhaps the most vulnerable population group,

38/80

23/04/2015

and also one that has the greatest potential for our
future as humankind, that is, youth.
I should also like to thank the Secretary-General
for the statement he made this morning, which also
provides guidelines on how to address this terrible
problem. I wish here to reiterate to what extent terrorism
is a threat and wish to make it clear that no excuse,
situation or condition can justify acts of terrorism.
At the same time, I would like to stress, as all of
the members of the Security Council have done on
numerous occasions, that any measures adopted to
tackle the scourge of terrorism must be enacted with
full respect for the rule of law and implemented in strict
compliance with international human rights standards.
Violent extremism and radicalization constitute
today one of the most pressing threats to peace, stability
and development, as indicated in the excellent concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex) circulated by Jordan, because
it is this generation of young people, the largest such
generation in history, that is the target of the strategies
of terrorist organizations, which take advantage of their
needs and their dissatisfaction to expand their networks
of violence and further their criminal activities.
Colombia reiterates its willingness to work
together with the rest of the international community
on strategies aimed at preventing the involvement of
young people in violent activities of any kind, as well
as to engage in initiatives aimed at promoting the
empowerment, education and participation of youth. It
is vital that we take balanced measures that respond to
all of the aspects of the complex phenomenon of violent
extremist.
Nonetheless, it is also important to recognize that
neither poverty nor underdevelopment is the cause per
se of such phenomena, as some have said. As history has
taught us, terrorism and extremism affect very diverse
societies with disparate levels of development and
varying social-inclusion conditions. For that reason,
it is not just counterproductive but also mendacious
to stereotype terrorism, radicalization and violent
extremism among youth as being uniquely a problem of
underdeveloped societies.
We therefore need to promote values such as
solidarity, respect, tolerance, acceptance of diversity
and respect for the rule of law, because an inclusive,
open society that is able to meet to meet the aspirations
of youth is vital not only to tackling the conditions

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

that promote radicalization and violent extremism, but
also to ensuring that we can achieve our aspirations as
democratic societies.
Including young people in the labour market is
without a doubt one of the elements that is pivotal
to the full development of their own aspirations as
individuals. In 2013, the number of unemployed youth,
according to the International Labour Organization,
soared to 73 million. We cannot continue to make
progress in the search for prevention mechanisms
without addressing that reality. We cannot lose sight of
the fact that both education and work are human rights
and that closing the gender gap at all levels of education
must be a priority in order to empower youth, improve
their living conditions and free them from the adverse
impact of violent extremism.
New technologies have proved to have negative
effects that must be urgently addressed. Proponents
of violence have been adept at identifying innovative
ways of befriending and exploiting young people, and,
as an international community, we have been lagging
far behind in terms of finding an appropriate response
to this phenomenon. As we seek solution strategies,
it is vital that actions aimed at responding to this
scourge be adopted with full respect for freedom of
expression, religion and association, and the right to
privacy. Censorship, therefore, is not the answer. Youth
themselves need to take ownership of the discourse
on democracy and diversity and they themselves must
stand as critics of the manipulative attempts of those
who advocate violence.
We in Colombia are, unfortunately, all too familiar
with the effects that violence and terrorism can have on
the lives of young people who, day by day, are seeking
to forge the future of our country. For that reason, we
are convinced of the need to grant the highest priority
to creating living standards that will allow future
generations to build fair and just societies and to live
together in peace and freedom.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ioannis Vrailas, Deputy
Head of Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
Mr. Vrailas: Allow me to present apologies on
behalf of Ambassador Mayr-Harting, as he is not able
to deliver this statement himself.
I am speaking on behalf of the European Union and
its member States. The candidate countries Turkey, the

S/PV.7432

former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro,
Serbia and Albania, the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Bosnia
and Herzegovina, as well as Ukraine, the Republic of
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia, align themselves with
this statement.
We thank the Jordanian presidency of the Security
Council for the initiative to organize this high-level
debate on the role of youth in countering violent
extremism and promoting peace. It offers us the
opportunity to further the discussions and to build
on the recent commitments we took at the Summit on
Countering Violent Extremism, convened by President
Obama in February.
The fight against violent extremism will be lengthy.
As we focus on immediate threats, we should also think
strategically, to our future. Younger generations are
the key to our success. Terrorist groups and extremists
capitalize on advances in technology to find new ways
of engaging with disaffected youth and take advantage
of social networking sites, online video channels and
radical chat rooms. They are spreading their propaganda
more widely, more rapidly and more effectively, and
youth are the main specific target through social media.
That is why it is important that we act together and in
a concerted manner, while upholding our core values.
The EU and its member States are very actively
engaged in countering violent extremism and have
identified anti-radicalization efforts as one of the
main areas in which to concentrate our efforts. A
particular emphasis is placed on prevention, and the
EU has defined its vision through the EU Strategy for
Combating Radicalization and Recruitment. We cannot
afford to lose the fight for our youth. This is why
education is so crucial. Let us not forget the words of
a brave young woman, the Nobel Peace Prize laureate
Malala Yousafzai: “The extremists are afraid of books
and pens. The power of education frightens them”.
In Europe, we believe that public education is
a powerful tool to promote open-mindedness and
tolerance in youth. We are also engaging with local
communities, civil society and the private sector in
order to foster their resilience and prevent the formation
of parallel education networks, where extremist ideas
may thrive. At the initiative of the French Government
and the EU, the Union’s Education Ministers met in
Paris on 17 March to discuss new measures to tackle
radicalization across the European Union.

15-1147439/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

In our partner countries, the EU also supports
initiatives aimed at identifying the motivations behind
youth extremism, at empowering women, at promoting
community policing, at strengthening local actors and
at improving the media and education capacities to
counter radicalizing ideologies. We have to make sure
that young people not only take advantage of education,
but that they can find their place in their own societies,
and an appropriate one. In that context, we also focus on
addressing the underlying factors of radicalization by
supporting initiatives with regard to youth, education,
vocational training, job opportunities, civil society,
security-sector reform and the role of women. That is
very much in line with the link between security and
development that the EU upholds, as is underlined
in the presidency’s concept note. There is indeed no
security possible without the necessary development
conditions, and in that sense supporting programmes
that give opportunities to youth is a good way to counter
extremism in an effective way. As already announced
at the White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism in February, we will soon launch additional
programmes on how to link education and counter
violent extremism, address the socioeconomic aspects
of conflicts and link them with the post-2015 agenda.
We therefore encourage States to engage with
members of the relevant local communities and
non-governmental actors in developing strategies to
counter the violent extremist narrative that can incite
youth to terrorist acts, and address the conditions
that are conducive to the spread of violent extremism.
Strategies include empowering youth and women, as
well as religious, cultural and education leaders and
all members of relevant civil-society groups, adopting
tailored approaches to countering recruitment to
this kind of violent extremism and promoting social
inclusion and cohesion.
We are also constantly pleading with United
Nations entities to focus on terrorism prevention
in a more coordinated manner. The United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Implementation Task Force and the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
have a crucial role to play in developing analyses and
programmes that involve youth and are dedicated to
youth for the purposes of effective countering-violentextremism prevention. The Global Counter-Terrorism
Forum is also an appropriate forum to develop
such efforts further. We welcome the ongoing close
cooperation between the Forum and the United Nations
and encourage its further strengthening. Within
40/80

23/04/2015

their respective competences, regional organizations
also have an important role to play, especially in the
effective implementation of initiatives emanating from
the United Nations.
The European Union will, therefore, continue to be
very active and cooperate with all countries to counter
violent extremism. The United Nations is a key forum
for that endeavour, and we look forward to further
constructive discussions during the General Assembly
Ministerial week in September.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): While we are meeting here, hundreds of
youth are leaving their families surreptitiously, finding
routes through open borders where they discover all
the facilities needed to join terrorist networks, which
are provided by specialized intelligence bodies. They
often fail to break loose from the networks after they
“awaken”, which occurs too late, if it ever occurs
at all. Our responsibilities as politicians, jurists,
specialists, mothers and fathers require us to make
every effort to address the underlying reasons why
young people are joining terrorist organizations.
Tackling that phenomenon is not new to our societies.
The new factor is the unprecedented appeal of terrorist
organizations, such as Daesh, the Al-Nusra Front, the
Al-Shabaab movement, Boko Haram and others. They
use instruments and tools of deception, especially
media networks, provide money in order to galvanize
unemployed youth and incite youth through religious
fatwas.
Reports affirm that the majority of foreign terrorist
fighters who join terrorist organizations, estimated in
the tens of thousands, are in the 15-35 age group. The
new media technologies have allowed us to empathize
with the sufferings of many families who were bereft
of their dear ones. The young people they have lost
decided, in an impulsive moment, to join organizations
that instilled them with the notion that they will be
performing their sacred duty or performing a heroic or
novel moral act. Some organizations have even offered
them easy money.
Addressing this phenomenon means that we
also have to deal with its underlying reasons. In
that respect, my delegation wishes to affirm that the
flagrant interference of certain States in the internal
affairs of other States — under pretexts like the

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

spread of democracy and freedom, the protection of
civilians, and jihad, which lead to the prolongation of
conflicts, and prevent us from settling them peacefully.
Such pretexts serve to create justifications for direct
or indirect foreign interference in the affairs of other
Member States. They, in fact, are among the most
important drivers of radicalization, hatred, violence
and extremism. The same applies to certain regimes
that spread a discourse of hatred and radicalization, or
use educational curricula that have nothing to do with
true religions or humanitarian principles and that incite
people to barbarism, violence and terrorism. That does
not mean that we have to disregard the other important
motivating factors, which include, but are not limited
to, discrimination based on religion, citizenship,
nationality, ethnicity, colour, gender or other factors
that constitute collective punishment against persons
who never opted for a “bad” place and did not choose
their religion or their skin colour.
Regrettably, various impulsive campaigns have
taken place that seek to stereotype the followers of a
certain religion and attempt to brand them as terrorists.
They have included various acts of discrimination,
marginalization and oppression, as well as security
crackdowns in States that claim to uphold humanitarian
values, citizenship and human rights. More regrettably
still, certain Islamic countries abuse anything Arab or
Muslim.
We are asked to work arduously and effectively
to protect young people, males and females, from the
campaigns running on social networking sites and
TV channels. These are campaigns that lure them
into leaving their families and homelands, espousing
fundamentalist takfiri and wahhabi ideologies,
and joining terrorist organizations abroad, where
they commit acts of murder and sabotage until they
are themselves killed in battle or suicide attacks.
Furthermore, when they return to their own countries,
they are called upon to create cells in order to carry out
attacks. We know which parties help and finance them
and facilitate their travel. Those parties call themselves
moderate and yet they train and arm young people to
fight in Afghanistan, Somalia, Chechnya, Iraq, Syria,
Libya, Tunisia, Egypt, Lebanon, Nigeria, Kenya and
other countries. The perpetrators here are not unknown.
They are the Governments of certain known States,
some of which are, unfortunately, represented in the
Council.

S/PV.7432

We should not leave young people with despair as
their only option as they try to decide between becoming
victims of the sponsors of terrorism or drowning in the
Mediterranean Sea en route to an imagined paradise.
That represents a major shortcoming in international
policy, for which young people are paying a dear price.
In our countries, millions of young men and women
are at risk — through social media and other online
platforms — of becoming the tools of terrorism. Why
do we not enlist them as agents in the fight against
terrorism and as soldiers of tolerance? Do we not have
the means to do so?
As a matter of fact, we already have appropriate
instruments in place, most notably the Security
Council’s resolutions on counter-terrorism, the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, and the
General Assembly’s resolutions on the Alliance of
Civilizations and the culture of peace, which seek to
counter discrimination, intolerance and incitement to
terrorism. What we really need is a strong resolve to
counter terrorism and to hold its sponsors accountable
in order to spare humanity from this scourge and arrive
at the maintenance of international peace security, the
title of our meeting today.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Hungary.
Ms. Bogyay (Hungary): I am speaking here today
not only as the Permanent Representative of Hungary,
but also as the mother of a young man. I truly believe
that we should teach our children the concept and
understanding of diversity. We should teach them
to celebrate diversity. Rather than see it as a burden,
they should see it as a source of inspiration. If we are
successful in that pursuit, our children will feel safer in
their own bodies.
Instead of that, what is happening today? Let me
start with the pressing issue of losing or not finding
one’s identity and looking for one, and then I shall
continue with the basic human aspiration of belonging
to some place and to someone, as well as the need for
recognition and the wish to be talked about, without
regard to good or bad motivations. All of this is taking
place in a time of uncertainty in both a chaotic world
and a chaotic order.
Culture is the foundation on which peoples’
identities grow and mature. It is my deeply held
belief that many of today’s problems are rooted in
a crisis of identity, which has today become a global

15-1147441/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

issue. The increasing mobility of young people and
ideas across international borders, the information
and communication revolutions, and economic
globalization have made identities broader, delocalized
and multilayered. Under the rapid transformation of
cultural and social structures, the fear of the unknown
and the lack of understanding of differing views often
provide fertile ground for racism, xenophobia and
intolerance, human rights violations and, of course,
outright conflict. Fully appreciating one’s own cultural
background is possible only after understanding and
respecting the diversity of other cultures and celebrating
the richness of our common cultural heritage. In other
words, we need to learn from and about each other.
Accordingly, I would like to address this very
issue of the power of learning. Such ideals and values
as compassion, hospitality, fraternity and solidarity
are, to a large extent, learned through education and
life experience. Peaceful transformation begins within
one’s self and involves learning about the self and others.
Transformations start from and within an individual.
An avalanche of incredible force accumulates from the
movements of particular snowflakes on a mountain
top. Powerful ideas are generated in the minds of
individuals and spread with the lightning speed of
modern information technologies to transform societies
in most fundamental ways.
I wish to thank Jordan and Crown Prince Al Hussein
bin Abdullah II for initiating today’s open debate on the
role of youth in countering violent extremism. Hungary,
of course, fully aligns itself with the statement made by
observer of the European Union.
We fully agree that, in order to effectively counter
the threat of radicalization, we must tackle the
socioeconomic root causes that often leave young people
marginalized and susceptible to violent extremists.
High levels of youth unemployment, illiteracy and weak
family bonds all contribute to creating a fertile ground
for radicalization. We also believe that education should
be accessible to every child and be directed towards the
development of respect for the child’s parents and his
or her own cultural identity, language and values, and
prepare the child for a responsible life in a free society.
It is my belief that strong and harmonious families
contribute to the development of strong identities and
cultural values that will make children and young
people more resilient in the face of extremism. In the
same vein, promoting sports, art and cultural activities
for youth is also important for developing culturally
42/80

23/04/2015

sensitive and responsible young adults. We believe that
Governments should also facilitate the participation
of young people in public life and public discourse.
I cannot express strongly enough the responsibility
and role of the media in creating dreams and setting
examples — negative or positive. Young people are not
only the targets of violent extremist groups; they may
also have a role to play in using the media, for instance
by engaging in journalism, to counter such ideologies
and promote tolerance, diversity and respect towards
each other.
Let me conclude my statement by underlining the
importance of criminal accountability in ensuring
justice for the victims and — in the long term — in
healing the wounds of traumatized societies.
In recent months we have heard a lot about the
barbaric crimes committed by terrorist organizations.
Although today we are discussing the important role
of youth in countering violent extremism, we must not
forget about the young victims, who deserve justice.
Hungary is of the view that there can be no peace and
reconciliation without accountability. Therefore, we
must redouble our efforts to find a solution that would
also honour the victims.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Belgium.
Mr. Buffin (Belgium) (spoke in French): Belgium
would like to thank the Jordanian presidency for having
organized this debate on a major challenge at the
beginning of this new century. My statement is meant
to complement the one delivered by the European Union
(EU), which we, of course, endorse.
We cannot deny that in recent years we have seen
an alarming increase in radicalization and violent
extremism involving a great many young people from
around the world. The Middle East is probably the
region that suffers most from that trend, but many
other regions of the world are also affected to varying
degrees. Europe is no exception, and neither is Belgium.
My country was directly affected by the deadly attack
almost a year ago, on 24 May 2014, against the Jewish
Museum in Brussels, which was likely perpetrated by a
young fighter returning from the Middle East.
We must of course ensure the safety of our citizens
against the risks posed by this phenomenon, but we
must also ask ourselves what the causes and remedies
are, and ensure that the latter are consistent with the
values t​hat we defend. Why do some young people
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

choose to kill innocent people rather than go to school
and acquire the tools necessary to become responsible
adults who are useful to the society and community to
which they belong? While the elements of the analysis
of the causes of the phenomenon are well known, the
remedies are complex and multifaceted, and need to
be fine-tuned. Time is also required for them to take
effect. In that regard, I would like to highlight three
courses of action that I consider crucial in the fight
against this phenomenon.
First, there is a need to link the actions at the
various levels of power, from the global to the most
local, while taking into account the value added and the
competencies of each of those levels. Although we must
define the major political outlines and acquire the means
at the international, regional and national levels to fight
this scourge, concrete implementation will primarily
take place in cities and neighbourhoods. It is an illusion
to think that we can reach the young people concerned,
who have often withdrawn from both school and society,
without reaching out to them where they live, where
their frustrations and failures have taken root and which
is the breeding ground for their potential radicalization.
That requires human and financial resources, as well as
genuine political will. Schools, neighbourhood leaders,
social services, families — where women often play a
major role — local religious leaders and civil-society
associations will be among our best allies. We need to
strengthen their ability to act, including by training
them to produce a counter-discourse that can really be
heard. Ultimately, such policies should have the result
of enabling young people to become the main vectors
for solutions and to defend themselves and the values of
​​
tolerance and respect for others.
Secondly, we need to provide our youth with a
future. Socio-professional insertion, particularly for
the most disadvantaged, should be a priority of all our
Governments. According to the International Labour
Organization, 73 million young people worldwide are
currently unemployed. The lack of employment and
income prevents them from projecting themselves
into their future and building a decent adult life. That
lack of prospects makes them easy prey for all types
of extremists. That issue should be at the core of
negotiations on the post-2015 development agenda.
Thirdly and finally, we need to better understand
how the channels of communication used by violent
extremists function. Social media and the Internet are
undeniably vectors for radicalization. As was pointed

S/PV.7432

out last February during the White House summit on
countering violent extremism, in Washington, D.C., it
is necessary to strengthen cooperation between actors
from all key sectors, including the private sector, while
respecting the fundamental principle of the freedom of
expression. The Internet has a powerful grip; however,
it is not in itself sufficient to radicalize youth in a
lasting way. Contact between these young people and
local extremist and jihadist networks and cells is the
second stage, which draws them more lastingly into
those destructive movements. We must fight against
them with strength and determination.
Allow me to conclude my statement by shedding
light on what Belgium has or intends to do in order to
combat violent extremism. Our actions could serve as
experience to be shared within the framework of the
necessary exercise of the exchange of good practices
between all the relevant stakeholders. The Belgian
federal authorities have adopted a programme to prevent
violent radicalization, with the goal, in particular, of
better identifying the processes of radicalization through
research projects and incorporating that information
into new initiatives that have been or will be further
developed in terms of prevention. A pilot project was
launched in 2014 in nearly a dozen of the cities most
affected by this phenomenon so as to provide better
support to local authorities and enable them to combat
the phenomenon of violent radicalization. Concerning
prisons, the Minister of Justice has just launched an
action plan against radicalization, which aims, first,
to prevent inmates from becoming radicalized while
in prison, and, secondly, to develop a specialized
coaching programme for those radicalized during their
detention. Other levels of Government in Belgium have
also launched their own projects, and all of them pay
particular attention to the training of those on the front
line, including teachers, educators and social workers.
Tools have also been developed to train young people
themselves and their parents so as to better anchor the
moral and civic values ​​of our societies in education
and better equip young people against the dangers of
ideological indoctrination.
At the request of EU member States and in
cooperation with the United Kingdom, Belgium has
taken the lead of the Syria Strategic Communications
Advisory Team programme, which aims to develop a
media strategy to counter the message of hatred sent
out by jihadist preachers.

15-1147443/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

I also wish to recall that Belgium, as part of its
chairmanship of the Committee of Ministers of the
Council of Europe, will organize on 8 May a conference
on the theme “Tolerance is stronger than hatred,”
thereby showing the extent to which the diversity of
our societies is an asset, rather than a risk. It aims to
identify concrete recommendations, with particular
attention to three areas that may play an important role
in promoting our ability to live together: formal and
informal education, the media, and the worlds of work
and social relationships. At the ministerial meeting of
19 May, during which the Belgian chairmanship will end,
member States will adopt a new protocol to the Council
of Europe Convention on the Prevention of Terrorism,
focused on the fight against the phenomenon of foreign
fighters. An action plan against the radicalization
and extremism that may lead to terrorism will also be
adopted on that occasion.
Based on our previous initiatives, including the
Washington, D.C., Summit organized by President
Obama last February, we encourage Member States
to strengthen their cooperation so as to address the
phenomenon of foreign fighters, ensure the safety of
our citizens, address the root causes allowing terrorism
to thrive, and deal with recruitment. In that regard,
we welcome the high-level meeting scheduled for
September, which will give us an opportunity to take
stock of the implementation of the action plan against
extremism developed during the recent Summit in
Washington, D.C.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Ms. Bird (Australia): I thank the President for
Jordan’s ongoing contribution to this very important
agenda item, going back to the Amman message during
World Interfaith Harmony Week.
Along with many Member States, Australia is
facing unprecedented numbers of youth travelling
to fight for Daesh, Al-Qaida, Al-Shabaab and other
terrorist groups. No community or social group is
immune to terrorist recruitment. One of the teenagers
intercepted by police at Sydney airport last month on
his way to join a terrorist group was affluent, a high
academic achiever and a member of the debating and
football teams.
Australia has strengthened laws and boosted
resources to prevent terrorist recruitment. The Foreign
Minister has cancelled over 100 passports to prevent

44/80

23/04/2015

travel. Counter-terrorism units in our airports have
intercepted teenagers as young as 16 attempting to join
Daesh’s ranks. But measures to strengthen security and
law enforcement alone are not the solution. Additional
action is needed as part of a multidimensional strategy.
As others have said here today, that includes looking
at whether we are sufficiently addressing the root
causes of violent extremism and fostering peaceful
and cohesive societies. Our strategies for countering
terrorism and supporting peace need to place youth
at the centre. Young people can be more vulnerable
to outside influences and are often seeking a sense of
purpose and belonging. Some have less ability to rebut
or contest radical or extremist ideas. That is why young
people are often the number one target of terrorist
groups.
Take the example of the 18-year old Australian
who is reported to have killed 17 people in a suicide
attack in Ramadi last month. He has been described as
a shy and impressionable boy who grew up an atheist
in Melbourne. We have heard other similarly tragic
stories today. One of the biggest challenges we face in
countering extremist and radical ideas is the exposure
of young people to online propaganda. But simply
deleting all such material from the Internet is both
impossible and ineffective. We also need to involve
young people in the solutions. Young people themselves
are best placed to deliver positive messages to contest
extremist views. That is why in Australia, for example,
we are empowering youth to engage in constructive
debates through an online magazine called The Point,
written by young Australians for young Australians.
Despite the online threat, in most cases youth
are recruited through local networks, so it is also
important to focus attention at the community level.
Strong communities are often well placed to intervene
against attempts towards radicalization and build a
sense of inclusion. Assistance in that area could include
empowering youth and non-governmental organizations
to run leadership and mentoring programmes and to
support youth participation in the arts and sport in
order to enhance equity and inclusion.
We need to continue sharing approaches that work
best, in particular those that effectively target and
engage youth. The Global Counter-Terrorism Forum’s
good practices are a useful inspiration for all Member
States. The Security Council and all States must remain
proactive in using United Nations sanctions to target
those individuals recruiting youth for terrorism.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7432

We also need to move beyond supporting better
coordination among the United Nations counterterrorism entities to ensure that all the relevant
programmes of the United Nations take account of the
roles of youth in countering violent extremism. We
hope that the United Nations plan of action will provide
the framework to guide that.

Governments, academia, civil society and the media
all have a role to play in fostering a peaceful and
inclusive society through interfaith dialogue. That can
be complemented by efforts at the international level,
such as the commendable work of the United Nations
Alliance of Civilization and the Declaration and
Programme of Action on a Culture of Peace.

Today’s debate takes us a step closer to placing
youth at the centre of terrorism prevention. We also
need to make the most of upcoming opportunities to
advance this agenda at the United Nations if we are to
overcome that threat.

Secondly, quality education should be universally
accessible. Priority should be given to efforts to
enhance access for vulnerable groups such as children
of migrant workers or those living in remote areas.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Thailand.
Mr. Plasai (Thailand) (spoke in French): Today,
peace and security are seriously threatened by terrorism
and violent extremism, which are exacerbating conflicts
in many countries around the world. Even more
alarmingly, a large number of our young people have
been affected by such hateful activities or have been
involved in them. The world’s 1.8 billion young people
represent one quarter of the global population. They
hold the key to our future. They could be the catalysts
for peace, development, prosperity and progress.
Accordingly, as an essential element of our strategy
and efforts to combat terrorism and violent extremism,
we must take into account and examine the specific
situation of youth and the potential role of young
people for promoting peace. We therefore welcome the
timely initiative of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
in convening today’s open debate. In that regard, I
would like to express the gratitude of the Kingdom of
Thailand to His Royal Highness Prince Al Hussein bin
Abdallah II of Jordan for presiding over this meeting. I
also thank the Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann
and Mr. Scott Atrain for sharing their points of view on
the problem.
(spoke in English)
In order to effectively protect our youth from
violence and enhance their role in countering violent
extremism, the international community must adopt a
comprehensive approach that addresses the root causes
of the problem. Allow me to share with the Council
some perspectives as to how we can support our youth
in that regard.
First, we must cultivate an environment of tolerance
for cultural diversity and respect for the freedoms of
belief, thought and expression. At the national level,

Thirdly, decent employment must be ensured
for youth, so as to give them a sense of purpose and
belonging. National Governments have an important
role to play, particularly in matching skills with jobs,
promoting gender equality and ensuring an appropriate
legal environment to protect youth in the labour market.
Fourthly, youth are sensitive to romantic and
heroic ideas. They are therefore highly vulnerable
to the propaganda of terrorist and violent extremist
groups. Education and employment provide, to a
certain extent, a defence against youth recruitment and
association with radical groups. However, they may not
be sufficient in today’s increasingly borderless world.
Governments must therefore focus on monitoring and
countering propaganda and recruitment techniques of
terrorist and violent extremist groups, especially those
made online. It goes without saying that there should
a balance between those efforts and the fundamental
principle of respect for privacy and the freedom of
expression.
Fifthly, of equal importance is the issue of the
rehabilitation and reintegration of youth who return
home after joining terrorist and violent extremist
groups. Should they be treated as terrorists or healed as
youth with shattered dreams? Should they be severely
punished or given another chance? That issue should be
further discussed and adequately addressed.
Last but not least, regional and global international
organizations can play an important part in efforts
to effectively harness the role of youth in countering
terrorism and violent extremism and promoting peace.
The Kingdom of Thailand supports the efforts of the
Security Council in that regard, in particular resolution
2178 (2014), which encourages the Analytical Support
and Sanctions Monitoring Team to ensure coordination
among all United Nations counter-terrorism bodies.
We also urge greater coordination among the relevant

15-1147445/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

United Nations offices and agencies, in particular the
Office of the Secretary-General’s Envoy on Youth,
the United Nations Development Programme and
UNESCO, in their efforts to protect our youth from
violence and enhance their role in promoting peace.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Germany.
Mr. Thorns (Germany): Germany fully aligns
itself with the statement by the Deputy Head of the
Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations. In addition, allow me to add some remarks in
my national capacity.
We are grateful for this timely debate and the
valuable initiative of the Jordanian presidency.
The United Nations system as a whole has an
important role to play in countering violent extremism
and addressing its root causes.
By fighting poverty and educating young people,
the United Nations development organizations address
the root causes of radicalization. The Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force and the United Nations
Centre for Counter-Terrorism play an important role
in developing concrete counter-terrorism strategies.
UN-Women empowers young women and mothers
to stand up to extremism in their families and their
environment. We feel, however, that more work needs
to be done to broaden the range of actors and to further
mainstream the fight against violent extremism into the
whole United Nations family.
Our response to violent extremism needs to be
multifaceted. Robust military engagement, sanctions
and criminal prosecution are only one part of the
solution. If we want to stop recruitment and lead young
people back into our societies, prevention measures and
de-radicalization are of even greater importance.
Both of those aspects are crucial pillars of
Germany’s counter-terrorism response. At the national
level, our Government works hand in hand with civil
society, religious institutions and non-governmental
organizations. One example of that comprehensive
approach is the programme Live Democracy, which
sets up regional prevention networks, gives advice to
former members of radical communities and funds civil
society institutions that are active in the fight against
extremism. Those institutions encourage young people
to stand up against extremist ideas and to assist affected
peers.

46/80

23/04/2015

At the international level, cooperation remains
crucial. Together with its partners, Germany continues
to counter the enabling structural conditions worldwide.
Our various initiatives in Africa and the Middle East
aim to create favourable socioeconomic conditions and
to mitigate factors that could lead to radicalization.
Youth employment, the social integration of refugees
and migrants, as well as mass educational programmes
are only some of the focus areas. A few examples of these
initiatives include our support for partner organizations
in Egypt to assist young people in finding a job, our
organization of education and after-school activities
for refugee children and youth in northern Iraq and
our support for youth groups and facilities, as well as
schools and professional training institutions in Mali.
Debating the important connection between youth
and their role in violent extremism is a good first step
in analysing where we stand and what is already being
done by different actors. However, now it is time to
act to ensure that the youth of today will not become
the terrorists of tomorrow. We need to work together
to bring endangered youth back into their families and
communities. And we need to disarm, de-radicalize
and reintegrate those young men and women who have
been seduced by extremist groups and terrorists.
Integrating youth into our collective efforts to
counter violent extremism will be the best way of
building our society and promoting peace as a whole.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Luxembourg.
Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): Allow
me to thank Jordan for having taken the initiative of
convening this open debate under the presidency of His
Majesty Crown King Abdullah II bin Al Hussein. The
Secretary-General, Mr. Peter Neumann and Mr. Scott
Atran illustrated the importance of this debate by
identifying the role of youth in the fight against violent
extremism and promoting peace. We welcome the
fact that the Security Council has given this issue the
attention it deserves.
Luxembourg fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of the European Union. I will
make a few comments in my national capacity.
First, as our Prime Minister said at the Security
Council meeting (see S/PV.7272) devoted to the fight
against foreign terrorist fighters, in September 2014,
we must intensify our efforts to prevent radicalization,

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

which could lead young people to terrorism, and to
counter violent extremism. In Europe, the European
Commission has put in place a radicalization awareness
network that works at the local community level. In its
capacity as President of the Council of the European
Union, which it will exercise in the second half of
2015, Luxembourg will ensure the follow-up to the
implementation of the European Union strategy aimed
at fighting radicalization and the recruitment of
terrorists.
At the national level, our relevant agencies are
implementing a strategy for the prevention of extremist
radicalization. A mentoring and awareness-raising
network has been established in close collaboration
with the educational and penitentiary structures of
our country, religious communities and with the full
support of the Red Cross Society.

S/PV.7432

It is in this spirit that Luxembourg is committed,
at the level of the Peacebuilding Commission, to
supporting the Guinean authorities in their policy
aimed at promoting employment and the socioeconomic
reintegration Organizationf young people and at
building an inclusive society. Our development
cooperation policy has a special focus on education and
vocational training for young people. It is in this sense
as well that Luxembourg has been working, together
with Bulgaria and Panama and the Group of Friends
for Children and the Sustainable Development Goals,
with the support of UNICEF, to ensure that the post2015 development agenda fully takes into account the
specific needs and potential of children and young
people in general.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Maldives.

The concept paper (S/2015/231, annex) circulated by
the Jordanian presidency ahead of this debate properly
identifies the main root causes that lead to youth
radicalization. Young people seeking a sense of identity
and of belonging to a social group are particularly
vulnerable to the phenomenon. The feeling of exclusion
as a precondition for radicalization has been eloquently
described this morning by Mr. Neumann and is clear in
the number of young people who leave Europe to fight
alongside Daesh other extremist terrorist organizations.

Mr. Sareer (Maldives): On behalf of the Maldives
delegation, I would like to express our sincere
appreciation to Jordan, as President of the Council, for
taking the initiative to convene this open debate on an
important topic. We also thank the Secretary-General
for his engagement in this debate. We have read with
much interest the concept paper (S/2015/231, annex)
circulated by the Kingdom of Jordan and we welcome
the call for a more in-depth analysis of this issue by the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate.

To counter the rise of violent extremism and
prevent the exploitation of young people, it is essential,
in our view, to invest in the development and wellbeing of youth themselves. For although we must avoid
oversimplifying reality, the lack of prospects and
economic opportunities, including the lack of access
to employment that young people are faced with,
undeniably contribute to creating a breeding ground for
the radicalization of young people. The link between
violent extremism and economic and social problems
goes back to the broader link that exists between
security, development and the respect for the rule of
law and human rights.

When we speak of violent extremism, terrorism and
conflict, it is sad to note that young people are always
somewhere in the picture. We catch horrifying glimpses
in the news of children as victims of violence — a
massacre at a school last year in Peshawar, Pakistan;
hundreds of children kidnapped by Boko Haram in
Nigeria; an attack on a school bus in Yemen; the killing
of teenagers in the West Bank; and the bombing of
a soccer game in Baghdad. As a Pakistani official
poignantly put it, “the smaller the coffin, the heavier
it is to carry”.

As the Secretary-General underscored this morning,
we must avoid reducing youth to a simple potential
security risk. On the contrary, we must acknowledge
them as agents of change and as actors in building
peace and development. We must give young people the
opportunity to show their potential by promoting their
full participation in the life of society.

As the scourge of terrorism sweeps the world, it
robs innocent children of their childhood, their parents,
their sisters and brothers, and sometimes even their
short-lived lives well before their time. Around the
world, children are losing the sacred sense of safety to
walk the streets, go to school and pursue their dreams. It
affects us all: acts of terror disrupt international peace
and security and undermine the inalienable rights of
children.

15-1147447/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

My delegation joins others in condemning terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. Terrorism and other
forms of violent extremism cannot be justified by any
means. It should not be associated with any religion,
race, faith, theology, values, culture, society or group,
nor can it be localized to one nation. The Government of
Maldives denounces the acts of the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Sham terrorist organization, which are fuelling
narratives of violence and promoting radicalism among
young people. We condemn in the strongest term the
acts of this un-Islamic and anti-Islamic group and its
recruitment of young people to engage in conflict and
commit grave violations against innocent people.
We will not let Islam, a religion of peace and
compassion, be hijacked by radical and extremist
elements to perpetuate hatred and violence. Nor will
we let these extremists spread ignorance, preach hate
and corrupt our youth. The Maldives has always called
for inculcating the true values of Islam — mutual
understanding, respect, tolerance and dialogue — in
our society. In particular, the Maldives has urged the
spread of good social and Islamic values and principles
among young people.
More than 25 years since the Convention on
the Rights of the Child was adopted by the General
Assembly, it is shocking to hear of the continuing role
of young people in violent extremism. We the nations
of the world promised a better life for children when we
signed that landmark Convention. We cannot let them
down.
Even more shocking than the victimization of
children is the radicalization of young people. Young
people, especially those searching for a sense of
belonging, purpose or identity, are highly vulnerable
to manipulation by those with violent agendas or
ideologies, who radicalize young minds, recruit them
to a cause, and mobilize them as child soldiers, terrorist
fighters or accessories to violent crimes. The Maldives,
as a party to the Optional Protocol on the involvement
of children in armed conflict, strongly opposes the
recruitment of children in armed conflict, and urges
States to take all necessary measures to prevent children
meeting with such a fate.
The Government of Maldives is committed to paving
the way for youth to be more involved in the building
of the nation and to create socioeconomic opportunities
for them. We are committed to empowering our youth
and implementing better programmes and mechanisms
to protect them.
48/80

23/04/2015

To bring our young people back from the front
lines to classrooms, we need a long-term game plan.
A critical part of the solution is, first, to invest in
education. Education is a powerful tool in empowering
young people to take control of their own futures.
Secondly, we need to create opportunities for
young people to find meaning and purpose in other
pursuits — for example, through youth skills training
and vocational programmes. Thirdly, we need to build
strong, supportive communities for our young people to
grow up in. Our children learn from us adults; we need
to set a positive example for them to follow.
We have been listening intently and taken note
of the initiatives on involving youth in peacebuilding
that we have heard about today from Member States.
However, as we discuss solutions, let us not forget to
engage young people themselves. We need to harness
their limitless imaginations, optimism, energy and
hope. What can children and youth teach us about
bringing peace to the world?
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Switzerland.
Mr. Sollberger (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
I would like to thank Jordan for having organized
this debate. The rise of radicalization and violent
extremism, especially among adolescent and young
people, is among the today’s most pressing threats to
peace, stability and development.
Switzerland is firmly committed to countering
violent extremism. This is a security imperative that
calls for a preventative approach and a broad-based
societal response. We must listen to the grievances of
those vulnerable to radicalization and recruitment by
terrorist groups, especially young people. We have
to offer a choice to these young people attracted to
radicalization — a sense of belonging and a purpose in
life, as the two professors who briefed the Council at
the opening of this debate pointed out.
It is for this reason that Switzerland supports the
Global Community Engagement and Resilience Fund.
This innovative public-private partnership based in
Geneva offers great opportunities to channel efforts and
collectively implement a long-term strategy aimed at
preventing the radicalization of young men and women.
We are ready to actively support the its campaign to
raise awareness among the private sector regarding the
need for joint action to create jobs for young people.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Let me explain how Switzerland is integrating
preventative measures to fight violent extremism in its
domestic as well as in its foreign policies. Domestically,
Switzerland’s bottom-up design actions seek to empower
local communities — to people themselves — the means
to act. Swiss communal and regional authorities and a
multitude of civil society actors, including religious
organizations, play an active role in promoting a
welcoming socioeconomic environment. Private-sector
companies offer jobs and vocational training. Paid
training offers significant advantages: as employees,
apprentices obtain a recognized status that builds their
confidence.
This bottom-up approach also informs Switzerland’s
foreign policy approach, which includes a wide range
of relevant development and peacebuilding measures
aiming to make societies more resilient, for example
through youth employment in Kyrgyzstan, demobilizing
child soldiers in Myanmar and vocational training in
Tunisia.
Let me conclude by addressing two particular
issues regarding the link between violent extremism
and youth. Switzerland has already expressed many
times its concern about counter-terrorism measures
that criminalize any humanitarian action or any contact
established for humanitarian ends with armed groups
considered to be extremists. It is the children in areas
controlled by such groups who are most affected and
directly suffer from the harmful consequences of
these measures. Counter-terrorism policies that often
seek to protect the most vulnerable should take such
consequences into consideration.
Finally, the enactment of counter-terrorism
legislation does not give sufficient consideration to
the fact that persons alleged of committing terrorism
could be under the age of 18. Many counter-terrorism
strategies, for example, provide for long sentences of
incarceration and solitary confinement, which not only
violates the rights of individuals to a fair trial but also
has a devastating psychological impact on children.
Criminal legislation for countering terrorism should
therefore be considered in the light of the specific
situation of children so as to integrate international
standards for juvenile justice.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Qatar.
Ms. Al-Thani (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): It was a
great pleasure for us to see His Highness Crown Prince

S/PV.7432

Al-Hussein bin Abdullah preside over this extremely
important meeting. There can be no doubt the fact
that he was keen to attend this debate underscores
the vital nature of this issue and how important it is
to reach practical recommendations to help facing
the challenges hampering youth empowerment and to
strengthen their role in building peace. Allow me also
me to congratulate Jordan on its great efforts during its
presidency of the Security Council this month.
The international community has been unanimous
in all of its resolutions: it is determined to fight
terrorism and extremism. All Member States agreed
under the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy that dealing with the root causes of terrorism
is the only way to eradicate it. Therefore, in the light of
that international consensus, to achieve that objective
will require a longer-term, far-reaching strategy that
takes into account the factors leading to terrorism.
Indeed, confronting this scourge, which threatens our
communities and undermines stability and unity, is a
shared responsibility.
Experience has confirmed that terrorism did not
arise in a vacuum, but grew and developed in fragile
environments where extremism also thrived as a result
of policies that do not take into account the problems of
communities, including issues related to young people.
The state of despair experienced by youth is one of
the most important factors being exploited by terrorist
organizations as they pursue their evil ends. These
groups use this despair as the fuel for their recruitment
of young people. Responding to the aspirations of
young people, creating educational programmes that
would enable them to contribute to the development
of their communities, and addressing unemployment
and social justice with a view to eliminating the sense
of insecurity and unfairness and enabling them to
participate in decision-making is the only sure way
to eradicate extremism and refute the arguments put
forward by terrorists.
The impact of extremism on young people — and
the severity of the consequences at the national and
international levels should the appropriate steps to
address this issue with the requisite urgency not be
taken — require us to consider all the reasons that
have led young people to be attracted to terrorism
and violence. The international community has a joint
responsibility in this respect. In the light of the various
dimensions of this problem, addressing the question of
extremism through the fight against terrorism alone

15-1147449/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

would be a mistake. Rather, we must take a holistic
view and consider the causes of extremism and why
young people sometimes join terrorist organizations
and see violence as a way of expressing their positions.
When we call for a comprehensive approach to
rooting out extremism and terrorism, we do not mean
to diminish the importance of the immediate military
response to the imminent threat posed by terrorist
groups that recruit young people. In that regard, we
stress the importance of addressing the root causes of
extremism and terrorism and, in the context of finding
comprehensive solutions, of changing circumstances
and motivations in order to improve the prospects for
a better future for communities and particularly for
young people.
Attending to the needs of our youth and supporting
their aspirations for the future are important components
of the State of Qatar’s policies at the national and
international levels, conscious as we are of the terrible
consequences if the ongoing conflicts in many countries
in our region, particularly in Palestine and Syria, were
to reach them. These conflicts have festered because
the international community has not been able to
reach solutions pursuant to decisions of international
legitimacy and the provisions of international law.
Syrian children constitute more than half the number
of Syrian refugees and displaced persons, which has
led to some 2 million Syrian children being deprived of
educational opportunities. That means that Syria is in
danger of losing an entire generation. Further, if Syrian
children are deprived of the right to education, they will
be vulnerable to recruitment by extremist groups. For
that reason, the State of Qatar announced at the recent
donor conference held in Kuwait the establishment
of a fund for education and skills training for Syrian
refugees and displaced persons.
In recognition of the role of youth in addressing
the world’s challenges, my country took the initiative to
hold the Youth Forum on Crime Prevention and Criminal
Justice from 7 to 9 April, on the eve of the thirteenth
United Nations Congress on Crime Prevention and
Criminal Justice, recently held in Doha, with a view
to enabling young people to express their opinions and
participate in the drafting of resolutions and policies
on crime in its various forms and in the fight against
terrorism.
Finally, young people have always been the real
engine of change. Failure to recognize their role would

50/80

23/04/2015

be tantamount to ignoring logic and the lessons of
history. Therefore, unless we provide an environment
in which youth are engaged and involved in all aspects
of community life, the price to be paid will be very high
and have a negative impact on international peace and
security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Mendoza-García (Costa Rica) (spoke in
Spanish): We thank the Jordanian delegation for
having organized such an important debate. We are
participating here today firmly convinced of the
key role that youth have to play in the attainment of
democracy and the promotion of peace.
The world continues to view with alarm the serious
threat posed by terrorism and violent extremism to
international peace and security, the enjoyment of human
rights, the social and economic development of States,
global stability and prosperity, and of course the creation
of opportunities for the development of young people.
As was reiterated at the recent Ibero-American Summit
of December 2014, the young people of today are the
best educated and skilled generation in history, yet they
face many challenges in such areas as employment,
health, mobility and participation, with none as crosscutting as education, the development of knowledge
and innovation. We therefore have to grapple with two
realities: first, the growth of the youth population,
particularly young people of working age, which serves
as the economic and demographic engine of our region
within the current global context; and secondly, the
development of technology, particularly information
and communications technology.
Costa Rica is honoured to have organized,
together with the International Telecommunication
Union (ITU), the World Youth Summit, held in San
José in August 2013, which, in its outcome document,
emphasized the fact that young people are genuinely
transforming today’s world and shaping themselves as
a force for progress. The Summit also shed light on the
need to improve democracy as an essential mechanism
for guaranteeing the full participation of young people
in decision-making processes and on the need to
take action that would nurture their empowerment at
regional, national and international levels. It is therefore
urgent that we focus on fostering and enabling genuine,
free and fair access to knowledge about information
and communications technology. This will ensure that
young people can simultaneously benefit from and act
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

as champions of social progress, a process in which
they will not simply play the role of spectator, but in
which they can also act as producers of content with
social, political and cultural depth and impact.
The President of the Republic of Costa Rica,
Mr. Luis Guillermo Solís Rivera, has upheld an ongoing
commitment to youth, involving young people directly
in the decision-making process at the highest levels and
ensuring their full participation in Government and
political posts that are key to the holistic development
of society. Given his actions, the Secretary-General
of the ITU has extended the courtesy to our President
of appointing him Patron of Youth and Information
Technology, an appointment that will be made official
in June of this year. The purpose of this designation
is to encourage the international community, the
private sector, organized civil society and the teaching
profession to deliver skills development and access
to information and communications technology to
young people, without regard to their social reality or
environment. In this regard, Costa Rica has already
been acknowledged for its tireless participation and
involvement in issues relating to cybersecurity and the
protection of childhood in the digital age, achieving
important and innovative change in our domestic
legislation with the overall aim of protecting childhood
and youth.
Despite the educational and socioeconomic
disadvantages facing many thousands of young
people around the world, they nonetheless represent
the sector of society that has made the most progress
in areas that will be fundamental to the delivery of
change, such as access to and the sophisticated use of
information communications technology in the digital
age. Nevertheless, the inclusion or exclusion of young
people cannot be attributed simply to the so-called
digital divide, given that the use of the Internet and
wireless telecommunications networks is no guarantee
of their genuine and authentic inclusion in digital
society or in the main power networks that forge our
common identities and values. In this regard, fostering
the ability to generate content for young people is key
if we are to open the way to new options for them to
engage in social, economic, environmental, political
and cultural participation.
Information and communications technology
is a key instrument in educational processes and a
fundamental part of the way education is delivered
today as a practical tool that allows young people to be

S/PV.7432

more equitably involved in the process of sustainable
development, escape poverty and contribute to
society, genuine development, and the maintenance
and promotion of peace. In that regard, education
is undoubtedly the most valuable investment in the
development and harmony of individuals and societies,
which Governments should promote, encourage and
guarantee as a right to ensure social mobility and full
access to the exercise of other rights and in building a
culture of peace.
Costa Rica remains proud of its decision to abolish
the army in 1948. That decision is fundamentally
important to our country, having freed greater resources
to be allocated to education and the social security
system. It is the basis for enhancing and pursuing, to this
day, the building of a knowledge-based society where
young people, through information and communications
technologies, have become increasingly involved in
social power networks and able to make more informed
decisions in forging of common values and identities.
The full inclusion of young people in spaces of
genuine power is crucial in generating intergenerational
agreements that will allow our societies to adopt new
attitudes and points of view and to create new avenues
for peaceful coexistence among peoples and new forms
of dialogue and understanding that will enable us to
acknowledge one another and act as citizens of the
world that we desire to build and to preserve peace.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Morocco.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I wish to thank His Royal Highness Crown
Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II for his statement
at the opening of this meeting on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace.
The young people of today also make up the future
generation. If they are healthy, the entire generation
and society will be healthy. It is unfortunate that many
young people in many countries are being influenced
and recruited by violent groups, for example in Somalia
and elsewhere. Who is responsible for that? Who is
responsible for violent extremism, which is the main
obstacle to global peace and security? We must all
stand against that threat. We must not forget that young
people are being targeted by such terrorist groups via
all means, including financial, advanced technology,
social networking and the Internet, whereby many
young people have been recruited. Many families, not

15-1147451/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

only in the Arab countries but throughout the world,
have discovered that their children have been recruited
by terrorist groups. It is indeed a nightmare and a deadly
virus. How can we stand against that phenomenon?
First of all, the responsibility lies with the State,
society and the family. Educational curricula should
promote tolerance and openness towards others. I
therefore call for obligatory education for both girls
and boys. It may be surprising to those here present
that I should raise this issue, but I do so because
certain countries in the world have not yet achieved
that Millennium Development Goal. Many families
deprive their young girls of an education because they
believe that a woman’s place is in the home as a mother.
However, there is a saying in Arabic that a mother is a
school. If the mother is healthy, then the entire family
and society as a whole will be healthy. We must protect
our children from the ideas of the extremists.
I also wish to highlight the accelerating rate of young
people dropping out of school. In such conditions, they
can become easy targets for criminal groups involved
with drug trafficking and other aspects of organized
crime. We have seen members of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Sham originating from over 80 countries,
according to the most recent reports.
In 2013, the Arab Thought Foundation published a
report showing that the most serious challenge facing
the Arab countries is the need to provide approximately
80 million employment opportunities by the year 2020.
The Director-General of the International Labour
Organization has also referred to that challenge, which
threatens the security of the entire region. There are
many reasons for this phenomenon, including political,
economic and social shortcomings in the region that
have led many young people to migrate, many of
whom have fallen victim to the sea while seeking a
lost paradise. The Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees recently announced the
drowning of 800 migrants.
The Kingdom of Morocco has welcomed the
initiative of King Mohammed VI to establish a
centre for the training of religious leaders and the
promotion of tolerant and moderate discourse. The
centre has provided appropriate training to religious
leaders from Africa and Europe in the framework of
a cooperation agreement among the Governments of
many African countries. Another forum involving
young parliamentarians is also a useful tool, in

52/80

23/04/2015

addition to a television station with the main objective
of enlightening young people in identifying hatredbased discourse. I believe that it is possible to combat
extremism by providing young people with openminded, proper education, including enlightened ideas.
Miracles can occur because, when people are motivated
and empowered, they will certainly succeed.
To conclude, I wish to reiterate Morocco’s support
for this morning’s youth initiative. I believe that its
content will prove to be as important as it is timely.
Moreover, I support the proposal of Brazil and Spain for
the creation of the post of Assistant Secretary-General
for matters affecting young people.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kenya.
Ms. Grignon (Kenya): On behalf of the Kenyan
delegation, I wish to congratulate the Jordanian
presidency on convening today’s open debate on the
role of youth in countering violent extremism and
promoting peace. We also wish to commend you on
the manner in which you have conducted the affairs of
the Council during the month of April, during which
important deliberations and conclusions have been
achieved.
We also wish to thank you for the detailed concept
paper (S/2015/231, annex) that has guided today’s
debate. We appreciate the commitment shown by His
Royal Highness the Crown Prince of Jordan in chairing
the morning session in person. Indeed, my President,
President Uhuru Kenyatta, was in the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan just a few days ago, where he and
his colleagues attended a coordination meeting for the
Horn of Africa countries, focusing on the fight against
terrorism and radicalization.
I would also like to thank the Secretary-General for
his comprehensive remarks on the subject, as well as
the two keynote speakers, for their incisive comments.
I would like to align our statement with that of
Ambassador Téte António on behalf of the African
Union, and to add some of our own views in my national
capacity.
My delegation notes with satisfaction the Security
Council’s concerted efforts to address violent extremism
through various resolutions, and commends it for its
current efforts, as the custodian of international peace
and security, to eradicate the threats posed by violent
extremist groups around the world.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Today’s debate has a very special significance
for Kenya. As the Council is aware, Kenya and other
countries in East Africa and the Horn of Africa have
been subjected to violent extremism in terrorist
attacks perpetrated mainly by Al-Shabaab, a Somalibased Al-Qaida affiliate. The recent attack targeting
Christian students at Garissa University College, in
which 148 young people were killed, is a case in point.
The young people themselves have been fundamentally
affected — indeed, in this case both the perpetrators and
the victims were young. That act was essentially aimed
at emasculating Kenya and its future. The perpetrators
of terrorism are just out to kill, irrespective of their
targets. Our experience shows that the psychology of the
perpetrators is devoid of any form of consciousness or
humanity. At this stage, they are just killing machines.
That is why preventive efforts, aimed at stopping young
people before they reach that stage, are critical.
Today, most regions of the world are grappling with
an unprecedented rise in violent extremism, mainly
targeting the most important and most vulnerable
segment of our society — young people, who are being
lured to abandon their promising future as responsible
citizens. Young people hold the key to future stability
for families, society and nations. Attempts to radicalize
them in order to put them on a tragic path of violence
and destruction based on ideological beliefs, with the
goal of achieving rapid social and political change
outside accepted norms, must be addressed now. Those
luring young people into extremism have exploited
common grievances. A lot of those grievances have been
mentioned today, to which I will just add those such as
hopelessness, perceived injustices and marginalization,
all of which can help radicalize young people and rally
them to a cause, often in the name of religion. We
condemn such actions in the strongest possible terms
and declare that the causes must be addressed.
My delegation believes that together we can
overcome violent extremism and help our young people
to effectively resist its lure and that of radicalization.
We can help them become champions and key actors
in countering such extremism by addressing the
conditions conducive to its spread and to that of
terrorism, as outlined in the first pillar of the Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, in an inclusive manner
that involves young people themselves at each stage of
the process, whereby we can actually create societies
free of violent extremism. That requires re-examining
the way in which we deal with and treat young people
in our intergovernmental dialogue, national discourse

S/PV.7432

and local conversations. We must look at young people
more as presenting an opportunity to defeat violent
extremism and radicalization. To do that, we must
empower them with various tools so they can confront
the agenda of violent extremism. That should include a
powerful counter-narrative that they can embrace.
The Government of Kenya has launched various
strategic initiatives designed to put young people at the
forefront of the fight against violent extremism and to
promote peace by encouraging resilience in the face of
extremism. The measures that we have adopted and are
implementing include, first, education policies ensuring
that the maximum educational opportunities are
available to all young people at the primary, secondary
and tertiary levels, as a bulwark against extremism.
They include specific education and outreach policies
targeted to those who are most vulnerable to violent
extremism, and innovative programmes that nurture
young people through the development of talent. Youth
development programmes teaching young people about
peaceful co-existence have also been initiated.
Second, we have also put in place a special fund,
known as the Uwezo Fund, which seeks to expand access
to financing and promote enterprises led by women,
young people and persons with disabilities. It provides
mentorship opportunities to enable young people to take
advantage of their 30 per cent Government procurement
preference through its capacity-building programme. It
is an avenue that is creating employment.
Third, the Government is now giving sustained fiscal
attention to focusing more on economic transformation
priorities, which are likely to have the greatest impact
on youth economic empowerment. These include
investments in information and communications
technology, agricultural transformation and food
security; in modern transport and logistics; in accessible
health care and the strengthening of social safety nets
in order to reduce household burdens.
Fourth, a national youth council and youth fund
are fully operational and working to oversee the
programmatic aspects of the economic transformation
agenda, which, among other things, calls for enhanced
support for devolved governance and resources aimed
at enhancing service delivery at the grass-roots level.
Fifth, through its National Youth Service, the
Government has initiated programmes that seek to
rehabilitate and mentor destitute children and young
people vulnerable to radicalization and recruitment.

15-1147453/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

The Youth Service empowers them with values that
give them a sense of identity, belonging and direction,
as well as promoting national values of tolerance,
patriotism, loyalty and unity.
Sixth, the Government is also committed to creating
partnerships with local communities, civil society and
religious leaders, and to engaging other actors to keep
vulnerable young people positively engaged.
Seventh, we have launched initiatives for regional
cooperation and inter-regional youth exchanges, aimed
at developing and promoting a common understanding
on addressing youth-related issues with a view to
enhancing resilience in the face of extremism and other
social problems. This involves sharing experiences
and best practices that can help young people to
empower themselves in confronting radicalization and
extremism.
Eighth and last is the enhancement of the capacity
of Kenyan prison authorities to identify specific cases
of possible radicalization in corrective institutions and
facilities, and to initiate rehabilitation programmes that
target such cases.
The delegation of Kenya wishes to assure the
Security Council that our Government will continue
to build institutional and community-level capacity,
especially at the grassroots level, that can enable youth
and women’s groups to counter violent extremism in
their communities, and will continue to partner with
the United Nations and other development partners and
stakeholders to identify new approaches and innovative
ways to counter violent extremism and radicalization.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon): I would like to begin by
thanking the Jordanian presidency for organizing this
important meeting and circulating the concept paper
on the role of youth in countering violent extremism
and promoting peace (S/2015/231, annex). I would also
like to commend His Royal Highness for presiding over
this meeting and for his commitment to youth issues.
And I would like to express our deep appreciation to the
Secretary-General and all the briefers.
Today there are more than 1 billion youth around
the world, a young population characterized by its
unprecedented access to information technology. At the
same time, this population faces many challenges that
exacerbate its vulnerability, with more than 6 million

54/80

23/04/2015

youth living in fragile and conflict regions, and about
75 million unemployed.
Youth are to be found on both sides of terrorist
activities. They are targeted in their schools,
universities and homes, in Palestine, Libya, Yemen,
Pakistan, Central Africa and Kenya, and youth are
targeting journalists and tourists in Paris, Tunisia,
Sweden and Brussels, among other places. This
alarming phenomenon emphasizes that terrorist attacks
transcend borders and are not limited to one country,
religion or ethnicity and represent a serious threat to
international peace and security around the world.
Prevention starts on benches in schools and
continues throughout the social mobility chain.
Education is pivotal in building up the resilience
of future generations. It should engrave in them
knowledge, human rights, understanding of the other,
openness, dialogue, tolerance and the rule of law. It
should promote critical thinking that will help fight
bigotry, stereotyping and essentialism. Education
should also be oriented to the needs of the labour market
and ensure a dignified livelihood, social inclusion and a
wider participation in the public political sphere.
The fight for the minds of young people should
continue through standing up to the attractiveness of
extremist and intolerant religious figures. Modern
and attractive social organizations for youth should
constitute a better alternative in order to educate and
prepare those youth for leadership posts and to be
positive role models.
All of the organs and specialized agencies of the
United Nations should continue to work relentlessly to
address the root causes of terrorism, to fully implement
strategies highlighting the interlinkages between peace
and development, with a strong emphasis on the needs
of youth, and, most importantly, putting an end to
impunity and double standards in the implementation
of law and ensuring justice.
The Middle East and the Arab world are informed by
the Israeli occupation, protracted conflicts, violations
of human rights, shattered dreams, an unprecedented
surge in terrorism and radicalization whose main
focus is on youth, who represent one third of our Arab
population.
Aware that the youth are our ray of hope in the
midst of all these challenges, my Government adopted
in 2012 a youth policy in Lebanon, drafted by young
people and capturing their priorities in five areas,
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

namely, demography and economic participation;
education and culture; health; social integration; and
political participation. Moreover, Lebanon’s vibrant
civil society has always offered platforms for inclusive
dialogue between its young people, with full respect
for their intellectual diversity. Suffice to mention the
Common Space Initiative, whose objective is to build
youth capacity in debate and solution formulation in
the context of national and regional programmes; and
the Adyan workshops, during which young people such
as Sara, a young Lebanese woman, state that they are
determined to break stereotypes and draw a different
picture of Islam than the one promoted by terrorism and
extremism.
This journey, at the national, regional and
international levels, will not be successful if our youth
are not our partners in elaborating a plan of action to
fight terrorism. They are not only the future generation;
we need to involve them now in today’s affairs to secure
a better future for all of us.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Pakistan.
Ms. Lodhi (Pakistan): Mr. President, my
delegation thanks you for having convened this
important debate. Violent extremism has emerged as
one of the most complex challenges of our time. It has
claimed innocent lives, caused wide-scale destruction
and disrupted social order as well as State structures.
Its scope, nature, causes and manifestations make
it a global phenomenon, and this requires a common
understanding and cooperative solutions.
A critical aspect of this challenge is the radicalization
of youth, which often leads them to commit violent acts.
But youth are also the key to building resilience against
this threat. We therefore welcome Jordan’s initiative to
highlight the role of youth in addressing this challenge.
Throughout history, youth have been the engine
of change, for good or for bad. The energy of youth
can generate progress and prosperity but, equally,
it can exacerbate violence and war. It is up to States
and societies to ensure that the energy and idealism
of youth is directed towards promoting peace and
progress rather than conflict and chaos. When young
people become alienated within societies, when they
perceive oppression and injustice, local or global, they
become susceptible to seduction by the ideologues of
extremism.

S/PV.7432

The rise of violent extremism has a direct
correlation with conflicts and disputes; foreign
intervention and occupation; religious, racial and ethnic
discrimination or persecution; and social and economic
exclusion. Extremists use such injustices to lure youth
into supporting their agenda. The radicalization of
youth in certain Western States flows from social
alienation, economic marginalization and the growing
phenomenon of Islamophobia. A major step to reverse
this is legislation to prohibit insults to religions and to
establish a clear distinction between free speech and
hate speech.
The Council, even as it considers the social and
economic dimensions of this phenomenon, has a vital
political role to play. It must intensify its efforts to
address long-standing conflicts and disputes.
The radicalization of youth cannot be understood,
much less addressed or curbed, shorn of its political,
social and economic context. Economic and political
exclusion and social injustice fuel disenchantment,
which drives young men and women towards
extremism, and that in turn assures terrorist groups
of a steady supply of recruits. We know only too well
how the youth bulge in several parts of the Middle
East has played a major role in the political upheavals
of recent years. The interplay between demographics,
lack of socioeconomic opportunity and radicalization
magnifies the challenge of violent extremism.
When economic opportunity fails to keep pace
with demographics, young people become particularly
vulnerable to being attracted to extremist narratives.
Social frustration and economic deprivation thus
provide a breeding ground for violent extremism. So
if violent extremists are to be defeated, the economic
empowerment of youth must be a major component
of a counter-radicalization strategy. Building
resilience in communities and societies is necessary
to evolve an effective strategy, because resilience
and cohesion are essential bulwarks against violent
extremism. This entails enlisting the support and
trust of local communities, particularly youth and
women. Educational programmes, as many others have
emphasized before me, can play a vital role in fostering
values of tolerance, harmony and respect for diversity.
The role of religious leaders is no less important,
because they can contribute to shaping young people’s
attitudes and building their resilience. They can also
help to counter and delegitimize acts of violence,
regardless of justifications or motivations.

15-1147455/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

We in Pakistan are pursuing a comprehensive
approach that involves, in addition to law enforcement,
educational,
social
and
economic
measures.
Acknowledging the key importance of creating
economic opportunities for young people and
harnessing their potential to promote national progress,
Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif launched a special
youth programme last year. It is designed to provide
educational and vocational support and socioeconomic
opportunity in the form of special schemes for young
people.
As part of our national action plan to counter
terrorism, Pakistan has taken other steps to curb violent
extremism. Those have included curbs on hate speech
and material, steps against religious persecution,
registration of religious schools and measures against
the use of social media for terrorism or its glorification.
We support the useful work of the United Nations Centre
for Counter-Terrorism in that area. Next month, with
the United Nations Counter-Terrorism Implementation
Task Force, my country will co-host in Islamabad a
skills development and needs assessment conference
focused on youth.
The United Nations with its expertise, on-the-ground
experience and unique convening power can play a
leading role in developing a comprehensive strategy.
Given the complexity and global dimensions of
violent extremism, the General Assembly should
also be enabled to play a leading role in developing a
multifaceted strategy, building on resolution 68/127.
We hope that the September United Nations summit on
the issue will provide a clear direction towards that end.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic of
Iran.
Mr. Khoshroo (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to thank Jordan for convening this
meeting on a very critical issue facing the world and
our youth.
Today, young people are in a paradoxical situation
in relation to Islam and the West. This critical situation
is rooted in two seemingly contradictory but inherently
complementary realities. On the one hand, we have
witnessed the expansion of extremism and terrorism,
which can be observed in some Western capitals as
much as in the villages and cities of some Islamic
countries. On the other hand, Islamophobia has been

56/80

23/04/2015

spreading across the West and implanting hatred and
fear in the fabric of Western societies.
Where are the youth in the midst of this conflicting
and contradictory situation? Have they caused the rise
of this situation or are they simply its victims? Who are
those who have created the situation and what interest
is to be served? What is the role of young people in the
equation? The Supreme Leader of the Islamic Republic
of Iran, in a message addressed to the young in the West,
called upon them to free themselves from that imposed
and destructive quandary. He added that today, modern
communication technology has blurred geographical
boundaries. The young must not allow themselves to be
confined within fabricated mental walls.
What are these artificial mental walls? They have
their foundation in destructive ideologies, which have
two attributes. First, they are tainted with ignorance,
superficiality and fanatical outlooks. Secondly, they are
also violence-oriented and based on terror and takfir,
that is, considering others or those who are different as
apostates. Those centres that propagate such ideologies
falsely under the name of Islam and spend billions of
dollars to spread them through satellite television and
social and traditional media are fuelling the spread
of ignorance and violence. They specifically prey on
youth and link them to their networks of extremism and
terrorism.
Today’s world has witnessed a nefarious show of
violence in the Middle East and North Africa. If those
behind that show are not confronted, the danger they
create can increase exponentially and lead to the most
threatening global security crisis. It seems that the
process has given rise to Islamophobia in the West.
However, the financial, political and cultural centres of
such hate-mongering and takfiri ideologies are indeed
allied to the bases of might and money in certain corners
in the West. Such power centres use global media to
target Islam, to attempt to depict it as the greatest threat
and to emphasize the inevitability of the bloody conflict
between Islam and the West.
Those ideologies, those global terrorists and the
fear-mongering media do not represent Islam. They all
lie at the core of Islamophobia and the acts that target
Muslims. In the message of Iran’s Supreme Leader,
youth are called upon to stay aloof from this unjustified
crisis and to distance themselves in a savvy and clearsighted way from the ideologies based on ignorance and
violence. Islam is a religion of compassion and wisdom,

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

and the way its Prophet lived demonstrates a peaceful
way of life, imbued with wisdom and empathy, which it
recommends to all. The earnest young people who seek
truth should break the mental barriers raised both by
Islamophobia and takfiri ideologies and set a new path
in the interaction between Islam and the West. Thanks
to those young people, the relation between Islam and
the West will be based on constructive interaction,
mutual respect and fairness. And that is exactly what
the Islamic Republic of Iran is looking for in terms of
global cooperation to combat extremism and violence.
Iranians, especially young Iranians, have been the
most immune when it comes to the propaganda and
recruitment of violent extremism, which is a matter of
pride to us. I would like to take this opportunity to once
again reaffirm Iran’s unquestionable commitment to
combating violent extremism, especially in the context
of our fight against the most dangerous of terrorist
groups in our region, such as Al-Qaida, Daesh and
similar groups that have also been the most successful
in preying upon the young all over the world.
Finally, I wish to say that President Hassan Rouhani
of Iran introduced a comprehensive agenda for a world
against violence and violent extremism, which was
adopted by the General Assembly as resolution 68/127
at its sixty-eighth session. The agenda provides a path
to combat violent extremism and empower young
people around the world, and its importance has never
been more clear.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Sajdik (Austria): At the outset, let me thank
the Jordanian presidency for convening today’s open
debate.
We are currently witnessing a dramatic rise of
radicalization and extremism in the name of religion,
particularly in the Middle East and North Africa.
However, violent extremism is not the challenge of
one region alone; it exists everywhere. As Austrian
Foreign Minister Sebastian Kurz stated in the Security
Council on 27 March (see S/PV.7419), it is a dangerous
development that young women and men seem to be the
targets of radicalization by terrorist groups.
The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters
who travel to conflict areas such as Iraq and Syria
constitutes a new security threat. At a time when the
youth population worldwide has reached an all-time
record, extremist groups are globally recruiting ever-

S/PV.7432

younger foreign fighters, often by using social media.
Young people are attracted to extremist ideologies
because of their marginalization in society. Poverty
and limited educational and employment opportunities
create discontent. Often, young people are also not
heard by decision-makers, and their self-organization in
community-based associations and groups is met with
suspicion. Wherever young people are marginalized,
this is also the result of failed politics.
Today’s debate highlights the need for the
international community to redouble its efforts to
counter the recruitment of young people by extremists.
Allow me to make some suggestions on what needs to be
done. We have to continue to support efforts to address
the underlying factors leading to the radicalization of
youth. We need to ensure that all young people have
access to quality education and job opportunities. From
early on, young people need to understand the intrinsic
value of diversity as a factor for the enrichment of
society. Young people need to learn about their human
rights and the human rights of others.
Young people need to know that they have the right
to participate in decision-making processes within
society, and they need to be encouraged to do so. Many
of the freedoms that young people are enjoying today
are being taken for granted. However, we need to
convey the message to young people that the freedom
they are enjoying today is the result of a long and often
arduous process and that they also have a responsibility
to promote freedom as a core value of our society. When
lacking prospects, young people may risk turning to
extremism. We therefore have to show them that they
are an integral part of society by offering them ways of
participation, such as voluntary work.
We need to use innovative mechanisms to reach
young people, using the Internet and social media to
counter messages of hatred with messages of hope. We
need to support civil society organizations in creating
the space for learning opportunities for youth. Civic
engagement, such as volunteering, yields life-long
benefits and strengthens self-worth and resilience
tow extremist ideologies. Religious leaders play an
important role in promoting respect and tolerance
and should therefore be involved in the preparation
of effective prevention campaigns. Equally, we must
strengthen partnerships with the private sector. In order
to thrive, companies need an educated work force.
Public-private partnerships, such as the apprenticeship
programmes we have been employing in Austria, yield

15-1147457/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

23/04/2015

good results both for companies and young people
themselves.

all the tireless efforts undertaken by the SecretaryGeneral’s Envoy on Youth, Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi.

Intercultural dialogue contributes to global trustbuilding, supports mutual understanding and promotes
pluralism in our society. Austria actively participates
in the United Nations Alliance of Civilizations and
supports its further development. In that regard, I would
like to take the opportunity to thank the United Nations
Alliance of Civilizations, the Secretary-General and
the President of the General Assembly for organizing
the important high-level thematic debate on promoting
tolerance and reconciliation that took place earlier this
week.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Republic of Korea.

Austria is taking action to intensify the international
cooperation in counter-terrorism efforts, especially in
the West Balkans. In mid-March, we adopted an action
plan to confront jihadism together with all West Balkans
countries. It includes, for example, closer cooperation
among law enforcement authorities, enhanced border
security and joint efforts to remove terrorist content
from the Internet. Our ultimate goal must be to prevent
a new generation of terrorists from emerging.
We are very concerned about the use of foreign
fighters by the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant, the
Al-Nusra Front and other terrorist organizations and
the risks that these foreign fighters may pose upon their
return. We are committed to ensuring the swift and
full implementation of Security Council resolutions
on all measures against extremism and terrorism,
especially resolution 2170 (2014), calling on Member
States to suppress the flow of foreign fighters, as well
as financing and support to Islamist extremist groups
in Iraq and Syria.
As President of the Economic and Social Council,
I have been fortunate to preside over the 2014 and 2015
Youth Forums. The Youth Forum attracts more than 500
young people to engage in dialogue among themselves
and with Member States on their priorities and their
vision for the future. This year, young people focused
on ways to participate more in shaping their countries’
development strategies and become active participants
in bringing justice and peace to their communities.
We need to listen to them and take their views into
account when developing strategies to counter violent
extremism. The Economic and Social Council will
continue providing this platform for youth from around
the world to advance solutions to the challenges they
and their societies face. In that context, I commend

58/80

Mr. Oh Joon (Republic of Korea): Mr. President, I
would like to thank you and the Jordanian presidency
for convening this important debate on countering
violent extremism.
Today, the number of foreign terrorist fighters is
higher than ever in history. The fact that a significant
proportion of these individuals are young people, some
barely 15 years old, is a particularly alarming trend.
One of the most pressing security challenges we face
today is preventing these young people from falling into
the grip of violent extremism. Yet the difficult reality
is that there is no single, one-size-fits-all solution to
this multifaceted problem. The motivation behind
youth radicalization varies by society, and diverse
factors are involved, ranging from extremist ideology
to socioeconomic factors and personal grievances.
Preventing radicalization will therefore require an
equally diverse and multidimensional approach. I
would like to share a few thoughts in this regard.
First, we need to more effectively counter extremist
narratives and propaganda that prey on the minds of
young people. Groups like the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant promote and propagate distorted
views and interpretations of religion, history and
the world through the Internet and social media. To
prevent the radicalization of youth, we need first to
have a clear understanding of why these messages
have such an appeal to so many young people across
different societies. Simply shutting down websites
and suspending Facebook accounts will not yield the
results we hoped for. We must develop and disseminate
effective, persuasive messages that will convince these
young people that the ideologies promoted by extremist
propaganda are just false and empty promises. Our
winning point should be free and diverse societies
that offer the right path to true dignity, opportunities
and happiness for all. Schools, families and religious
communities should play a central role in telling young
people that they will not find any opportunities or
future in extremism.
Secondly, community engagement is of particular
importance in preventing youth radicalization, as
stressed by resolution 2178 (2014). Disaffected youths in
each society are easily targeted by extremist recruiters,

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

who lure them with promises of a new community
and collective identity. It is the home communities
themselves that are best placed to protect their youths
from such vulnerability, by providing them with a sense
of belonging, identity and job opportunities.
Thirdly, from a broader perspective, we should
delve deeper and address the social gaps and ills that
allow violent extremism to take root. Good governance,
the protection of human rights and development are all
essential elements in addressing the grievances and
hopelessness that breed violent extremism. Of crucial
importance, too, is the role of education that teaches
our future generations universal values such as human
dignity, diversity and tolerance, as emphasized in the
concept of global citizenship education.
As Secretary General Ban Ki-moon stressed at
the Washington, D.C., Summit on countering violent
extremism last February, preventing violent extremism
may be the greatest test that our human family faces in
the twenty-first century. It is time for us to join hands
and pull together our wisdom in order to tackle this
formidable challenge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Montenegro.
Ms. Pajević (Montenegro): We thank the President
for convening today’s debate on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism in promoting peace. We
commend Jordan’s strong commitment to this issue.
We also thank today’s briefers for their outstanding
presentations.
Montenegro aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the observer of European Union. However,
I would like to highlight some points of particular
importance to my country.
Today, more than 1 billion people are defined as
youth. Youth are vital stakeholders in shaping social
and economic development, challenging social norms
and values and building the foundation of the world’s
future. They have proved to be instrumental in fostering
constructive dialogue among religions, faiths and
civilizations, and have provided valuable contributions
to the promotion of peace, tolerance and diversity.
We are witnessing the devastating and enduring
impact of violence and the culture of violence, which
is overwhelming different parts of the world. In
particular, young people face obstacles, ranging from
discrimination, marginalization and poverty, to violence.

S/PV.7432

Their voices are distinctively underrepresented on issues
that concern them, including violent extremism — one
of the most critical challenges that youth face today.
Young people are the main victims of direct violence in
conflict situations, but they are also the perpetrators of
violence, owing to their vulnerability to both voluntary
and involuntary military recruitment.
Extremism is not something that can just be
ignored, but needs to be tackled head-on because its
consequences are clear. The risk of extremism grows
where young people have no education and no hope
for the future, as that makes them most vulnerable to
the influence of radical ideas. However, Governments
cannot act alone on this issue. Additionally, we should
be aware that no external power can bring about the
transformation of hearts and minds. That task falls on
countries and their peoples themselves. The potential
of youth to facilitate the process of countering violent
extremism is often undermined. Therefore, we believe it
is crucial to involve youth in the process as stakeholders
and decision-makers. That would allow them to gain
ownership of the policies that affect them and all of us.
Montenegro commends all the efforts aimed at
addressing the needs and priorities of young people and
at proposing sustainable solutions to their problems.
There are many talented and creative young men and
women who are pioneering in innovation, new social
media tools and means to reach the young population.
My Government has taken stock of that fact. Through
the education system, we prepare young people to
think in a creative and critical way, to cooperate,
communicate and take risks. The goal of our economic
policy is to foster, encourage and facilitate the creation
of new jobs and new businesses, as well as the growth
of existing ones, with special emphasis on youth.
In addition, through the implementation of different
programmes and projects, such as the one that we are
implementing with the United Nations Development
Programme, called Youth Empowerment, we provide
the younger generations with self-confidence and
ambition to be constructive and valued members of
society as well as to be successful in the new globalized
economy — while promoting peace, tolerance and
diversity. We will expand similar programmes and
projects, and we are currently preparing a new strategic
and legislative framework. We believe that such
investments are the winning card for any society that
strives for a better future and are also the best antidote
to violence.

15-1147459/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

Many States have a predominantly young population.
Therefore, it is a demographic and democratic
imperative that young people be active participants
in decision-making and be treated as a vital asset for
society. Providing youth with the right educational
tools for crisis-prevention and peacebuilding impact
positively on youth’s development and helps to bring
about more sustainable peace. Moreover, addressing
the realization of the human rights of young people is a
way of influencing the social and economic conditions
and the well-being and livelihood of future generations.
Only by approaching the issue of violent extremism and
promoting peace in this way, can we ever hope to face
the challenges of ensuring lasting global peace.
Montenegro remains committed to addressing this
important issue, with the aim of ensuring better inclusion
of youth in mainstream decision-making processes and
reducing their political and social marginalization. We
will also continue to be a reliable partner of the United
Nations in its activities in the promotion of tolerance
and reconciliation. Proud of its values and achievements
and confident in the future, we will work along side it
for the realization of international peace and security.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Nassir Abdulaziz Al-Nasser,
United Nations High Representative for the Alliance of
Civilizations.
Mr. Al-Nasser: I am honoured to speak here today
to tell the Security Council about the efforts of the
United Nations Alliance of Civilizations in promoting
peace and tolerance through a special focus on youth.
I wish to thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for
organizing this important meeting, which has particular
importance for the maintenance of International Peace
and Security. The fact that Crown Prince Al Hussein
bin Abdullah II presided over this meeting earlier
illustrates Jordan’s great leadership as an active member
of the Security Council.
For me personally, as well as in my capacity as
High Representative of the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, placing the world’s young people at the
forefront of United Nations counter-terrorism efforts
is crucial at both the level of prevention and in postconflict situations. We know from our experiences
in supporting youth-led initiatives on the ground that
peaceful and inclusive societies cannot be sustainably
built without the participation and engagement of
young people. Two thirds of the world’s population are
comprised of youth. Furthermore, in most conflict60/80

23/04/2015

affected and post-conflict countries, young people
account for more than 50 per cent of the population.
However, I find that, to date, our discussion on
youth, peace and security has been limited, both in
its focus and the degree to which it actually engages
young people. The cultural dimension is essential when
addressing youth issues, in particular to safeguard their
hearts and minds from the influence of radicalization.
I know how this body, the Security Council, has
spearheaded the world’s thinking on a number of
critical matters regarding global peace and security.
For youth, however, the international community still
lacks a comprehensive position and holistic policy,
commitments, priorities and responsibilities to fulfil
the aspirations of young people around the world.
That is where the role of the Alliance of Civilizations
comes into play in order to complement the efforts of
United Nations bodies and of Member States. We are
able to do so through practical projects and activities
thanks to the financial support of Member States,
specialized non-governmental organizations and
corporate-sector partners. Let me start by mentioning
our fellowship programme.
Through the programme, every year, we sponsor
young people from Western and Eastern countries and
conduct country visits with them. That programme
enables young people to understand other cultures and
traditions, to believe in the importance of living with
the others and to encourage them to reject violence
based on culture or religion. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank Jordan for hosting the fellows
earlier this year, along with Morocco and Qatar. I look
forward to receiving the support of other countries that
wish to do the same.
The Youth Solidarity Fund, through which the
Alliance of Civilizations has reached more than 10,000
youth-led organizations and hundreds of thousands of
young people around the world with its grant-making
and capacity-building workshops. Another example is
the Intercultural Innovation Award, which is a model
example of public-private engagement between the
Alliance of Civilizations and BMW Group, through
which we support innovative grass-roots initiatives that
advance cross-cultural dialogue. A more recent example
is Entrepreneurs for Social Change. There are other
programmes as well, including Plural+, which gives
young film-makers a platform to speak about identity;
and the annual Summer School, which brings together
young activists and social innovators from around the
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

world for a week of training exercises here in New York.
All of those Alliance of Civilizations programmes are
oriented around the recognition of one fundamental
truth: that the primary agents of change — not just in
the future, but in our present — are young people.
Over the last decade, the world’s attention to
terrorism and violent extremism has brought a sharp
focus to the role of youth in the commission of terrorist
acts. We all know that, through media and the use of
information and communication technologies, youth
are exposed to new and emerging threats to global
security, but also to themselves. Sadly, recent dramatic
events have demonstrated that young people can
indeed be seduced into committing heinous crimes
and unspeakable violence, while also being victims of
such acts and environments. I feel deeply for them, in
particular those who live in zones of protracted conflict
and whose only mistake is having been born there.
Many countries with a high proportion of young
people have not suffered violence, due to a high gross
domestic product and social welfare. In fact, research
suggests that a higher risk of violent conflict exists in
countries where youth “bulges” coincide with periods
of long-term economic decline, limited educational
and employment opportunities, exclusion from social,
cultural and political participation, and an absence of
equal opportunities. Most young people do not engage
in violence unless they were taught to do so by someone
older, even in conflict settings. To be effective in our
work, we need to recognize that fact.
Many young people suffer high levels of relative
deprivation, discrimination and exclusion, and many
young men do not fit the social standards of manhood;
and yet most do not engage in violence. Studies
suggest that strong communities and young people’s
involvement in community associations expand their
sense of belonging, and that such opportunities act as
important deterrents to engagement in violence. We
need to partner with young people to assert positive
group identities, and sweep the rug from underneath
extremists who try to provide them with one. But
that is not the headline. For me, the headline remains
that young people are an extraordinary force of
social progress, development and, eventually, human
advancement. Young women and men are important
drivers and agents of change in the reconstruction and
development of their societies.
Today, young people are often more open to
change, feedback and learning, and tend to be more

S/PV.7432

future-oriented. Today they are more idealistic, creative
and innovative, and perhaps more willing to take risks.
Their ability to interact with one another and with
adults, and to communicate, is also unprecedented.
How do I know that? I know that because of various
activities. We have hundreds of successful examples
of young people who started their lives as activists
in the area of innovation, promoting coexistence
among faiths, opposing social injustice and addressing
sectarian violence and tensions in their countries
through meaningful activities and venues.
Giving young people a stake in their societies
during the transition period after violent conflict
is important for long-term peace and security. That
said, we must also recognize that in conflict-affected
countries, youth structures, systems and networks,
where they exist, often have limited political influence,
weak capacity and are poorly resourced. Youth policies
tend to be underfunded and under implemented. Few of
them make specific contributions to peace and security,
such as the need to prevent the engagement of youth
in violence, to protect young men and women from
violence and to promote meaningful participation in
political processes.
Overall, the evidence suggests that in the context
of peace and security, many Member States do not
pay sufficient attention to their youth population.
There is sometimes a lack of trust and understanding,
political will and, in some cases, limited capacity
and resources to act. But this debate is a sign that the
tide is turning. Under the initiative of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, the Security Council is boosting
the role of young people as partners in peace, security
and in countering violent extremism. To recognize the
positive role young people can play, several entities of
the United Nations — the Peacebuilding Commission,
the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Population Fund, UNICEF, the Alliance
of Civilizations and others — in partnership with such
civil society organizations as Search for Common
Ground, World Vision and the United Network of
Young Peacebuilders, published the Guiding Principles
on Young People’s Participation in Peacebuilding last
year.
In conclusion, I firmly believe that those principles
should guide our discussions in the Council today and
in the future. Young people’s participation is essential
to successful peacebuilding. Around the world, young
people are already leaders of today, not just leaders

15-1147461/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

of tomorrow. We must use this platform to help them
amplify and scale up their efforts. I am personally
committed to doing so, and the Alliance of Civilizations
stands ready to work with the Council and engage
further with the United Nations system to address these
questions. In the face of violent extremism, partnering
with young people and enhancing their dedication to
peace must be part of the solution.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Turkey.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for organizing this important
debate.
Youth are a key asset and the hope for peaceful
and prosperous societies. Yet today an unprecedented
number of young people travel to Syria and Iraq to fight
as foreign terrorist fighters alongside terrorist groups
such as Daesh. Similarly, the ranks of Al-Shabaab and
Boko Haram consist predominantly of young people.
On all continents, an increasing number of young men
and women are vulnerable to extremist ideologies,
radicalization and terrorism.
In order to counter that phenomenon, it is necessary
to take robust measures to stop young people from
travelling to conflict zones, as required by resolution
2178 (2014). Turkey has been doing its part by adopting
numerous measures, including enhancing controls
at borders and establishing a no-entry list. Needless
to say, that struggle cannot be led by Turkey alone,
and effective international cooperation and timely
information-sharing, particularly on the part of the
source countries, are crucial.
On that point, since issues related to recruitment
and travel to conflict zones have been highlighted
earlier with specific references, let me mention one
striking example that recently received wide press
coverage. According to media reports, the United
States citizen who took part in a suicide bombing in
Syria was believed to have travelled to that country
more than once. That is a reminder of the importance of
close cooperation and information-sharing.
In addressing that phenomenon, the first step is
to understand the root causes of radicalization among
youth. As underlined in the United Nations Global
Counter-Terrorism Strategy, effective counter-terrorism
requires the eradication of conditions conducive to its
spread. In that task, it is important to remember that
radicalization and violent extremism are not peculiar to
62/80

23/04/2015

one particular religion, faith or community. The process
that leads to violent extremism may have different
triggering factors, ranging from underdevelopment to
a feeling of discrimination. Particular emphasis should
be placed on better designed integration policies. The
more migrant communities are truly integrated where
they live, the easier it will be to marginalize extremism
and to overcome the perceived grievances of being left
out, stigmatized and rejected.
Protracted conflicts nourish conditions conducive
to the spread of terrorism among youth. Other factors
that contribute to such conditions include the absence
of the rule of law, violations of human rights, ethnic,
national and religious discrimination, political
exclusion, socioeconomic marginalization and lack of
good governance. The multiple factors that can lead
to youth radicalization show that a holistic approach
involving multiple branches of Government and
various sectors of civil society is needed. A whole-ofGovernment strategy must be supported by a whole-ofsociety approach.
In Turkey, several Government agencies including
security, youth, education and social policy institutions,
are involved in such efforts. Furthermore, the Office of
Religious Affairs of the Prime Ministry plays a special
role in Turkey as an actor in efforts to combat violent
extremism by harmonizing Friday sermons through
guidelines that accentuate the message of peace in
Islam.
International cooperation can be instrumental in
empowering youth in the face of violent extremism.
Both the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism
Strategy and relevant Security Council resolutions,
such as resolutions 1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014),
identify the concrete steps to be taken. We welcome the
announcement by the Secretary-General of an action
plan on preventing violent extremism at the White House
Summit on Countering Violent Extremism in February.
We believe that youth must be an important target
group of those efforts. In that framework, we welcome
the projects already implemented by the United Nations
Counter-Terrorism Centre and the Counter-Terrorism
Implementation Task Force, focusing on youth, and
we call for their continuation. In addition to the joint
United Nations efforts, the many framework and goodpractices documents — including those adopted by the
Global Counter-Terrorism Forum, the Organization
for Security and Cooperation in Europe and other
platforms — can provide us with valuable guidance.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

As terrorists use and abuse modern communications
technologies to spread their morbid messages, protecting
youth from those toxic indoctrination attempts requires
conveying messages of peace and tolerance to them as
part of our common struggle against discrimination,
intolerance, racism, xenophobia, Islamophobia,
anti-Semitism and discrimination against Christians
and members of other religions. In that context, the
Alliance of Civilizations, of which Turkey is a sponsor,
is doing valuable work with respect to the topic of our
debate through numerous projects and activities that
focus on four main pillars, namely, youth, education,
media and migration. Young people should trust that
regardless of the differences in our beliefs, we can live
in unity, peace and harmony. Only thus can our societies
be truly resilient in the face of violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Georgia.
Mr. Kvelashvili (Georgia): At the outset, let me
express our heartfelt gratitude to the presidency of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for organizing
today’s open debate and, personally, to His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II
for his leadership, which has significantly contributed
to the constructive and comprehensive nature of our
deliberations today.
Georgia fully supports and shares the vision,
approaches and conclusions outlined in the concept
paper (S/2015/215, annex) disseminated earlier by
the Permanent Mission of Jordan, and calls on all
stakeholders to play a more vigorous role in our joint
efforts aimed at countering violent extremism. We
are also convinced that it is time for the international
community to stand firmly for the principles enshrined
in the Charter of the United Nations, and underline the
importance of respect for international law for the sake
of peace and stability in the world.
Georgia fully associates itself with the statement
made by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. In addition, I would like to make some comments
in my national capacity.
The latest developments in the Middle East, Africa
and Eastern Europe have clearly demonstrated that we
cannot take our security for granted, and in today’s
uncertain world, all like-minded countries must stand
united to protect and promote peace, stability and a rulesbased world order. Georgia believes that utter disrespect
for the fundamental principles of international law

S/PV.7432

and for human rights and basic freedoms in domestic
affairs have significantly contributed to the dangerous
erosion of trust among nations and peoples, which has
in turn played a pivotal role in all recent manifestations
of violent extremism and the radicalization of youth in
certain parts of the world.
For instance, European security is being
significantly challenged by the Russian Federation’s
aggressive behaviour towards its neighbours,
especially Georgia and Ukraine, through the ongoing
illegal military occupation of integral parts of our
sovereign territories. That worrisome pattern of
arbitrarily altering international borders by force poses
a significant threat not only to the strategic vision of a
Europe whole, free and at peace, but also to the notion
of amicable relations among young men and women
of all countries of our region. When State-run mass
media, especially television, encourage extreme forms
of nationalism and violent ideology and try to justify
on chauvinistic grounds the grabbing and annexing of
foreign lands, youth radicalization becomes a common
phenomenon.
With regard to the Middle East, we are deeply
shocked and distressed by the violent developments and
rapid deterioration of the security situation in parts of
Iraq and Syria. Georgia condemns in the strongest terms
the despicable acts of terrorism and violence against
civilian populations on the basis of their religious and
ethnic affiliation. Terrorist groups such as the Islamic
State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) pose threats not only
to the nations of the Middle East but also to Europe,
North America and beyond. It is only through our joint
efforts and commitment that we can stop, reverse and
prevent such violent actions from happening.
We fully support international cooperative efforts
to counter ISIL. Georgia has already joined three
counter-ISIL working groups on counter-financing,
counter-messaging and foreign terrorist fighters. We
hope that the work of those groups will further increase
the level of coordination and dialogue among coalition
members.
At the national level, Georgia, which has historically
been an example of ethnic and religious tolerance,
is working on modifying a domestic policy aimed at
countering the rising global threat of extremism and
terrorism. My Government has already initiated the
relevant legislative amendments, whose adoption aims
at bringing the criminal code of Georgia in line with the
best international practices. It is of special importance

15-1147463/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

that, inter alia, the amendments will criminalize the
whole spectrum of activities related to foreign terrorist
fighters, in accordance with resolution 2178 (2014).
At the same, more has to be done at national
and international levels to address the root causes
conducive to the spread of violent extremism, including
policies aimed at social and economic development,
and fostering education and youth employment, as well
as their political empowerment.
The participation of third-country citizens as foreign
terrorist fighters in ISIL and other terrorist groups is
a matter of serious concern. Addressing this problem,
especially taking into account its transnational and
cross-border nature, requires coordinated approaches.
We stand ready to work closely with our international
partners in countering the global problems posed by
foreign terrorist fighters by better coordinating our
efforts, as well as exchanging experience and good
practices.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Netherlands.
Mr. van Oosterom (Netherlands): First, let me
thank the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for the
initiative to organize this important and very timely
debate.
The Kingdom of the Netherlands aligns itself
with the statement made earlier by the observer of the
European Union.
In view of time constraints, I will limit myself to
the main points of my statement. My full statement
will be available via my Twitter account. I will address
three issues: education, our international involvement
and the importance of inclusiveness.
First, with regard to education, the Netherlands
has an active policy aimed at strengthening the role
of young people in countering violent extremism and
promoting peace. Our approach is characterized by
strengthening the role of families, professionals and
their communities in countering radicalization and
social tensions.
The Netherlands aims to enhance knowledge and
expertise within the triangle of parents, schools and
their social environment. In our view, parents play a key
role in preventing radicalization. To reach parents, we
have developed a set of tools and answers that provide
guidance for education in this context. We organize
local information sessions about recruitment methods
64/80

23/04/2015

and the dangers children face on the Internet, an issue
many of us have addressed before.
In addition, the Netherlands has set up a national
advisory centre that offers support to family members
of radicalized individuals. Furthermore, we aim to
enhance the expertise of professionals in education to
better identify and discuss radicalization. We train many
teachers in recognizing radicalization and acting upon
it. We have developed a toolbox, including web portals,
e-learning and networks of front-line professionals
who can provide advice. Our schools have the duty to
discuss citizenship and related values such as equality,
the freedom of expression, the freedom of religion and
freedom in general.
My third point in this context is that it is important
to be in contact with young people in the immediate
vicinity of their communities. In order to influence
groups of young people, we involve youth leaders to be
voices of moderation and reason. At the local level that
requires cooperation among schools, municipalities,
the police, civil society and political and religious
groups. Municipalities are supported in their efforts to
strengthen such community networks — for instance, by
organizing group dialogues with parents, professionals
and key opinion leaders, such as imams.
The second issue I wish to discuss concerns
our international activities. We are involved in
many international initiatives. Let me mention the
Radicalisation Awareness Network and the Global
Counter-Terrorism Forum. Of course, we also support
the work of the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate, which we are very happy to
see represented in the Council. Let me also mention in
particular the bilateral cooperation that exists between
the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom
of Morocco in preventing terrorism and addressing
radicalization. Another specific activity includes our
work with non-governmental organizations on this
matter. As an example, we have financed a publication
on strategic communication in countering the narrative
of extremist organizations.
The third issue concerns inclusiveness. The
Netherlands firmly believes in the necessity of more
inclusive decision-making, which should empower
young people to voice their concerns. Young people
should be active partners in tolerance and conflict
prevention initiatives. We must ensure that their
priorities are part of our policies. Governments should
be responsive to the concerns of young people. This
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

holds true in particular for the post-2015 sustainable
development agenda. The young people of today are
both an object and a subject of that agenda. Not only
will it define their future, they will be the ones who in
large measure will have to implement it. All sustainable
development goals are relevant for the young people of
today. Their voice must be heard; their commitment is
crucial; their action is needed.
As we speak, the Netherlands United Nations
Youth Representative, Jilt van Schayik, is travelling
from Amsterdam to South Africa, crossing more than
20 countries and passing through two continents. In
good Dutch tradition, he is covering more than 11,000
kilometres by bicycle. The purpose of his journey, called
Building Bridges, is to listen to the young people in the
countries he visits. We will use his input as valuable
content for the post-2015 agenda. Young delegates like
him are positive role models for other youth around the
world.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
prides itself in being a partner for peace, justice and
development. An old Dutch proverb says, “He who is
young, controls the future”. Let us work together for a
future where the youth of today shall wield the tools of
peace, justice and development. instead of the arms of
hatred and terror.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the observer of the Holy See.
Archbishop Auza (Holy See): At the outset, let
me congratulate Jordan for its presidency during this
month, and in particular for scheduling this debate
on the role of young people in countering violent
extremism and promoting peace.
The ever-increasing globalization and technological
interconnectedness have brought many benefits to
our world today, but they have also created new
and emerging challenges. Young people around the
world can use the Internet and social media to enter
into contact, make friends and learn about the great
cultures and traditions of other people in every corner
of the world. Unfortunately, those great technological
advances can also be manipulated to spread messages of
hate and violence. Today’s debate allows us to examine
more in depth how these harmful messages are finding
new audiences and how States can work together to
face the challenge.
The phenomenon of young people responding to the
recruitment of those inciting them to engage in violent

S/PV.7432

extremism develops within a context of disillusionment
and missed opportunities, of sociocultural identity crisis
and failed integration, of alienation and dissatisfaction,
of intergenerational break-ups and broken families.
A fundamental step in addressing the radicalization
of young people is to work with and support the family
in its efforts to educate children and young people in
the values of dialogue and respect for others, to make
them better equipped to resist what appear at first as
attractive calls to a higher cause and to adventure with
extremist groups. If States really want to reach young
people before they are exposed to extremist ideologies,
they should render appropriate assistance to parents in
the performance of their child-rearing responsibilities,
according to the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Studies and events show that some Governments
tend to avoid frank and constructive conversations on
the question of radicalization. Hiding the problem,
however, is counterproductive. Fostering public debate,
on the other hand, can encourage young people to vent
their frustrations before they succumb to extremist
ideologies and can assist the State to articulate policies
accordingly. Failure to bring the problem to public
discussion may imply disinterest on the part of States,
fear or both, while encouraging debate will ordinarily
promote collective confidence and deeper mutual
understanding among the various ethnic, racial and
religious components of society. This dialogue can lead
to the formulation of Government policies of which all
members of a society can claim collective ownership
and offer young people convincing counter-narratives
to extremist propaganda.
Indeed, balanced public policy plays a key role in
facilitating solid integration of immigrants in society as
citizens. Policies that discourage xenophobic or racist
perceptions are much needed because they contribute
to the observance of healthy religious and sociocultural
values. Religion constitutes a potent part of these value
systems. Policies and education that seek to minimize
or eliminate the faith component of individual and
collective identities could leave the young disoriented,
alienated, marginalized or excluded and prone to the
message of extremist groups. There is no doubt that the
catchwords and slogans used by extremist groups to
recruit young people often involve distorted religious
and sociocultural values.
Unemployment and despair also lie behind the
vulnerability of many young people to the propaganda
and manipulations of extremist recruiters. Idle

15-1147465/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

minds and hands are highly vulnerable to extremist
ideologies. Thus, global economic inequalities and the
marginalization and exclusion from development to
which they lead are not only a grave social and economic
concern but can become a threat to international peace
and security. Achieving social justice is therefore key
to countering the phenomenon of young people joining
extremist organizations.
In our fight against extremist ideologies and our
efforts to promote a culture of peace, young people
themselves are a most precious resource. We can
counter extremist recruiters by promoting voices that
are trusted and respected among their peers on the very
platforms they use to recruit new members, like the
social media.
Finally, faith leaders and organizations must
condemn messages of hate in the name of religion
and provide young people with religious education
that fosters understanding and respect between
peoples of different faiths. People of faith have a grave
responsibility to condemn those who seek to detach
faith from reason and who instrumentalize faith as a
justification for violence. As Pope Francis emphasized
during his visit to Albania on 21 September 2014, no
one should consider oneself “to be the ‘armour’ of God
while planning and carrying out acts of violence and
oppression”.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Drobnjak (Croatia): I would like to pay tribute
to Jordan for convening this important and timely
debate.
Croatia aligns itself with the statement delivered
earlier by the Head of the Delegation of the European
Union. I will now make some remarks in my national
capacity.
Allow me to share with the Security Council words
of wisdom from young people we had the pleasure to
hear from last week in our capital, Zagreb. These words
were accompanied by a memorable performance when,
at 14:07, hours on 16 April, 147 students lay on the
ground in front of the Croatian National Theatre in the
centre of Zagreb and remained motionless for exactly
147 seconds. With this act, Croatian students wanted
to draw public attention to the tragedy that happened
in Kenya on 2 April, when 147 students were heinously
murdered on their university campus. Croatian students,
paying respect to their perished colleagues, sent the
66/80

23/04/2015

message from which I will borrow several important
sentences:
“Without proper communication, differences
lead to misunderstanding, misunderstanding leads
to conflict, and conflict to tragedy ... What made
those 147 students different? Being Christians? ... We
believe that race, religion, ethnicity and orientation
are irrelevant when talking about human rights.
They are universal, but unfortunately vulnerable ...
The Kenyan tragedy reminds us that the safety that
we take for granted is a luxury to others.”
Many important and wise words have been shared
with us here today. We are proud to add to today’s
debate these several lines, the voice of our youth.
We are encouraged by their yearning for committed
actions against violence, intolerance and all forms of
discrimination. Youth can be at the very core of the
solution for violent extremism. Young people can serve
as positive role models and should embrace this role
without hesitation. They can influence and inspire their
peers, raise public awareness and encourage a broader
discussion within a society.
However, in order for the young generation to be
capable of doing that, we must enable them to develop
all their potential in that regard. Violence is often
rooted in fear, prejudice and, ultimately, ignorance.
That is why education is paramount and should be
inextricably coupled with guaranteeing safety and
security for our youth. Knowledge and education are
among the most powerful tools for fostering tolerance
and open-mindedness. They are powerful weapons for
fighting against hate speech and ignorance that are so
often leading to insecurity and violence. It is insight
and information that foster common understanding and
lead to the development of confident and strong young
individuals, unsusceptible to the darkness of hate. By
doing this, we are strengthening the social fabric of
every society and of the global community.
What many present-day crisis areas have in
common, besides suffering and misery brought by
armed conflicts, is that they encompass some of the
youngest societies in the world. The average age in
some of these countries is below 18 years. We should
not treat this as just another statistical fact. Today,
when we are challenged with the escalating threats of
terrorism and radicalism, we must focus on providing
for the needs of the young generation and strengthen
their sense of feeling both safe and included. We must
enable them to be heard and allow them to acquire
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

intercultural competencies with which they can
understand and appreciate diversity both within their
societies and globally. And we must provide young
people with jobs — youth unemployment is a problem
that goes way beyond being just an economic category.
Unemployment takes away perspective for the future.
Lack of perspective is among the worst kinds of
poverty; it causes a society of peace and tolerance to
erode from within.
Today’s topic cannot be addressed thoroughly
without taking into account the development component.
Only with a holistic, multidisciplinary approach,
which includes the implementation of the adequate
development policies and legislative frameworks,
education and inclusive work with a number of
stakeholders such as academia, non-governmental
organizations, the private sector, religious authorities
and media, can we achieve sustainable results in
countering terrorism and in promoting peace. Our
policies must therefore be exemplary and all-inclusive,
eliminating all inequalities, both social and economic,
in our societies.
By tackling issues such as political and social
discrimination, exclusion and marginalization, we are
doing our utmost to prevent the further recruitment of
new terrorists. By spreading and nurturing education,
knowledge, tolerance, interfaith and intercultural
understanding, we can give a significant blow to
the misleading narratives and ideologies of violent
extremism and terrorism. In this regard, States
also have an obligation to stimulate and strengthen
cooperation with civil society and its capacity to tackle
the challenges of violent extremism and any form of
radicalization.
Finally, let us be mindful of the fact that it is today
that we plant the seeds for a better future.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Malta.
Mr. Grima (Malta): At the outset, I would like to
express my appreciation to the Jordanian presidency of
the Security Council for its leadership in addressing
an issue to which my Government attaches particular
importance. Malta also aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier on behalf of the European Union.
Violent extremism is not a new phenomenon, but
the recent dramatic surge in extreme violent acts by
individuals and groups has thrust the issue to the top
of the international agenda. For that reason, today’s

S/PV.7432

debate provides a most welcome opportunity to discuss
the issue from a youth perspective and share initiatives
and best practices with one another.
Technological progress and the modern media have
ensured that the violent extremist narrative can have a
virtually global reach. No longer confined to specific
countries or regions, this phenomenon is fast becoming
one of the most pressing contemporary challenges.
More and more violent extremists and radicals turn
to modern media to spread their extremist messages.
More technologically savvy young people therefore
naturally find themselves at greater risk of this threat.
By the same token, however, through good use of the
media, young people have a particular role to play in
countering the extremist narrative and rejecting it.
Violent extremism feeds on people’s desperation.
Young people, often experiencing isolation, exclusion
and deprivation, are particularly vulnerable to the
designs of extremist groups or individuals who seek
to exploit their vulnerabilities, playing on their
anxieties and insecurity. A better understanding of the
needs, aspirations and circumstances of young people
therefore becomes an essential tool for addressing that
challenge. More inclusive, tolerant societies, in which
no one — especially young people — feels left behind
or marginalized, are just as important. That requires
a participatory approach in which young people feel
part of the society to which they belong by also actively
contributing to its socioeconomic development.
There is perhaps no better way to achieve this
than by empowering our younger generation through
education, including education in tolerance and
non-discrimination. Education is the key to providing
young people with the knowledge and skills that will
ultimately empower them to reject violent extremism.
That has always been the view of my Government and
is the underlying factor in the national youth policy
framework that we have adopted for the period 2015
to 2020. The framework addresses this phenomenon
first by supporting and encouraging young people
in fulfilling their potential and aspirations while
addressing their needs and concerns, and secondly
by upporting young people as active and responsible
citizens who fully participate in and contribute to the
social, economic and cultural life of their nation and
Europe.
Malta has an array of programmes and initiatives
aimed at empowering young people and promoting
and supporting the social inclusion of minorities,

15-1147467/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

cultural, religious or ethnic, as well as that of young
people with fewer opportunities. The programmes
range from national initiatives to others that are
implemented in conjunction with the European Union
and other international partners. They aim to promote
integration, awareness and tolerance among the various
sectors of Maltese society, including refugees and
migrants who have obtained subsidiary protection. The
Government implements them through partnerships
with non-governmental organizations and the European
Refugee Fund. It is important that young people be
provided with avenues in which to channel their energy,
enthusiasm and talent. The performing arts can make
an important contribution to inter-cultural dialogue and
are one of the tools we use to facilitate social cohesion
and interaction between different segments of society.
Malta believes that one effective way to counter
violent extremism is by strengthening the rule of law
and the judiciary in States. Addressing root causes is
crucial, and we are firmly convinced that effective
counter-extremism strategies should be linked to
promoting and protecting human rights and sustainable
development. Malta is the proud host of the International
Institute on Justice and the Rule of Law, established
in June of last year. One of the objectives behind its
creation is countering violent extremism through the
rule of law and criminal justice by providing rule-oflaw-based training to lawmakers, police, prosecutors,
judges, corrections officials and other justice-sector
stakeholders. Given its geographic location, the
Institute is paying particular attention to supporting
countries in transition in North, West and East Africa
and the Middle East. We believe that such initiatives
could serve as a regional catalyst to counter terrorism,
radicalization and violent extremism among young
people as well.

23/04/2015

Discontent and radicalism among young people
today arise, in particular, from poverty and a sense of
hopelessness. The stark statistics of unemployment call
for a coordinated regional and global effort to generate
job-creating economies by the United Nations system
and its country teams, together with regional groups.
Such measures must be put into practice at the national
level, and in that context I would like to mention some
initiatives that have been developed in my country.
Kazakhstan has adopted a State programme that
we call a Road Map to Employment, which enables
young people across the country to obtain free
education and vocational training while focusing on
intensive job creation and fostering entrepreneurship
and microcredit. We have also made provisions for
health care, including mental health, social facilities
and housing for young people, aimed at ensuring social
stability. Such services are part of our new economic
policy, Nurly Zhol, or Path for the Future.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Kazakhstan.

We believe that investing in people- and youthcentred development is crucially important if we are to
win an ideological war. Kazakhstan has launched a key
national programme on countering religious extremism
and terrorism for the period 2013 to 2017, allocating
some $600 million for preventive measures, including
among our youth population. Our goal is to defeat the
intangible causes that create a fertile environment for
the growth of extremism and to foster young people’s
sound physical, psychological, cultural and spiritual
development. We want to utilize mass media to help
to transform young people’s attitudes in the interests
of fostering harmony. My country’s youth congress
today comprises active movements and organizations
that are shaping policy directives on young people. We
have developed a counter-narrative approach in the
Government’s numerous activities designed to dissuade
young people from using violence to serve extremist
causes and to work for peace instead.

Mr. Abdrakhmanov (Kazakhstan): At the outset,
I would like to pay tribute to His Royal Highness
Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II of Jordan
for convening this timely meeting on the important
role of young people, who are both victims and
perpetrators of violence, in combating extremism and
promoting peace. I also thank the Secretary-General
for his comprehensive briefing and acknowledge with
appreciation the efforts of Mr. Ahmad Alhendawi, his
Envoy on Youth, in mobilizing young people to engage
in peace processes.

Being a multi-ethnic and multi-religious nation,
Kazakhstan enjoys peace and stability, since it has
always worked to make tolerance and respect its
guiding principles. What is perhaps most important in
this ideological struggle is addressing the emotional
and spiritual needs of young people who feel defeated
and angry. In Kazakhstan we are trying to provide
educational and peace programmes that give young
people the opportunity to interact with genuine religious
leaders who treat them with respect, addressing their
needs through round tables, dialogues and seminars.

68/80

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

The vulnerability and strengths of young people will be
discussed at the Fifth Congress of Leaders of World and
Traditional Religions, to be held in Astana in June on
the theme of political and religious leaders for peace and
development. The overall outcome recommendations
should add to United Nations and multilateral thinking
on rapprochement among civilizations.
In conclusion, I would like to assure the Council
of Kazakhstan’s readiness to participate in multilateral
action aimed at transforming our young people’s lives
so that they may become responsible leaders in the
promotion of peace, stability and prosperity.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Canada.
Mr. Grant (Canada) (spoke in French): On behalf of
the Government of Canada, I congratulate the Jordanian
presidency for organizing this important debate today.
Canada is pleased to participate in the discussion and
has joined the growing number of countries concerned
about the issue of violent extremism. It is undoubtedly
one of the main threats to global security.
(spoke in English)
Canada is among many other nations concerned
with the reality in which our citizens, including our
young people, can be radicalized to violence or decide
to travel abroad to participate in terrorist activities.
I would like to outline how Canada is tackling this
challenge. At the same time, I would like to note that
we are participating in today’s meeting to learn from
other nations, as sharing information and best practices
is crucial in this respect.
Addressing violent extremism is a challenge that
demands comprehensive action on many fronts and
across Government departments. First, it demands
strong legislative measures to strengthen our national
security. Indeed, we recently took an important step
forward in this regard by introducing the anti-terrorism
act. This legislation will address terrorism on a number
of fronts, including creating a new offense of advocating
or promoting terrorism generally, and providing for
the ability to remove terrorist propaganda from our
domestic web servers.
Secondly, and more germane to our discussions
today, the challenge of violent extremism demands
concerted and sustained efforts at all levels to build
resilience within communities. This is an area in which

S/PV.7432

I am proud to say that Canada is actively engaged.
In fact, prevention is a key component of Canada’s
counter-terrorism strategy.
Canada believes strongly in the importance
of preventing individuals — including our young
people — from radicalizing to violence before they
cross the line into terrorist criminal activity. Young
people are both potential recruits and interveners in the
radicalization process. It is therefore critical that they
be meaningfully engaged so that they can be part of the
solution.
How is Canada working to achieve just that? First,
much important work is being done by numerous
Government departments and agencies to empower and
educate youth. We work in partnership with communities
to build mutual trust and understanding — a foundation
from which we can collectively take action to prevent
radicalization at home and in the broader global
community. Broadly speaking, our efforts are anchored
by research, community outreach and meaningful
engagement and by building a tailored, whole-ofgovernment intervention.
Canada’s development assistance also supports
efforts to ensure safe and secure environments
for children and youth so that they can contribute
meaningfully to society. That includes efforts to create
opportunities for youth-at-risk to find alternatives to
violence and crime and become engaged as positive
members of their societies.
Domestically, our work with leaders through the
Cross-Cultural Roundtable on Security helps us to
engage with communities across Canada and to initiate
frank and open discussions around the conditions
conducive to the spread of violent extremism.
Our efforts are paying off in a number of large
cities across Canada where communities have begun to
identify points of intervention and local communitydriven action plans. In a series of workshops called
Deepening the Dialogue, we use first-hand experiences
to engage with young people. The approach challenges
the audience to reflect on radicalization leading to
violence in the context of their own communities. We
work with them to identify opportunities for individual
and community interventions and resources before an
individual crosses the threshold to violent extremism.
We are convinced that such exercises will do much to
strengthen the resilience of communities.

15-1147469/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

(spoke in French)
Preventing violent radicalization is a collective
responsibility. Citizens, families, religious leaders,
police, the Government and, of course, communities all
have a role to play.
While the primary responsibility for responding
to violent extremism lies with the individual States,
the United Nations plays a crucial role in facilitating
and promoting coordination and coherence in the
implementation of various tools and strategies at
national, regional and international levels and in
assisting Member States.
We encourage States to support multilateral
efforts in the fight against terrorism, such as the
Hedayah Centre, which was established by the Global
Counterterrorism Forum. It is the first international
centre dedicated to training, dialogue, research and
collaboration in the fight against violent extremism.
Canada welcomed the launch of the Hedayah Centre
and is pleased to support its work.
As mentioned in my opening remarks, Canada is
here to share its experience and to listen and learn from
others. We recognize that every nation has a particular
experience, but we all share common basic principles.
We must ensure that the lines of communication are
open and that the international community works
together on all fronts. It is the only way to effectively
deal with such a threat. With a significant commitment,
young people can be a powerful force to help create a
more peaceful and secure world.
(spoke in English)
Canada has benefited greatly from hearing the
perspectives of the Member States participating in
today’s debate. I again thank the Jordanian presidency
for the convening of this meeting.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Albania.
Mr. Nina (Albania): Albania aligns itself with
the statement delivered earlier by the observer of the
European Union. Allow me to make some remarks in
my national capacity.
We appreciate the opportunity to take part in this
open debate and would like to thank the President for
organizing it. It offers us a real opportunity to further
our discussions on this very important topic following
the summit on countering violent extremism convened

70/80

23/04/2015

by President Obama, back in February. We also thank
the presidency for its concept paper (S/2015/231, annex)
in preparation for this debate.
The reality check is bleak and painful. The
year 2014 has been a devastating one for millions of
children, and 2015 is in no way better. According to
UNICEF, hundreds of millions of children live in
countries and areas affected by armed conflict, and an
estimated 15 million children are directly caught up in
violent conflicts in different countries. Never in recent
memory have so many children been subjected to the
unspeakable brutalities we have heard of recently.
The world has always been prone to conflict—
otherwise seen as the pursuit of contrary or seemingly
incompatible interests — but as we have seen, its
nature has fundamentally changed during the past
two decades. While in modern times relations among
nations have managed to prevent direct inter-State
conflicts — with a few notable exceptions, as evidenced
by those in Georgia and Ukraine — the number of
intra-State conflicts fuelled by ethnic, religious or other
differences and grievances have increased. While in
the context of strong governance and robust social and
political systems conflicting interests are managed and
ways are found for groups to peacefully pursue their
goals, in fragile situations with poor governance and
weak political and social systems, grievances, disputes
and competition for resources can turn violent with
disastrous consequences.
Children living in conflict areas are a direct and
easy target of violent and extremist groups. Terrorist
groups, in particular Al-Qaida, the Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant, Al-Shabaab and Boko Haram, have
taken full advantage of the overall security situation
in different parts of the world and are not only trying,
but are, rather successfully, managing to indoctrinate
children in extremist ideology. Sadly, reports also
describe recurrent cases of abductions of children by
those groups, who are then trained as fighters.
Regrettably, the recruitment of children is not
confined to areas of conflict. Through the Internet,
and especially via social media, people are now more
interconnected than ever before to other people and
subjected to their ideas. We feel increasingly powerless
in noticing how traditional links, including to family,
are undermined by profit-driven, unwarranted external
influences, which have been strengthened.

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

Economic hardship, disillusionment, exclusion,
discrimination and marginalization — especially
among the vulnerable and disadvantaged — will
inevitably lead individuals, in particular youth, to seek
solutions outside the exhausted traditional ones, thereby
becoming easy targets of extremist ideology, religious
radicalization and exploitation. There is no doubt that
radicalization and violent extremism, especially among
young people, are one of today’s, and for that matter
tomorrow’s, most pressing challenges to peace, stability
and development.
As amply highlighted in yesterday’s discussion
in the General Assembly, while acknowledging that
extremism is fuelled by various factors and has complex
roots, the abhorrent and catastrophic acts of nebulous
terrorist groups have placed religious extremism at
the centre of world debate, and religious leaders on
the front line with regard to their influence, role and
responsibility in influencing developments in society,
alongside the family, schools, communities and other
important actors.
Countering violent extremism in today’s fastchanging multicultural and multiconfessional societies
requires a completely renewed and optimal focus on
a wide range of issues. It should bring together good
governance, the rule of law, respect for human rights
across the board, sustainable economic growth with
opportunities for all, accountable institutions, and the
involvement of young people and women and education,
and including, indispensably, work in the community.
Education is beyond any doubt one of the most
powerful tools for providing the younger generation
with the keys to its future. We must continue, within or
outside conflict areas and their neighbouring countries,
to seriously invest in the kind of education needed not
only for opening minds and providing knowledge, but
for providing the kind of empowerment that provides
the necessary tools to build a new life.
But reality forces us to admit that schooling alone
may prove to be insufficient and sometimes too little,
too late in the struggle against terrorist groups and their
increased influence. The long and challenging fight
against extremism will be won only by successfully
combining a wide variety of tools; by successfully
countering extremist ideologies and changing mindsets;
and by engaging all stakeholders in contributing to
building a better society for all. Otherwise, we may
end up fighting long and protracted battles against this
scourge.

S/PV.7432

Albania participated in and welcomes the results
of the White House Summit on Countering Violent
Extremism, organized in February in Washington,
D.C., and we are fully committed to doing our part
while working closely with our partners and allies.
To this end, we are happy to organize in Tirana, on
19 to 20 May, the first regional follow-up meeting to
the White House Summit. We will be glad to share
the conclusions of that meeting with the wider United
Nations membership.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Indonesia.
Mr. Anshor (Indonesia): Let me begin by
expressing the appreciation of my delegation to Jordan
for convening this open debate. We also recognize
the presence of His Royal Highness Crown Prince Al
Hussein bin Abdullah II, who was here to preside over
the debate this morning.
My delegation fully agrees that there is a need to
address with urgency the rise of radicalization and
violent extremism among youth. Young people make
up a large share of the world population. In various
ways, they shape our political, social, cultural and
economic development. It has been said quite correctly
that young people are our future. Today’s young people,
however, are confronted by many obstacles to realizing
their aspirations. These include discrimination,
marginalization, unemployment and lack of access
to education, which severely limit their potential.
We share the view that such situations can provoke
disillusionment among young people and raise the
possibility of their being lured into embracing extreme
views.
It is therefore quite obvious that, in the projection
of our long-term programme to counter extremism,
we must find ways to empower young people as a
critical component of our preventive measures in the
fight against terrorism. It must be noted, however, that
extremism is a complex phenomenon, involving not
only physical acts but also ideas. Addressing the social
and economic conditions of youth must therefore be
followed by a comprehensive programme to fight the
philosophies of hatred and intolerance that lead people,
including youth, to extremism.
On that account, Indonesia’s efforts in countering
extremism have consistently followed two different
but mutually reinforcing approaches: a hard approach
and a soft approach. The hard approach entails law

15-1147471/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

enforcement measures, while the soft approach seeks
to influence the hearts and minds of people. From our
own experience in countering extremism, there are at
least three lessons that my delegation wishes to share
with the Council.
The first is the need to prioritize the building of
a resilient community, which is a community that is
outward-looking and receptive to new ideas, and seeks
the good of all. A resilient community is our first line
of defence against the spread of the ideas of hatred
and intolerance. To help in building and strengthening
community resiliency, my Government aligns itself with
the moderates, including religious groups and leaders,
youth organizations and the mass media. Together,
we have been persistent in our message of peace and
mutual respect. This method, we believe, strengthens
communal ownership and responsibility. Extremism
and terrorism are a global threat, but the fight against
them must take advantage of local characteristics and
potential.
Second is the need to foster dialogue, which
contributes not only to reducing suspicion and
intolerance, but also to enhancing understanding.
Engagement with youth through dialogue and education
provides an appropriate platform to directly counter
the narrative of extremism and to instil in youth the
importance of diversity and respect. As an example
of this programme, my Government has enlisted
the support of various Islamic organizations, youth
institutions and academicians to educate young people
on the danger of the ideology of the Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant, and its appeal to become a foreign
terrorist fighter.
Third is the need to strengthen the network of
dialogue to spread the culture of peace and tolerance at
all levels, regional and global. This is vital because, in the
era of globalization, young people are extremely wellconnected. We must also bear in mind that extremism
is increasingly being felt worldwide. No country is
immune to its dangers, and the responsibility to combat
it rests on the shoulders of all, both individually and
collectively.
In this context, Indonesia believes that we should
strengthen the existing frameworks within the United
Nations to mobilize international cooperation in
combating the spread of extremism among youth. Such
frameworks include the United Nations Alliance of
Civilizations, which works to intensify the activities
under its youth pillar. It is encouraging to note that at
72/80

23/04/2015

the most recent Global Forum of the Alliance, which
Indonesia hosted last year, young people insisted on the
importance of including cross-cultural understanding
and peacebuilding in education.
To conclude, allow me to underline that countering
extremism among youth must also address its pull
factors, that is, those conditions by which terrorist groups
continue to justify their activities. In this context, I wish
to reiterate that prolonged and unresolved conflicts are
capable of creating situations that are conducive to the
spread of extreme and radical views. History shows
that terrorists groups have exploited such situations to
recruit and groom new converts, as we have seen in
current events in the Middle East and Africa.
That fact only underlines the urgent need for the
Council to resolve conflicts throughout the world,
and help bring peace and prosperity. The Council
should be part of the systematic response of the whole
United Nations system that we are now developing, to
strengthen our common efforts to prevent and address
youth involvement in violent extremism. We also believe
that the Council should align its works in this regard
with the United Nations development framework, which
places emphasis on inclusive development for countries
emerging from conflict.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Poland.
Mr. Winid (Poland): Poland aligns itself with the
statement made by the observer of the European Union.
I would like to add a few comments in my national
capacity.
Let me first thank you, Sir, for convening this
timely debate. It gives us an opportunity to reflect on
the key issue of the radicalization of youth, which is
an increasingly challenging aspect of the fight against
extremism. The importance of this topic was also
underlined during this week’s high-level meeting of the
General Assembly.
I would like to highlight the role, sometimes heroic
and very tragic, of young individuals in our collective
struggle against terrorism. Just this Monday, Captain
Ahmed Salam and two other brave Egyptian soldiers
paid the ultimate price when they were killed by a
roadside bomb in the Sinai peninsula. Their devoted
patriotism did not differentiate among faith, tribal or
ethnic backgrounds. We pay tribute to their heroism.
Responsibility for this act of terror was claimed by an
affiliate of the so-called Islamic State. Thiat terrorist
15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

organization also runs the most effective campaign
of attracting youth from all over the world. Fighting
this evil propaganda is a key element of a successful
campaign against extremism.
The United Nations Global Counterterrorism
Strategy identifies in its first pillar the socioeconomic
conditions that are conducive to the spread of
radicalism. Unemployment, the lack of education and
prospects for personal development are among the
major factors that make young people so vulnerable to
propaganda. Terrorists offer them an illusion of security
and power. As is rightly stated in the concept paper
(S/2015/231, annex) prepared by Jordan for this debate,
violent extremist groups very effectively exploit these
weaknesses. Their cynical propaganda takes advantage
of youth’s economic struggle and idealism. These
problems do not, however, affect only young people
in certain regions of the world, struck by conflict and
poverty. This ideology is also advancing in rich and
developed countries. The issue of social exclusion is a
worldwide challenge that has to be better addressed by
the international community.
To adequately address the challenge posed by
radicalism, we need to apply holistic approach.
The focus has to be put on education and promoting
interreligious dialogue to counter the idea of the socalled clash of civilizations that is being spread by
extremists and greatly contributes to the radicalization
of youth. Bearing in mind that one should not establish
a false direct link between Islam and radicalism,
we welcome the very wise voice of Sheikh Ahmed
al-Tayeb, Grand Imam of Cairo’s Al-Azhar University.
Let me recall his February speech in Mecca, in which
he condemned terrorism, linking extremism to “bad
interpretations” of the Koran and the life of the Prophet
Muhammad.
Another very good example of a valuable contribution
to countering radicalism is the comprehensive strategy
implemented by Morocco. It includes, among other
things, an innovative programme of training for imams,
which begun in 2008 and was recently reinvigorated
by the opening of the Mohammed VI Institute for
the Training of Imams in Rabat. Instead of military
operations to mitigate the effects of extremism,
Morocco has identified a powerful tool to address its
root causes.
A long-term, concerted effort is needed to limit
the involvement of youth in violent extremism.
There is a direct link between security, development

S/PV.7432

and education. This is why I echo the call for better
coordination among all United Nations bodies active
in the field of countering terrorism. At the same time,
the Security Council and the international community
have to do more to bring an end to the conflicts that
destabilize the Middle East and fuel radicalism. No
country is safe from the threat of extremism. It is in
our common interest to effectively respond to this
challenge.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Portugal.
Mrs. Pucarinho (Portugal): I thank you, Sir, for
convening this open debate on the role of youth in
countering violent extremism and promoting peace, as
well as Mr. Neumann and Mr. Atran for their insightful
briefings.
The world currently has the largest generation
of young people in its history — over 1.2 billion,
representing one-fourth of the total population.
Youth has always been and will always be the driving
force of social, political and economic change, and
require respect for their fundamental freedoms and
rights, improved conditions for themselves and their
communities, opportunities to learn, decent work and
participation in making decisions that affect them.
Most of all, young people strive for feasible means to
ensure the achievement of their hopes and dreams.
Young people are agents, beneficiaries and victims
of major societal changes, and are often confronted by
the apparent paradox of seeking to be integrated into an
existing order or to serving as a force of transformation
of that same order. Those two aspects are, however, not
incompatible as long as young people can direct their
vitality in directions leading to positive advancements
and beneficial changes to the whole of society. Young
people absorb and reflect social, economic and political
realities. The response to the nexus between youth
and violent extremism requires an understanding of
the specific framework of their insertion, especially
when they live in societies under stress, along with the
complexities of the period of transition to adulthood.
In countries at war, young people are more prone
to recruitment into extremist groups, often by coercive
enforcement. As we have been able to establish more
recently, even in countries that are not involved in conflict
young people may be drawn into violent extremism,
partly due to a sense of marginalization and/or social and
economic exclusion. Ultimately, the absence of kinship

15-1147473/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

and belonging, alienation and disfranchisement renders
young people more susceptible to violent extremism.
In globalized societies, the increased use by terrorists
and their supporters of information and communication
technologies, in particular the Internet and social
networks, to incite, recruit, fund and eventually plan
terrorist acts, the dissemination of a narrative of glory
and sense of empowerment are only one computer click
away.
The international debate and fight against the
scourge of violent extremism must go beyond the
paradigm of the war on terrorism and involve a
preventive policy model with a human rights-based
approach. Addressing the threat posed by extremist
non-State armed groups and terrorists to young people
requires a comprehensive and multidimensional
approach to its underlying factors, such as poor living
conditions, limited or unequal access to education,
lack of employment or sustainable livelihood, social
exclusion and inequality, weak political participation,
previous exposure to violence, and a lack of public
safety and security.
On the other hand we must also engage in an effective
communication strategy to prevent radicalization and
the evolution from there to terrorism. That would
help in suppressing the flow of foreign fighters by
promoting a counter-narrative to extremism and its
fake promises of glory. The issue of youth and violent
extremism cuts across mandates and across peace,
security and development agendas. The magnitude
of the problem requires it to be globally addressed,
a multidimensional and cross-cutting approach and
the involvement of States, international and regional
organizations, religious communities, civil society,
media representatives and, most importantly, young
people themselves.
Portugal has been a firm and consistent supporter of
the United Nations youth agenda, and strongly believes
that the World Programme of Action for Youth, adopted
20 years ago by consensus at the General Assembly,
continues to offer the apposite response to the serious
challenges faced today by the young population, as it
provides Member States with a blueprint containing
practical guidelines for action at the national and
for international support in improving the situation
of young people. Portugal also looks forward to the
Secretary-General’s plan of action on countering
violent extremism.

74/80

23/04/2015

If we are to protect youth against violent extremism,
we must make use of all instruments at our disposal, and
there is no greater tool than education. We consider it
crucial to promote a culture of peace, justice and human
development, ethnic and religious tolerance, and respect
for all religions and cultures by establishing suitable
and inclusive educational programmes. In that regard,
Portugal believes that platforms like the Alliance of
Civilizations can play a key role, including through
intra- and interfaith dialogue. The debate on promoting
tolerance and practical strategies to counter extremism
should deconstruct the false claim of terrorists and
extremists that religion is their guide, since their
ideologies and practices lack foundations and are even
contrary to the teachings of any major faith.
At the regional level, initiatives that foster mutual
understandingand intercultural dialogue and build
bridges among cultures, with a particular emphasis
on youth, should be most welcome. In that regard,
the North-South Centre of the Council of Europe
provides a good example of regional cooperation that
brings together youth from both hemispheres and
creates conditions to mitigate the appeal of terrorism
and violent extremism. Investing in good policies and
programmes to create enabling environments for youth
to prosper, fulfil their potential, enjoy their human
rights and engage as responsible social actors is key to a
successful collective strategy against the dissemination
of violent extremism.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United Arab Emirates.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to thank His Royal
Highness Crown Prince Al Hussein bin Abdullah II
of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan for convening
this important debate and for his valuable statement. I
would also like to thank the Secretary-General and the
previous speakers for their insights today.
The United Arab Emirates fully shares the view of
the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan that young people
should be seen not only as victims, but also as agents in
building and delivering a positive agenda that counters
extremism and violence and offers hope in the wake of
the destructive war waged by the forces of intolerance
and hatred. Many speakers today have noted the range
of socioeconomic root causes that might make youth
vulnerable to recruitment and radicalization. These
include the significant and growing “youth bulge”

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

globally and the stress it is placing on basic services such
as education, unemployment, perceptions of injustice,
individual alienation or community grievances.
In the Middle East region, the unresolved and
brutal conflicts in countries such as Syria, Iraq, Libya
and Yemen, and the long-standing Israeli occupation,
have led to further violence and fractured the global
security order. These crises have left political vacuums,
which have exacerbated extremism, leading to spillover
effects that have destabilized the entire region.
From the perspective of the United Arab Emirates,
the Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) exploits
all of the factors described today in order to draw young
people towards them to wage war against innocent
civilians. Inflicting human suffering in the name of
religion is a clear violation of Islamic teaching and
doctrine. Considerable financial, communications and
travel support networks that span the world sustain ISIL
and other extremist and terrorist organizations. Those
recruited as foreign fighters in Syria by ISIL come
from more than 90 countries. More thorough research
is required to identify and address the full range of
drivers of the form of extremism that confronts us.
The United Arab Emirates has developed a
comprehensive strategy to implement its vision
regarding the importance of severing the links
through which youth move towards extremism and
our conviction that youth are the primary resource in
building our nation. The strategy rests on the following
pillars: support for the equal right to education,
including girls; encouraging critical thinking in the
educational process; building a knowledge economy
that promotes innovation and prepares young people
for the modern labour market; and encouraging our
youth to take leadership and greater responsibilities in
all areas.
Our strategy also focuses on denying the use of
social media as a propaganda and recruitment tactic.
We recently launched the United Arab Emirates-United
States Anti-Daesh Online Operations Centre to counter
the exploitation of online media through monitoring
and analysis, and proposing credible religious counternarratives. Additionally, we promote the values of
tolerance and moderation by partnering with respected
religious leaders and academic institutions. For
example, in Afghanistan, the United Arab Emirates
has invested $20 million in a programme that provides
imams in rural areas with training in the true and
moderate teachings of Islam. In Abu Dhabi, we have

S/PV.7432

established the Muslim Council of Elders to promote
Islam’s peaceful values and teachings worldwide.
Furthermore, we support youth throughout our
region, particularly in conflict-affected and transitional
countries. We partner with national and international
organizations to provide high quality health-care and
education services for refugees from Syria and Iraq.
And we remain firmly committed to providing full
support to Egypt through youth-focused programmes.
As Egypt is home to 30 per cent of the youth population
of the Middle East and North Africa today, we firmly
believe that Egypt’s stability is the cornerstone of the
region’s stability.
I would like to propose some recommendations to
the international community in countering extremism
in the long-term.
First, we must deny the conditions on the ground
that allow extremism to spread in transitional States.
When mass atrocities take place, we should take swift
and collective action through the Security Council.
Secondly, we should utilize the existing and emerging
legal frameworks to counter extremist recruitment and
financing channels, and ensure the implementation of
the relevant Security Council resolutions. Thirdly, we
should encourage long-term investments in education
and health, especially in humanitarian and fragile
settings. Fourthly, we should develop programmes that
empower mothers to serve as the first line of defence
for families and children against misperceptions and
extremist thinking.
We must recognize the nexus between the
development and security agendas, prioritize our
commitments to young people and address their
economic, political and social concerns. Let us unite
in support of the more than 1.8 billion young people
globally to help them meet their aspirations and develop
a better future, together.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I now give the
floor to the representative of Azerbaijan.
Ms. Mammadova (Azerbaijan): At the outset,
I would like to thank the Jordanian presidency for
convening today’s important and timely debate on the
role of youth in countering extremism and promoting
peace.
In recent years, the youth dimension has emerged
as a critical factor in global counter-terrorism efforts.
Terrorist organizations often grow their ranks by

15-1147475/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

recruiting young people who have a need to belong.
In this context, it is particularly alarming to observe
that the forced recruitment trend is shifting towards
adherence and that youth are voluntarily joining terrorist
organizations for ideological and/or socioeconomic
reasons. Pseudoreligious and warrior ideologies have
become an effective recruitment tactic, and with the
growth of social media and virtual platforms, developed
and developing countries alike are facing an increasing
risk of radicalization in their societies.
If we are to effectively prevent, protect and
reintegrate youth, we need to better understand the
triggers and catalysts of extremism. Among them, the
following factors appear to be common and pertinent to
different settings.
Unresolved, protracted conflicts and foreign
military occupation undermine the common belief in
the rule of law, human dignity and human life. Such
situations, accompanied by the weak capacity of affected
States to control and address the ensuing risks create a
climate of instability, injustice and impunity. A broader
lack of opportunities, in particular socioeconomic
deprivation, leads to an increased sense of insecurity
and despair. Thus, a focus on economic and employment
factors is key to countering the motivation and strategy
of recruiters, and to rewarding the resilience of youth
and societies at large to radicalization.
Racism and related intolerance can permeate
social marginalization and encourage youth to search
for a new, radical identity. Intercultural and interfaith
dialogue is essential to promoting mutual respect and
peaceful coexistence. Ignorance drives extremism,
not religion. Education is vital to curbing this scourge
and to fostering a culture free from discrimination,
prejudice and stigma. It is important to pursue
youth policy work in a holistic manner and from
multi-stakeholder perspective, and to advance youth
priorities at all levels.
The youth population is growing all over the
world, and it grows it is ever more critical to design
response measures that enable young people to become
productive, rather than destructive members of their
communities. My country, Azerbaijan, seeking to make
a practical contribution to youth policy development and
its implementation with and for youth, in October 2014
hosted the first-ever Global Forum on Youth Policies.
The global event was organized at the initiative of the
Secretary-General, in partnership with his Envoy on
Youth, the United Nations Development Programme,
76/80

23/04/2015

UNESCO and the Council of Europe. It brought
together over 700 representatives from 165 countries,
with the active participation of ministers responsible
for youth, as well as experts, youth advocates, civil
society representatives.
The Forum adopted the Baku Commitment to Youth
Policies, which, inter alia, calls for further promoting
and supporting the implementation of the World
Programme for Action on Youth, establishing a global
initiative on youth policies to support their development
and implementation, fostering partnerships that enable
inclusive and multi-stakeholder involvement in youth
policies, among other initiatives.
The United Nations has an important role play
in promoting policies that can create and provide the
resources youth need to become active local and global
citizens. In this respect, this year represents a unique
opportunity to promote synergies between youth policies
and broader development policies and frameworks,
particularly in the context of the post-2015 development
agenda and the means of its implementation.
In conclusion, I would like once again to reiterate
our appreciation to the delegation of the Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan for convening this important
debate. As is often said in the Security Council, we all
shall remain seized of this acute matter.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Ukraine.
Mr. Yeremenko (Ukraine): My delegation would
like to express sincere gratitude to Jordan for organizing
this high-level debate on the role of youth in countering
violent extremism and promoting peace.
Extremism and terrorism nowadays pose a serious
threat to peace, security and stability in the world. We
fully agree that there is a need to intensify our common
work to address this issue and place youth at the centre
of the global agenda to counter violent extremism.
Radicalization among youth should be prevented and
stopped, yet the achievement of this goal will be possible
only through concrete strategies aimed at consolidating
all existing efforts and strengthening close cooperation
among all stakeholders.
The United Nations, in particular the Security
Council, as well as other United Nations bodies and
entities, including the Office of the Secretary-General’s
Envoy on Youth, have to play a key role in preventing
violent extremism. Of high importance in this regard

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

S/PV.7432

is ensuring the effective implementation of resolutions
1624 (2005) and 2178 (2014).

coming from its neighbour, Ukraine is ready to actively
contribute to taking this initiative forward.

Unfortunately, young people constitute one of the
strata most vulnerable to factors leading to radicalism
and extremism. There are many such factors, yet one
of the most important, especially vis-à-vis youth, is
propaganda. Violent extremist groups actively exploit
this tool through media and social networks. In our
opinion, the most dangerous situation emerges when
manipulative propaganda is elevated to the rank of
State priorities.

The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor to
the representative of Benin.

For more than a year, Ukraine has suffered from
the aggression of its big neighbour, the Russian
Federation. Russia has temporarily occupied and
made an attempt to annex a part of the territory of
Ukraine — the Autonomous Republic of Crimea — and
continues hostile and subversive actions against our
country in the Donbas. Still, the military component
of the aggression is far from the most dangerous one.
Fierce, deceitful propaganda disseminated by the
State-controlled Russian media and through numerous
other means is one of the key elements of the ongoing
aggression against Ukraine.
The international community has to be alarmed
by the fact that this Soviet-style propaganda machine
works very well, first and foremost on youth. There are
reported cases of teeagers participating in the activity
of the pro-Russian terrorist gangs in certain areas of
eastern Ukraine. Some are 15-years old and even
younger. There is also credible information that the
Russian-coordinated and sponsored terrorist groups are
trying to force students into their ranks using different
means of influence. Moreover, there is testimony that
such means as promising to annul criminal records or
to repay loans are practiced in the Russian campaign to
recruit mercenaries into the terrorist gangs operating in
the Donbas. Young people are common victims of this
recruiting campaign.
Apart from comprehensive efforts to eliminate the
social, economic, cultural, religious and other grounds
for the spread of violent extremism among youth,
the United Nations has to take the fight against the
propaganda of intolerance and hatred to a new level.
To reach this goal, we might need to explore ways of
establishing an international mechanism to reveal
such facts in real time, condemn them, and above all
identify the means of discouraging those spreading
such propaganda. As a country experiencing first-hand
the grave consequences of such vicious propaganda

Mr. Zinsou (Benin) (spoke in French): Let me first
congratulate Jordan on its assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for the second time during
its mandate, and to thank it for having organized this
debate on the maintenance of international peace and
security, with a focus on the role of youth in countering
violent extremism and promoting peace. In particular I
would like to thank his Royal Highness Crown Prince
Al Hussein bin Abdullah II, for his visit to New York so
as to preside over this meeting. I would also like to hail
his most instructive statement.
My delegation is pleased that the Security Council
is focusing on the consideration of matters relating
to peace and security and youth. As also stressed by
other delegations, young people are prey to conflicts
and extremism. The recruitment of child soldiers and
the kidnapping of young girls, youths, essentially as
sexual slaves are clear demonstrations of this. We have
seen how recruiters from terrorist groups exploit gaps
in societies so as to spread their theories and radicalize
youth. Economic and social inequalities, poverty and
particularly frustration arising from situations of youth
unemployment, underemployment and social exclusion
in double standard societies, which are increasingly
elitist, where the social elevator seems to have definitely
broken down, all of these things my delegation feels are
circumstances and root causes leading to radicalization
and the endoctrinement of young people.
My delegation therefore believes that there would be
a need to invest in young people such that they can enjoy
their fundamental rights and participate in decisions
having to do with their own flourishing. My delegation
also feels that there must be further investment in
human security so as to strengthen the resiliency of
populations in general and youth in particular, in order
to promote private-public partnership for economies
that generate employment for youth.
All of these things require good governance to
accelerate economic growth, harness demographics
and effectively combat poverty and inequality when
distributing wealth. The judicious use of public
administration is quite important to re-establishing
equality and combating inequality, as peace requires
inclusive development. It is Benin’s hope that,

15-1147477/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

through shared prosperity, taking into account the
limited resources of our planet, the implementation
of the development programme from the post-2015
period, which is currently being finalized, will be a
transformative one that creates conditions for States to
have necessary resources that give rise to opportunities
for youth and provide them with means to flourish and
have faith in the political systems of their countries.
We also need to mobilize civil society so as to
counter extremism wherever it may emerge. Skill
and knowledge are necessary to create employment
and to access universal values such as secularism,
respect for human dignity and others, and acceptance
of coexistence and diversity. Such education must
be based on universal values, which can give youth
resiliency in countering propaganda on the Internet.
In this process, States will have to increasingly avoid
exclusion practices such as favortism and corruption
and instead choose programmes that draw upon the
merits of individuals where youth can demonstrate
their own skills, create and innovate for the common
good of their countries.
The international community must provide means
to change the situation of millions of disenfranchised
youth if it does not want the rug to be pulled out from
under them by religious extremists, leading to a total
delegitimatization of societies by terrorist movements
such as Boko Haram, the Islamic State, Al-Qaida
and others. We reiterate the importance of the United
Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy, one pillar
of which is the elimination of conditions that lead to the
spread of terrorism. The strategy must continue to be
implemented by taking into account the new dimension
of the issue of religious extremism.
In making its humble contribution to achieving
this goal, Benin has launched the African Initiative for
Education in peace, development and interreligious and
intercultural dialogue. The official launching will be in
Cotonou from 26 to 28 May, during the international
symposium that Benin will be hosting. This is but one
example of my country’s efforts along those lines. The
initiative is essentially to stop religious extremism in
Africa by attacking its root causes, as recommended
in the preambular paragraph of the UNESCO Charter.
The initiative seeks to find a happy medium among
religions by providing shared spaces where people
can live together and exhange views. It also seeks to
promote projects and innovations for harmony and to

78/80

23/04/2015

strengthen the idea of living together, social progress
and balanced development which benefits all.
The African initiative will bring together various
religious and secular leaders for honest dialogue has
been supported by numerous partners, including
the Alliance of Civilizations, UNESCO, the United
Nations Development Programme and the Economic
Community of West African States. Moreover, the
initiative is one element of an important decision taken
the twenty-fourth regular session of the Conference
of Heads of State and Government of the African
Union on 30 and 31 January in Addis Ababa. The
General Assembly also endorsed the initiative during
its adoption on 15 December 2014 of resolution 69/140
on the promotion of interreligious and intercultural
dialogue, understanding and cooperation for peace.
One of the high points of the Cotonou symposium
will be the adoption of a manifesto on tolerance, dialogue
and understanding. This is a new commitment that
could lead to lasting peace through the strengthening
of love and reason in spite of the difficulties we are
encountering today. Youth will be a key stakeholder
in this new approach to combating terrorism and
extremism of all stripes. Benin needs the support of all
to ensure that the promises of this initiative become a
reality.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of the Russian Federation has asked for the floor to
make a further statement.
Mr. Zagaynov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): With your permission, we would like, at this
time, to give a more detailed response to the statement
made by the representative of Ukraine, all the more so
since, with respect to that country, there is a great deal
to say on the matter of extremism. However, contrary
to what our Ukrainian colleagues believe, the issue
actually is not where they say it is.
Last year, units of fighters, with the participation of
representatives of radicalized youth, were intentionally
used to carry out a violent coup d’état against the legally
elected Government in Ukraine. Ever since then, the
authorities in Kyiv have insisted on turning a blind eye
to the rise of extremism, intolerance and nationalism
in the country. It is difficult to imagine a more horrific
confirmation of that fact than the unpunished seizure
of dozens of people as hostages in Odessa in May
last year. Moreover, it seems that the Kyiv authorities
are intentionally creating an atmosphere of hate and

15-11474

23/04/2015

Maintenance of international peace and security

xenophobia in the country, which has, of course, had
an enormous effect on young people. One need only
consider, for example, at the voluntary battalions
fighting in the Donbas, with their odious inclination to
Nazi ideology, made up mostly of previously radicalized
youth.
What is the meaning of the law adopted by the
Rada or Parliament on the status of fighters for the
independence of Ukraine in the twentieth century?
Those who fought on the side of the fascists in the
Second World War, among them members of the
Ukrainian nationalist movement and the Ukrainian
rebel army, have been declared national heroes. Tens of
thousands of peaceful people were killed by that army
during one of the most horrific examples of ethnic
cleansing in the history of Ukraine. In 1941, the socalled heroes of Ukrainian history adopted a document
declaring that the newly formed Ukrainian State would
closely cooperate with the great National Socialist
Germany, which, under the leadership of Adolf Hitler,
would create a new order in Europe and the world. Such
are the views circulating in Ukraine today.
Those who do not agree with the Kyiv Government’s
position are called enemies of Ukraine, and the media
cover up alternative points of views. There has been a
wave of killings of opposition journalists and political
actors. Recently, the former deputy of the Regional
Party, Oleg Kalashnikov, and the Ukrainian journalist
Oles Buzyna were both killed. Threats have also been
made against other dissidents. There is a peace-making
website with a list of individuals — with some personal
information — who disagree with the wild outbursts
of xenophobia in the country. Kyiv has been officially
spreading such propaganda, as has been demonstrated
by the statements of the advisor to the Minister for
Internal Affairs, Mr. Gerashchenko.
Extremism in Ukraine is spreading in a climate of
impunity. There have still not been proper investigations
into the tragedies that took place in the Maidan, Odessa
and Mariupol. The report of the International Advisory
Panel of the Council of Europe on its investigation into
the events in the Maidan described them as not in line
with the European Convention for the Protection of
Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
In the light of the new approach to history, as can be
seen in school textbooks, young Ukrainians can hardly
avoid xenophobic or nationalistic views. It has become
a regular practice to spread hate speech, as evidenced
by the campaign mounted by student activists at Lviv

S/PV.7432

University on 25 February in setting up the so-called
corridor of shame denouncing dissident professors.
We might also recall the video clips that appeared on
the Internet last year that showed a large crowd of
Ukrainian students chanting in the school courtyard
for reprisals against Russians. The list of evidence of
intolerance, radicalism and extremism in Ukraine goes
on and on. However, considering the late hour, I would
like to conclude with an appeal to the representative
of Ukraine to seriously deal with resolving the issue
of extremism and radicalism in that country. Members
of the Security Council should also try to objectively
understand the situation in Ukraine.
The President (spoke in Arabic): The representative
of Ukraine has requested the floor to make an additional
statement. I give him the floor, noting that he will not
be able to make a further request.
Mr. Yaremenko (Ukraine) (spoke in Russian):
I would like to demonstrate with some numbers the
level of the so-called extremism that exists in Ukraine,
which apparently only people in Russia seem to know
about. Last year, two electoral campaigns were held
in Ukraine. The first was to elect the President of the
country, and the second to elect members of Parliament.
The Russian side, at least in as far as I understand their
position, seems to mean by the term “extremist” two of
the political parties in Ukraine. One is called the Right
Sector and the other is known as Freedom. I would like
to recall that, with respect to the presidential elections,
the candidate for the Right Sector, Mr. Yarash,
received only 1.6 per cent of the vote, which put him
in 10th place, and in 11th place with 0.7 per cent of
the vote came Mr. Tyahnybok of the Freedom Party.
In the parliamentary elections, in which those parties
also were represented, neither of those parties made it
into Parliament. I would like to stress that 29 parties
participated in the parliamentary campaign.
So what kind of extremism are we talking about
here? We can take a look back at history. Unfortunately,
it is very difficult for me to speak about this, because
my country, in recognition of this difficult page in our
history, adopted a law establishing that on 8 May we
remember the victims of the World War II. That is a
normal and civilized approach for any State. On 9 May,
we celebrate our victory.
I would also like to recall that in August 1939 the
Soviet Union signed a pact with Nazi Germany with
respect to the de facto division of Europe. Moreover,
on 17 September the Soviet Union attacked Poland.

15-1147479/80

S/PV.7432

Maintenance of international peace and security

Then they held a joint parade in Brest to celebrate
with the fascists. It is even more painful to speak
about this, but on 22 March of this year, in the city of
Saint Petersburg, something momentous took place:
a gathering of various European ultra-radical and
extreme rightist parties, about which the Federation
of Jewish Communities of Russia issued the following
statement. “We are extremely concerned and puzzled
that permission was given for a large gathering of
the most extreme nationalistic forces in Europe to be
held in Saint Petersburg, a city that lived through all
the horrors of the fascist blockade”. The forum was
attended by representatives of various ultra-nationalist
parties of Europe, including such heinous parties as the
Greek Golden Dawn party, the National Democratic
Party of Germany, whose leader, Udo Voigt, also took

80/80

23/04/2015

part in the forum and who earlier and unambiguously
stated that his party was a successor to Hitler’s National
Socialists. Also present were the Austrian Freedom
Party; the Party of the Swedes founded by the National
Socialist Front in Sweden; the British National Party,
whose ex-leader, Nick Griffin, also participated in the
forum and denied the Holocaust; and the Italian New
Force and its leader Roberto Fiore, who calls himself
a fascist. All of that was organized under the aegis of
the Rodina Party or the Motherland-National Patriotic
Union. So, what kind of fascism are we speaking of in
Ukraine?
The President: There are no more names on the list
of speakers.
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m.

15-11474
