S/PRST/2019/2

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
3 April 2019
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 8501st meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 April 2019, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “The situation in
Mali”, the President of the Security Council made the following statement on behalf
of the Council:
“The Security Council recalls the provisions of resolution 2423 (2018)
urging the Government of Mali and the Plateforme and Coordination armed
groups to take immediate and concrete action to implement key provisions of
the Roadmap adopted on 22 March 2018 over a six month period.
“The Security Council takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
submitted in accordance with paragraph 6 of resolution 2423 (2018)
(S/2019/207).
“The Security Council takes positive note of some progress made in the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali (“the
Agreement”) since the inauguration of President Keita on 4 September 2018. It
recognizes the increased steps taken within the past eight months than during
the first years after the signing of the Agreement, which were characterized by
a slow pace of implementation. It welcomes: the holding of the presidential
elections in a generally peaceful environment, with the support of the signatory
armed groups; some progress in the decentralization process, including through
the adoption of a decree setting out arrangements for the transfer of
decentralized State services to local authorities in their ar eas of competence;
further steps towards the operationalization of the interim administrations in the
North of Mali; the registration of all combatants eligible to the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration (DDR) process and the launch of an
accelerated DDR process for 1423 combatants; the adoption of a decree setting
out modalities of integration in the reformed and reconstituted and reformed
Malian Defense and security forces (MDSF); increased representation of women
in the current Government.
“The Security Council notes that the mobilization of the Prime Minister in
support to the full and inclusive implementation of the Agreement, as well as
international pressure, including through the prospect of sanctions, constituted
important factors in securing these positive results. It expresses its intention to
continue to closely monitor the implementation of the Agreement. It underlines
that MINUSMA, along with the other security presences mentioned in
resolution 2423 (2018), significantly contributes to the implementation of the
Agreement and to the stabilization of Mali. It commends MINUSMA ’s efforts

19-05590 (E)

030419

*1905590*

S/PRST/2019/2

to adopt a more robust posture over the past months as well as the intensification
of the frequency and scale of its operations.
“The Security Council strongly regrets that several provisions of the
Agreement referenced in paragraph 4 of resolution 2423 have not yet been fully
implemented or started, despite its repeated calls in this sense over th e past
months: the adoption, following adequate consultations, of a legislation
establishing a regional territorial police force; the allocation of the necessary
human, technical and financial resources for the interim administrations in the
North of Mali to perform their mission; the completed integration of at least
1000 members of the signatory arms groups in the MDSF; the start of the
socioeconomic reintegration of unintegrated members of the signatory armed
groups with the support of international partners; progress towards the
socioeconomic development of the North of Mali, through the adoption of
legislation establishing the Northern Development Zone; greater participation
of women in the mechanisms established by the Agreement to support and
monitor its implementation.
“The Security Council notes that protracted delays in implementation
contribute to a political and security vacuum jeopardizing the stability and
development of Mali as well as the viability of the Agreement. It recalls the
provisions of resolution 2423 (2018) expressing the intention of the Security
Council to follow closely the timely implementation of the Roadmap adopted
on 22 March 2018 and to respond with measures pursuant t o resolution 2374
(2017) should the parties not implement the agreed-upon commitments within
the announced timeframe. It stresses that all parties to the Agreement share the
primary responsibility to make steadfast progress in its implementation. It urges
them to refrain from actions undermining the implementation of the Agreement.
It calls upon all Malian stakeholders to support the necessary decisions for the
full and inclusive implementation of the Agreement.
“The Security Council urges the Government of Mali and the Plateforme
and Coordination armed groups to continue to accelerate the implementation of
the Agreement, through significant, meaningful and irreversible measures to be
taken on an urgent basis. It stresses the need for increased ownership and
prioritization in the implementation of the Agreement. It encourages the
adoption by the Malian parties of a revised roadmap with a clear, realistic and
binding timeline focused on a limited number of prioritie s, including the
completion of a constitutional reform following an inclusive and collaborative
process, the adoption of a comprehensive plan for the effective redeployment of
reconstituted and reformed MDSF to Northern Mali, as well as the establishment
of the Northern Development Zone. It encourages the swift completion of the
constitutional reform following an inclusive and collaborative process, with the
full engagement and consensus of the government, signatory armed groups, the
political opposition and civil society. It calls for the integration in the MDSF of
the combatants taking part in the accelerated DDR process who meet the set
criteria, as well as for the adoption of a draft legislation setting out the Northern
Development Zone before the end of MINUSMA’s current mandate. It recalls
the importance of swift progress towards equal and meaningful participation of
women as set out in resolution 2423 (2018).
“The Security Council requests the Secretary-General, as part of his
regular reporting on MINUSMA, to include in its next quarterly report
recommendations on concrete measures in the three priority areas for a revised
roadmap outlined in the paragraph above, to be fulfilled by the Malian pa rties
during the course of MINUSMA’s upcoming mandate, on the basis of their latest
commitments. It further requests the Secretary-General to provide options for a
2/3

19-05590

S/PRST/2019/2

potential significant adaptation of MINUSMA, with sufficient time for
Council’s consideration before the expiration of MINUSMA’s mandate, with a
view to enhancing its effectiveness to support the implementation of the
Agreement through a greater focus on priority tasks, without jeopardizing the
stability of Mali and its region, MINUSMA’s central role in supporting the
implementation of the Agreement, as well as MINUSMA’s capacity to interact
with other security presences which have the potential to be mutually beneficial
instruments to restore peace and stability in Mali and the Sahel region, as
recognized by resolution 2423. It notes that these options should factor the dire
security situation, including in Central Mali, and the threat from terrorist groups,
take into account the safety and security of personnel and evaluate the current
prioritization of MINUSMA’s objectives. It expresses its intention to consider
these options taking into account the state and pace of implementation of the
Agreement.
“The Security Council expresses increased concerns about the security
situation in Central Mali. It strongly condemns the continued attacks, including
terrorist attacks, against civilians, representatives from local, regional and State
institutions, as well as national, international and UN security forces. It further
strongly condemns the recent expansion of intercommunal violence, including
the horrific attack in Ogossagou on 23 March 2019, which resulted in more than
160 civilians killed. It urges Malian authorities to ensure that those responsible
for crimes involving violations and abuses of human rights and violations of
international humanitarian law are held accountable and brought to justice
without undue delay. It encourages Malian authorities to make further and
continued efforts in the implementation of a comprehensive plan to re -establish
state presence in Central Mali, as well as to enhance their actions to restore
peaceful relations between communities. It requests the Secretary General, as
part of his regular reporting on MINUSMA, to include recommendations in its
next quarterly report on ways for MINUSMA to enhance its support to such
efforts and actions. It further encourages MINUSMA to continue to support the
restoration of State authority in the Centre and to implement its good offices,
reconciliation and protection of civilians mandate, according to the relevant
provisions of resolution 2423 (2018). It calls upon Malian authorities to closely
coordinate with MINUSMA upcoming steps towards the restoration of State
presence in the Centre.
“The Security Council reiterates its full support to the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Mali and Head of MINUSMA,
Mahamat Saleh Annadif, the international mediation team, MINUSMA and the
other security presences in Mali and in the Sahel region, as mentioned in
resolution 2423 (2018).
“The Security Council underlines that lasting peace and security in the
Sahel region will not be achieved without the full, effective and inclusive
implementation of the Agreement as well as a combination of political, security
and development efforts benefitting all regions of Mali. It further underlines the
importance of an inclusive implementation of the Agreement, which associates
all Malian actors supportive of the peace process.”

19-05590

3/3
