UNITED NATIONS

SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFKIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

YEAR

25’72d

MEETING:

NEW

11 MARCH

1985

YORK

CONTENTS
Poge
Provisional agenda (!VAgenda/2572)

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . .

Tribute to the memory of Mr. Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko, “resident of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and
General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union . . . . . . . . . . . ..~.........................................,.....
Adoption

of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . ..*.*.................................

Ihe situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 February 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon
to the United Nations addressed to the President ol” the Security Council
(S/16983) .,........,..,.,,.......,...,,,~..,.,..........,........

WV.2572

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol W . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supphtws
of the Q(I?eia/ I&con& of tk Seeur&v COI&/. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appars or in which information about it
is &en.
IIw resolutions of the Security Cluncil, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1966. are published in yearly volumes of Res&rians and DrrLdans of the
Securiry Cot&I. 7?re new system, whiih has heen applii
~troactively to nzsohttions
adopted before I January 1965, became fully operative, on that date.

257211d MEETING
Held in New York on Monday, 11 March 1985, at 3 p.m.
Presiakvtnt:Mr. Blake RABETAFIKA

(Madagascar).

4. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (htterpretutio~ from Russian): On behalf of the
Soviet delegation, I should like to express our sincere gratitude to you, Mr. President, for the statement you just
made on behalf of the members of the Council and to
thank you for your condolences in connection with the
death of the General Secretary of the Central Committee
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, Konstantin
Ustinovich Chernenko. The Soviet State and people have
&%ed a great loss. An outstanding Party and State offercial has passed away, an unswerving fighter for the cause
of strengther,ing peace and international co-operation.

JWenr: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, fienmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Hrru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.

I.

Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in the Middle East:
Letter dated 25 February 1985 from the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (s/16983)

5. The activities of Konstantin Ustinovich Chernenko in
his high posts in the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and the Soviet State earned him great respect
throughout the world. He devoted his entire life to faithfully serving the Soviet people and will for ever remain in
the memory of the Soviet people and af the whole of
progressive mankind.

Thp meeting was coiled to order ot 3.45 p.m.

6. The message of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Sovet Union, of the Presidium of :he
Supreme Soviet and of the Council of Ministers of tk
USSR on the occasion of the death of Konstantin Ustine
vich Chemenko on I I March, stresses the consistent nature
of the foteign policy of the Soviet Union; it reads 4s follows:

I. The PRESIDENT (InterpretotlottjFom Den&): It was
with deep sorrow that we learned of the passing of an
outstanding statesman of our day. Mr. Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. President of the Pmsidium of the
Supteme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
and General Secretary of tk Central Qmmittee of the
Communist Party of tk 8ovkt Union. As the principal
United Nations organ on which Member States have confd
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, tk Security Cotmcil must pay
a tribute to I4esident Chemenko for his great devotion to
the cause of peace and security for all peoples, the ccssation of the arms race and tbe elimination of tk threat ofa
nuclear war.

‘The Soviet State has done and is doing all that is
possible and required to strengthen the socialist cor,r
munity, consolidate the positions of socialism throughout the world, avert nuclear catastrophe and ensure
lasting peace.
“We wish to see cessation of the arms race and ate
persistently strivinp to and to avert the militarixation of
outer space. Our ultimate objective is the total destruction of nuclear weapons throughout the planet and
the complete elimination of the threat of nuclear war.
The Soviet Union has unswervingly favoured and continues to favour constructive dialogue, practical measures leading to the reduction of international tensions
and the establishment of an atmosphere of trust, c*
operation and mutuai understanding among all peapies and States.‘*

2 I should like, as President of tbe Council and on
behalf of its members, to express to tbe represmtative of
tk Soviet Union and, through him, to tk Government of
UK Soviet Union, the Soviet peopk and the family of the
daased. our sincere condolences.

7. The Soviet delegation will convey the condokttces
that have been expressed here to the Government of the
Soviet Union, the Soviet people and the bereaved family.

3. I now invite the members of the Council to stand and
observe a minute of silence.

Maptlatoftheagenda
lk
reprpsentotiws,
silence.

stat&g,

akrwd

a minute of
nie agenda was adopted
I

.

would confer on the PalestineLiberationOrganization
(PLO) the samerightsof participationasthoseconferred
on MemberStatespursuantto rule 37.Doesany member
of the Council wishto speakon this proposal?

Use sltuatfw in tbe Middle East:
Latter dated 25 February 198§from tke Permaaeat Repff
sentatiue of Jabaaon to tbe Uuited Natiolro ad&es4 to
the Resktent of the Security Council (S/16983)

8. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): In
12. Mr. CLARK (United States of America): The
accordancewith decisions
taken by the Councilat preUnited Statesopposesextendingto the PLO the same
viousmeetings[2568th and 2570th meetings], I invite the
rightsof participationin theproceedings
of the Councilas
representative
of Lehanonto take a placeat the Council if that organisationrepresented
a MemberState.Wehave
table; I invite the representatives
of Algeria,Bangladesh, consistentlytakenthe positionthat, underthe provisions
Cuba, Democratic Yen.:n, the German Democratic of the rulesof proceduretheonly legalbasison whichthe
Republic.the IslamicRepublicof Iran, Israel,Jordan, Council may grant a hearingto personsspeakingOII
Qatar, the SyrianArab Repubiic,the UnitedArab Emir- behalf of non-governmental
entitiesis rule 39.
ates,Viet NamandYugoslaviato taketheplacesreserved
for themat the sideof the Councilchamber.
13. For manydecades,
the UnitedStateshassupported
a generousinterpretationof rule 39,and we would not
At the invitation of the fiesident. Mr. Fakhouri(Lebanon)
objectin thiscase.Weare,however.opposed
to specialud
hoc departuresfrom orderly procedure.In particular,the
took a place at the Council table: Mr. Djoudi (Algeria), Mr.
United Statesdoesnot agreewith the recentpracticeof
Wasiualiin (BangIadesh), Mr. Oramas Oliva (Cub@, Mr.
the Council,which appearsselectivelyto try to enhance
AI-A& (Democratic Yemen), Mr. Ott (German Democratic
Republic), Mr. Rrrjole-Khorassani (Islamic Republic ofIran),
the prestigeof thosewho wish to speakin the Council
througha departurefrom the rulesof procedure.WeconMr. Netanyahu (Israe& Mr. Kasrawi (Jordan). Mr. AC
Kawari (Qatar), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab Republic), Mr.
siderthis specialpracticeto be without legalfoundation
and to constitutean abuseof the rules.The integrity of
AI-Shad/ (United Arab Emirates), Mr. Le Kim Chwtg (Viet
the Council’sprocedures. we believe.is very important.
Nom) and Mr. Golob (Yugoslavia) took the plaes reserved
for themat the side of the Cotmcil chamber.
14. For thesereasons.the United Statesrequeststhat
9. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from finch): I
you, Mr. President, put the terms cF the proposed invitashouldlike to inform members
of the Councilthat I have tion to the vote. The United Stateswill vote against.
receivedlettersfromtherepresentativesof
Cyprus,CzechoSlovakia,Indonesia,Nicaragua,PakiStarJ,Poland,Saudi 15. The PRESIDENT(interpretation from French): If no
Arabia, Senegal
andthe Sudanin whichtheyrequestto be other member of the Council wishes
to speakat thisstage,
invitedto participatein the discuss’on
of the itemon the
I shall take it that the Council is prepared to voteon the
agenda.In conformity with the usualpractice,I prolnxe, proposal by Democratic Yemen.
with theconsentof theCouncil,to invitethoserepresentaA vote wastakenby show of hana!~.
tivesto participatein the discussion,
without the right to
vote, in accordancewith the relevantprovisionsof the
In favour: Burkina Faso,China,Egypt,India, khdagasCharterand rule 37of the Council’sprovisionalrulesof
car, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Ukrainian
procedure.
Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics.
At the invitation of the president. Mr. Phe&os-V&t
(Cyprus), Mr. C&u (Czechoslovakia), Mr. Akztas (lnalxtesia). Mr. Icoro Gallard (Nicaragua), Mr. Sikh Nauuz
(Pakistan), Mr. Nowak (Potat@, Mr. Shihabi (Sot& Arabia) Mr. Sat& (Senegal) and Mr. Adam (St&n) took the
places reserved for them at t4e side of the Council chamber.

Agobut: United Statesof America.

~&f&t~
Australia, Denmark,France,United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
lRe propt&
abstetltianu.

IO. The PRESIDENT (interpretution from Ftenck): I
shouldlike to informmembers
of tbeCouncilthat I have
receiveda letterdated7 March [S/17011]from the representativeof DemocraticYemen.The text of theletterisas
follows:

~49 adopted by 10 votes to I, with 4

At the invitatkm of the Resibknt,Mr. Terzi (Palestine
Liberation Organhtion)
took the place reservedfor him at
the sib of the Coud chamber.

“I havethe honourto requestthat theSecurityCouncil extendan invitation to Mr. ZehdiTerxi, observerof
the Palestine
LiberationOrganisation,to participate
in
- _. - __

16. Mr. WOOLCQTT (Australia): Australia hasjust
abstainedin the voting on thequestionbeforetheCouncil.
We did 90because,
in our view, the observerof the PLO
iiir &w&m
on ihe iiem ‘The Siiuation in the Mlctale
shouidproperiybeinvitedto participateon thesamebasis
East’,in accordance
with theCouncil’sauualpractice.” as representatives
of other organizationsor bodieswhich
are not States.To havesupporteda measure
whichwould
Il. The proposalby the representative
of Democratic confer upon the PLO the samerightsas MemberStates
Yemenis not madepursuantto rule 37or rule 39 of the would imply that Australiarecognizes
the PLO. Australia
provisionalrules of procedure,but if approvedby the doesnot recognisethe PLO and will not do so whileit
Council, the invitsqon to participatein the discussion maintainsits denialof Israel’sright to exist.
2

17. Australia acknowledges that the PLO, which represents the opinion of a very significant portion of the Palestinian people, should be included in the process of seeking
a comprehensive settlement. It believes, however, that the
PLO’s opportunity to engage productively in such a process is limited, and perhaps nonexistent. while it persists
in denying Israel’s right to exist.

25. These battles are continuing. Naval units of the
Israeli forces are continuing to bombard neighbouring villages along the Lebanese coast, north of Saida.
26. This escalation undertaken by Israeli forces is a most
serious matter. Massacre follows massacre in Lebanese
villages. There are no means to dissuade the Israeli forces.
If they continue their escalation, if they cnntinue to flout
the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of I2 August
1949’ and the conventions on human rights, if they continue to cross the Litani River and to enter the region and
engage in their inhumane practices against the Lebanese
army and villages. how can we lo sure that this withdrawai
is indeed a 8enuine withdrawal, as these forces state? How
can we ensure the safety of our inhabitants? How can we
protect their property ?nd their rights?

18. Australia does not object in principle to the observer
of the PLO appearirg before the Council. As will be clear,
our objection is to the basis upon which this was proposed.
19. Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): The Danish de’egation
abstained in the vote on the proposal of participation of
the PLO in the Council’s debate. In doing so, my delegation was guided by the rules of procedure which the Council has itself established. lhe procedure followed today is
clearly designed to grant the PI.0 a status similar to that
of a Member State. This does not reflect the true relationship of the PLO to the Organization, and, therefore, we
cannot support it.

27. Israel has embarked on an escalation of its barbaric
acts. This will have disastrous consequences that will turn
against Israel itself. How long will the Council remain a
silent witness to these barbaric acts? At least once, the
Council should show that it can meet its responsibilities
and that it is worthy of the confidence placed in it.

20. This does not mean, however, that my delegation
objects to the PLG being heard by the Council during the
present debate.

28. Mr. KASEMSRI (Thailand): It was with deep sorrow that we learned this morning of the passing away of
Mr. Konstantin Chemenks,. General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. His
death is a profound loss to the Government and people of
that great country as well as to all those who had valued
his contribution to world peace and held high expectations of his taking an even greater role in international
security, particularly in the field of disarmament. On
behalf of my delegation, therefore, I join in the expression
of condolences to the people and Government of the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, to its Mission and to
the bereaved family.

21. The PRESIDENT (inrerprerorlonfiom
French): The
first speaker is the representative of Lebanon, on whom I
now call.
22. Mr. FAKHOURY
(Lebanon) (hterpretution from
Aroblc): First, on behalf of Lebanon and its people, I
extend to the Soviet delegation, which represents a
friendly country, and through it to the Soviet Government and people, our sinarest condolences on the passing
of Mr. Konstantin Chemenko, General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.

29. My delegation has been following with serious concern the disturbing news reports of recent days indicating
brutal reprisals by Israeli forces against the civilian population in southern Lebanon. Such actions as wanton killings without due process of law. demolition of homes
and other measures going beyond any pretext of military
necessity appear to violate in particular the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in
time of War, of I2 August l949?

23. The increasing escalation of Israeli practices is confirmed hour by hour. These practices are becoming ever
more barbaric as time goes on, but anyone who thought
chat our determination would be shaken and that we
would yield our positions would be badly mistaken,
24. This very morning, lsraeli forces launched a krgescale raid against the village of Zannriye, north of the
Litani River, in the region from which Israel had withdrzwn a few weeks ago and where there is still a small unit
of the Lebanese army. The first information we have
received on this matter is that the Israeli forces encircled
the village with a large number of tanks and troop
transport vehicles and proceeded to bomb the village,
entered it and cantuied
24 of irs inhabitants, mowinn Y
.
them down by gunhre before the very &yes of their families. These forces also opened fire on the Lebanese unit
which was defending the village and its inhabitants. A
number of soldiers were wounded: others were arrested.
The mhabitants joined the Lebanese soldiers in defending
their village against the Israeli aggressor.

30.

For humanitarian

reasons, the Convention

neces-

sarily places strict obligations on the occupying Power
which exercises authority
in the area. It is therefore
incumbent on Israel to satisfy the international
community
on
these concerns and to desist from any such actions. To all

intents and nuv;

the

Iam&

yweentntiw
r
_.

_ . in. hit
. . . cm!p-

ment befor;
the Council
the other day 12568th meeting].
has not satisfied my delegation’s
concern in this regard. On
the contrary.
our concern
has been heightened
by the
serious repercussions
which the inhumane
actions. as long
as they continue.
will likely have on the peace and intematiorral security
in the area. Recent incidents
at Ma’rakah
3

IstPtli withdrawal to proceed unimpeded with an expeditheus timetable. In this connection, my delegadon ga*eatly
appreciates the initiatives and efforts of the SecretaryGeneral and his representative, as well as their ongoing
good off~ees, to have the talks resumed. Consequently, we
note with regret the absence of any reference to this
important point in the draft resolution before the Councu
[s/17ooo].

are bound to inflame emotions and exacerbate tension
even further.
31. Thailand’s position on the fourth Geneva Convention of 1943 is clear on this matter. We condemn all practices and measures against the civilian population in
southern Lebanon which are in violation of its provisions.
32. It is also clear that the root cause of the bloodshed
and suffering in this instance is the continuing illegal occupation of Lebanese territory by Israeli forces. This occupation, in turn, has led to mounting resistance on the part
of the Lebanese. It is therefore necessary to elimirate this
root cause in order to spare all parties further bloodshed
and suffering. It is for this reason that my delegation is
gratified to learn of the completion of the first phase of
the Israeli withdrawal and the commencement of the
second phase With the increasing dificulties, there is
even greater urgency that the total withdrawal of Israeli
forces to the internationally recognized boundaries of
Lebanon be accomplished expeditiously and in an uninterrupted manner.

37. The Thai delegation sees continuing usefulness for
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL),
despite changes in the situation. It may perhaps be said
with some justification that, because of recent develop
men& there is greater necessity for the continuation of its
mandate. Both the contributing Governments and the
men themselves deserve our gratitude for the sacrifices
they have to bear, pending the final resolution of the conflict. It should, therefore, be a matter of serious concern
to the Council to enhance the safety of the forces in the
peace-keeping opetitions of the United Nations who are
caught in the present situation. My delegation has learned
with dismay that a threat has been made against some of
them because of their nationalities and the poshions that
iheir Governments-which
represent sovereign member
States-take in ihe Council.

33. Thailand’s basic position can be summed up as fotlows. Firstly, Lebanon’s sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity must be respected by all parties concerned. My delegation therefore supports the efforts of
the Lebanese Government to extend its authority over all
of its territory. Secondly, there must be no interference in
the internal affairs of Lebanon. To emure this, all foreign
forces must withdraw from Iabanon. unless the Lebanese
Government. in the exercise of its sovereign right,chooscs
otherwise Thirdly, all relevant resolutions of the Council
must be implemented without undue delay. Fourthly. disputes must be settled by peaceful means, tiling into
account the legitimate concerns of the parties.

38. It is therefore desirable, from the point of view of
my delegation, that the Council take an initiative with a
view to alleviating this concern and deploring any threat
ot violence against any member State in the exercise of its
prerogatives in the Council.
39. We also note with regret the absence of any specific
refere,dce to UNIFIL in the draft resolution before the
Council.
40. Regarding that draft resolution, my delegation’s
view, based on the foregoing statement of Thailand&
basic position, is as follows. Firstly, my delegation’s
strong preference is for either a consensus resolution or a
statement of the Resident which would also require a
consensuss, sinee we regard the issue ct hand as one of
humanitarian concern to all. Seconc’ry, since my delegation believes that at this delica:e junrqure the interests of
all parties would be better served if the total withdrawal
of Israeli forces to the international border of L&anon
were accomplished without interruption or undue delay,
it has reservations on the wording of some paragraphs ot
the draft resolution. In particular, in the first operative
paragraph the Council should condemn all practices and
measures against the civilian population th2t are in violation of international law and the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949.

34. While withdrawal is under way, the civilian poptition. including the Palestinian refugees, must be spared
from repressive measures It is sad enough that they are
caught in the crossfire; it is worse when they are subjected
to organised actions by the occupying forces. When the
Israeli representative said before the Council that the
Israeli authorities would use every means to stop the killing% we hope he meant the killings on both sides. Is it not
worse for all concerned to leave feelings of bitter enmity
and humiliation in the aftermath of the withdrawal which
is now under way?
35. Part of the present difficulties stem from the lack of
agreed arrangements which would ensure security, particularly for the dvilian population, in the absence ofimpartial monitoring and protection. Iis safety would certainly
be enhanced if there were agreed arrangements between
the parties direct!:, involved. For that reason, we regret
the breakdown in the Naqoura talks.

41. Consequently, my delegation would prefer not to
ha%Z ik &&I Ejriiiriion pressed iu ihr vote. i-iowever.
this is unfortunately not the case. and the issue under
consideration is limited to the situation in the areas CXCUpied by Israel. In view of Thailand’s basic position. and
with the torcgoing observations and reservations on
record, my delegation will vote in favour of the draft
resolution.

36. At this delicate stage, the increasing difliculties
appear to complicate the withdrawal process and exacerbate the plight of the civilians, thereby r,rolonging their
anguish. My delegation therefore joins in the appeal for a
resumption of the Naqoura talks as soon as possible. We
hope that an agreement can be reached to enable the
4

42. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from f+enc/t): The
next speakeris Mr. Clovis Maksoud. observerof the
‘League
of Arab States,to whomtheCouncilhasextended
an invitation,in accordance
with rule39of itsprovisional
rulesof procedure,at its 2568thmeeting.I invite him to
take a place as the Council table and to make his
statement.

after a certaintime,whenweseekto assertwhatiselementary, it againbecomes
controversialaud thened arisesat that particular moment-for “even-handedand
balancedattitudes”. It is very easyfor Israelto subject
everyobjectivereality to controversyandthusmakeobjective reality no longerelementarybut debatable.Thereby
Israel
States

seeks,

unfortunately.

to persuade

certain

Member

that what isrequiredisan objectiveapproachthat
with the victims of aggres43. Mr. MAKSOUD: I shouldlike at the outsetto join equatesIsael. the aggressor,
in the universalcondolences
to the Sovietdelegationon sion. It is a techniquewhich the internationalbody has
to, but thedeviceisutilizedin
the untimelydepartureof KonstantinChernenko,Presi- not, fortunately,succumbed
dentof thePresidiumof the SupremeSovietof theUnion order to paralysethe emergingconsensus
in the Council.
movementin Lebanon-a
of SovietSocialistRepublics
andGeneralSecretaryof the To ascribeto the resistance
Committeeof the CommunistParty of the SovietUnion. movementwhichisoneof themostgloriousexnp’:sionsof
Needless
to say,the Leagueof Arab Statesasanorganiza- nationalcommitment-theterm“terrorist” puts1.ILr%isttion and the entire Arab peoplesharein the grief, and ante in the noble categoryof many previousresistance
and nationalliberationmovements
that were
theywishthat the newleadership
in the SovietUnionwill movements
continuethe commitmentto the interestsof peace,inter- describedby racistsand colonialistsas terrorists.So
whetherthey are calledterroristsby the Israelisor not is
nationalsecurityand development.
fundamentallyand historicallyimmaterial,because
resist44. We havejust heardthe representative
of Lebanon ance in the south of Lebanonis in the samehistorical
speakabout the latestescalationin the situationin Leba- tradition as all the liberationmovementsthat haveled to
non by the Israelioccupationarmy. I just want to read the universalcharacterand representation
of thisbody of
out what hasbeenstatedby the Israelistoday:
the United Nations.
“The Lebanese
army was*oldpot tn interferewith the
lDF’-the so-calledIsraeliDefenceForce--“‘action.
And only after they fired at our troopsweretheyshot
at and IO of their soldiersde&cd.”

48. Furthermore,the Israelirepresentative
statedbefore
the Council, without :ven batting an eyelid, that “there
are certainbasicassumptions
sovereignStatesacceptand
expect from one another” [2568th meeting, pnra. 69’j.

45. This might soundlike a routine statement;yet it
entailsa largemeasure
of indicationsof what the Israeli
position in southernLebanonis. What it is is that the
Lebanese
army, exercisingits full sovereignprerogatives
in part of its territory to defendits own landsagainst
Israeliactionswhichare in violation of Lebanese
sovereignty, of SecurityCouncilresolutions
and of the Charter
of the UnitedNations,ischallenged,
on its own territory,
by the Israeliarmy of occupation.The Israeliarmy states
emphatically that the Lebanesearmy interrupted its
action. The questionis: doesthe Lebanese
army havethe
right to interruptIsraeliactionon territory that belongsto
Lebanon?-a very simplequestion,perhapsnot even
necessary
to repeat.

49. Whenyou hearthis,at facevalueit isobviousthat it
is a correct statement,but whenit comesfrom Israelit is
very interestingto ask over what territoriesIsraelexercisessovereignty.Has Israel-from its inceptionuntil
today-ever beenon recordasableto clarify anddefine
the parameters
of its sovereigntysothat otherswouldnot
encroachupon it? So to claimjudiciouslythat sovereign
Stateshavesovereignrights,in orderthat theywill not be
encroachedupon it is importantthat the Councilbeable
to extmct from Israel a definition of the territorial
parametersover which it claimssovereignty.

46. Yet what we are facedwith, in Israelisemantics,
is
that they can renderthe mostelementaryand obvious
facts-obvious legally recognisedrights-as controversial,debatableanddiscussable.
sothat wewhoareon the
sideof the aggrievedparty appearto be repetitiousand
redundant,continuingto insiston whatshouldhavebeen
solveda long time ago. This is a techniqueutilized by
Israelrepeatedlyin order to makewhat is obviousand
elementary-the rights of Lebanon-somethingdebatable and controversial.at leastfor Israelitselfand those
who supportit.

51. The answer is very clear, very obvious: Israel
remainsunwillingto determinethe timetablefor itswithdrawal
compliancewith Councilresolutions
Xltl(l982)
. _^^in.__^_.
anam (IYaq, the iatter oi whichdemands
that it shouid
withdrawforthwith fromall occupiedLebanese
territories.

47. Wearealsofacedwith semanticacrobaticsin regard
to a very elementarysituation.All of a suddenpeoplein
the south of Lebanon
resisting
occupation-as
every
dxent
human
being
are called terrorists.

50. Conversely,Israelis in obviousviolation of the sovereigntyof manyArab States:of Egyptin Tabah,of Syria
in the Golan Heights,of the Palestinian
territory on the
West Bank, in Jerusalemand G--and
in Lebanon,
which is the primary subjectof this debate.The sovereigntyof Lebanonhasbeenviolatedrepeatedlysince1978
and beforeby Israel.And herewecometo a centralissue
which hasbeenfrequentlyraisedin thisdebate-why the
Naqoura talks on military arrangementshave not
resumed.

talks have been envisaged
as a modality
52. The Naqoura
through
which implementation
of the timetable
would take
place and the arrangements
for the withdrawals
would be
made palatable
at the lowest human costs. Instead. Israel

does when faced with occupationIsrael repeats the word and the des-

cription “terrorist”, and it conditionsthe reflexesso that
5

declared that it wanted to withdraw, made certain logistical arrangements and withdrew from certain territories
because of the costs that had been inflicted by the resistance to its occupation. But then there arose its internal
dilemma: the desire of one of the s palled coalition
partners to have a visible result in the south of Lebanon so
as to absolve Israel from the crime of its invasion of Lebanon. and the desire of the other part of the coalition to
satisfy an emerging opposition to the continued Israeli
occupation of Lebanon. So the equivocation on the part of
Israel on withdrawing fully and forthwith from Lebanon is
a projection of the internal dilemma and contradiction, at
the expense of human life in southern Lebanon.

Israel to persuade the international community that it
seeks to withdraw from the south of Lebanon while it
maintains for itself the “inherent” right to encroach on
the sovereignty of Lebanon at any moment it so desires. It
does SO. of course,
under the pretense that it is acting in
self-defence.
57. I do not want to go into all the origins of this technique and this theory, which is dangerous. The Charter of
the United Nations was based on the assumption that retaliation, massive and otherwise. violates international
order and the prospects of international security. What is
more, Israel s,.ttes that it is hurt when Beirut voices concern when it is a matter that concerns Israel.

53. Then we are told that Israel has declared its intention
to withdraw and that this should be taken at face value,
The answer to that is that in l978a historical precedent was
established whereby declared its withdrawal from Lebanon, and instead of allowing the legitimate Government of
Lebanon to exercise its full authority and deploy its army
in the south of Lebanon, it sought, through the extension
of its mercenary forces, to maintain Lebanon’s sovereignty
as a fiction and introduced what I have repeatedly called
the notion of Lebanon’s ‘*suspended sovemignty” over the
south of Lebanon. This “‘suspended sovereignty** was a
prescription for the subsequent Israeli invasion into L&anon in 1982.

58. We must once and for all ease that hurt. Beirut is the
capital of a sovereign State, Lebanon. Lebanon is a
founder member of the League of Arab States. Lebanon
is an Arab country. Therefore, it is part and parcel of the
overall Arab commitment to the sovereignty of Arab
States and to the rights of the Palestinians to selfdetermination. The attempt to describe Lebanon as Arab
because of duress or. as the Israelis have repeatedly said,
because of Syria, flies in the face of historical reality,
national commitment and human decency. because Lebanon, like Syria, has contributed and will continue to contribute to the Arab national, intellectual and cultural
renausance.

54. That explains the insistence of the Lebanese Govemment that those who are keen on the resumption of the
Naqoura talks must realixe that in 1978 Lebanon experienced the trauma of a fictional withdrawal and an actual
occupation. The resumption of the Naqoura talks is a
desirable objective of many of the Members of the Council, as it is fo: the legitimate Lebanese authorities. However, because of that precedent and because of the dangers
it has imposed and the prescription it gave for renewed
invasion, a clearly spelled-out timetable has become an
absoiute necessity for a credible outcome of resumed
Naqoum talks between the Lebanese and the Israelis
within the framework of the United Nations.

59. Furthermore, any violation by Israel of Lebanon is a
matter for instant reaction. It is surprising that Israel
allows itself to confront the Lebanese army, as if to say
that the Lebanese army ‘: permissive towards the “terrorists”. Israel dots not understand tht. mood of the Lebanese army, the Lebanese Government and the people in
the south of Lebanon. It does not perceive that the army,
the Government and those people are all an integral part
of a genuine national resistance.
60. The Israeli representative told the Council: “As for
Israel, we do not have to justify to anyone” [i&d. puru.
74. That is the crux not only of a statement made in
debate but of a basic attitude of mind, an ideological
determination to confront anybody, any institution, any
resolution, any mechanism that seeks to contain and curtail an entity that is in a state of deftance and that rejects
as a matter of ideological commitment any form of
accountability for any of its violations, any of its conquests, any of its acts of aggression, any of its acts of
annexation.

55. Israel cannot digest the fact that every action on the
part of Lebanon emerges from exercise of its sovereign
prerogatives. and it persists in its argument that those
who are exercising resistance in the south of Lebanon are
either fanatics, religious zealots or something else. It
seems that Israel cannot understand the obvious, the
immediacy and spontanaeity with which any decent
human being rebels against the ccerciveness of occupation. Israel does not understand, as Mr. Rabin has
stated-when he said the genie had been exploded-that
human beings, in asserting their equality and dignity.
refuse to be humiliated. that humiliation is a prescription
for insurrection and revolt, and that these have been determined by all to be legitimate pursuits when occupation
arrogates to itself the ri8hr to perperuarc iueif.
56.

61. “As for Israel, we do not have to justify to anyone.*’
What does it not have to justify? The answer to that question is the documented violations and inhumane practices
that the Lebanese representative has clearly spelled out.
not oniy today but throughout the debate. Are not the
quesrions
and inquiries
of the members
oi the Councii
worthy
of a response from Israel? Are not they worthy of
its giving an answer other than automatic
rejection?

when Israel states ihat it wants to
in form, yet retains for itself the right to strike

Furthermore,

withdraw
and “to

retaliate”,

it means

!bat it wants

62.

to keep t;x south

The

statement

“We

do not

have

to justify

to any-

of Lebanon hostage to its military. strategic and, if possi-

one” is dangerous because Israel is trying to establish a

ble, polit&l

situation

hegemony.

This

is an attempt

on the part of

6

in which

it becomes

a loose

cannon

in intema-

tional relations, under international law, the Charter and
resolutions of the United Nations.It is trying to put itself
outside the pale of accountability that all Member States
have accepted. It is trying to create a counter-legitimacy
to this body’s legitimacy. It is trying, in fact, to say “Take
it or leave it. We are not accountable; we are not
answerable.”

assurances and cwperation,
for which the United States
representative has expressed appreciation. My point is not
the concern over the threats, because such concern is to be
expected and is a duty. My concern is that it became
almost the entire subject of the debate, almost the entire
position of the United States on on issue that carries with i!
a great deal of concern and danger. Besides, it must ‘be
teal&d that the Lebanese people, as well as all other Arab
peoples, has great respect for any citizen of any country
working within the mechanism of the United Nations: and
therefore, with due respect for the concern and with deep
appreciation for such concern, we consider that it has been
a digression to seek to project an entire position on a
limited aspect 01’ the concern. whether justitied or not.

63. The permissiveness enshrined in that attitude contains the seeds of much bigger acts of aggression, violations and threats to international peace and security. That
approach is mind-boggling, especially on the part of an
entity licensed by this very organization, the United
Nations. In order to perpetuate its systematic, studied.,
ideological defiance uf the international community, It
uses the term “iron fist”. It did not have to use the term
“iron fist**. We have seen the nature of its practices: the
bulldozing of houses, the blowing up of people, the entry
into hospitals-violation
after violation, violations so frequent that one cannot cope with them.

68. It is not for me to mention how much we appreciate
the support we have received from the international community, especially that voiced here, concerning the plight
of the Lebanese and of the Palestinian refugees in the
camps. We would have preferred, however, that this body
not be made the arena for ideological polemics with the
Arab States, and we hope that the support we receive cn
this Particular issue not be made conditional on sermonizing to the Arabs on how they should act. 1 should like to
mention that the concern expressed in this Council over
the prevalence of violence is a matter of deep and great
coneem for us. I think that all of us abhor violence. The
sight on television every night of the removal of the
twisted bodies of countless people, their faces distorted,
touches the basic ethos. regardless of who they may have
been, and it behooves us all to put an end to violence. It
must be understood, however, that even the advocates of
non-violence, such as Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther
King and others, described the limits of human patience
to indignities, the parametem of humiliation.
Nonviolence is the preferred option of any resistance, but if
non-violence means submissiveness to the occupier, then
the violence of the occupation authorities is to be found
not only in the destruction of houses, hospitals and fields
or in the mutilation of bodies or in the death that is
inflicted repeatedly and indiscriminately
on civilian
inhabitants--that
is the more obvious form of violencebut when one discriminates, when one assumes and arr+
gates to oneself a superiority, the right to dominate, to
occupy, to disqualify, to disenfranchise-that
is a form of
violence that strikes at the gut of every citizen and decent
human being. That has been the texture of all revolutions.
J’herefore when the Council and the Lebanese delegation
seek a halt to these acts, it is actually an investment in the
future of peace, tranquillity and stability, because they are
trying to defuse an unmanageable explosion of human
indignity against the continued presence and defiance of
Israeli occupation in southern Lebanon. Therefore objectivity is not ;In equidistant position between right and
wrong, between the aggressor and the victims of aggression. Objectivity is measured historically by how much a
position or a resolution can actually help to promote
peace and effectively extirpate the seeds of violence.

64. When one thinl.i of the “iron fist” policy and the
Israeli occupation, one asks by what right the Israeli army
continues its presence in southern Lebanon. When practices described by everyone as violations of the Geneva
Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons
in Time of War, of I2 August 19491 are condemned, is it
not time, as the representative of Lebanon asked, to take
action to deter Israel and to give it an incentive to
comply?
65. We are told that we must be realistic. We are told
that conditions are not propitious at this moment for the
United Nations to act decisively.
66. We were utterly amazed lest week at what was said
[257&h meet&g] by the representative of the United
States, with which Lebanon has historically maintained
the closest relations ever since its independence. The two
countries have the closest aqnities. At this time of suffering being undergone by the Lebanese people, when scores
of people in Lebanon are dying, the representative of the
United States came before the Council to voice concern
that would be understandable if it were part of a broader
and deeper concern about Israel’s practices in the south of
Lebanon, the various violations that have taken place and
the inhumanity of the Israeli occupation. But the repreaentative of tbe United States excluded the concerns of Lebanon and the international community about what is
happening in the south, and focused on three telephone
calls. They were threatening, perhaps, but, however
understandable that concern, I invite the representative of
the United Stz:cs to spend a day at one of the Atab offices
in this city: she will heat- some of the telephone threats
that we receive at times. I am sure Member Staies represented in the Council have also received telephone threats.
67. Let us go further. Perhaps the Or&d States, because
of the tragedies that have taken place in Lebanon and other
places, has to be even more vigilant. We can accept that.
Vigilanze of any country concerning its citizens is a
prerogative-a matter of rght and duty-and the Lebanese
Government

has given

whatever

69. Mr. LING Qing (China) (I~tprplp~u~io~ from Chinest): The Chinese delegation was shocked to learn of the
untimely

passing

of Mr.

Konstantin
Party

standing leader of the Soviet

it can give in the way of

7

Chernenko.
and State

the outand Presi-

dent of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet. This is a
major loss to the Soviet people. We wish to convey our
deep condolences to the Soviet delegation and, through
the delegation, to the bereaved family.

ment without delay the relevant resolutions adopted by
the Council and withdraw all its troops from Lebanon, so
that the sacred rights of the Lebanese people to exercise
sovereignty over their entire territory can be restored.

70. Recently the Israeli authorities mobilizcd a large
number of troops, tanks and armoured vehicles in southern Lebanon, the west Bekaa and Ihe Rashaya district in
pursuit of the so-called iron-fist policy, launched a series
of raids against peaceful villages and towns and arrested
and suppressed civilians, resulting in heavy casualties and
the destruction of many houses.

76. Mr. de KI?MOULARIA
(France) (inferpre/utiot~
from French): First. I should like to associate myself with
the remarks of the President and my colleagues who have
preceded me on the passing of President Chernenko. On
my country’s behalf, I extend to the representative of the
Soviet Union our sincere condolences. A page of history
has turned in his country. We would like him to know that
we are aware of its importance and that WC share in the:
Soviet Union’s bereavement.

71. We have listened attentively to the three statements
by Mr. Rachid Fakhoury, the representative of Lebanon at
the 2567th, 2570th and the present meeting, in which he
denounced with numerous facts the recent atrocities committed by Israeli troops and the heavy losses of life and
property inflicted by them on the Lebanese people. The
Israeli occupying troops have thus seriously tmmpled
underfoot the provisions contained in the I949 Geneva
Conventions.’

77. Once again the Council has met here on the request
of the Lebanese Government to consider the situation in
southern Lebanon. Indeed, that situation has become a
matter of great concern. and it is the Coicncil’s duty immediately to give it all due attention.

72. It must be noted that certain “chieftains” of the
Israeli occupying troops have even openly asserted that
they “had not exhausted all the possibilities” in their sup
pressive measures and that they were going to take further
actions of terror. As the memories of the tragic massacre
of innocent civilians in the Sabra and Shiltila refugee
camps in 1982 are still fresh, we cannot but worry about
the recurrence of similar bloodshed.

78. The information that has been given us by the representative of Lebanon highlights the seriousness of these
incidents, which have been growing more frequent in
recent times, causing great loss of life and increasing the
suffering of a population which is already sorely tried by
all the events which have been taking place for years now
in that region. We have continually advocated nqeotiation,
and can only deplore acts of violence of any sort which
cannot but make the search for peaceful solutions more
dificult.

73. By invading and prolonging their occupation of territories of Lebanon, the Israeli authorities have seriously
violated the basic norms governing international relations
and the purposes and principles of the Charter of the
United Nations. No country whatsoever may invade
neighbouring countries and forcibly occupy their territories under the pretext of ensuring its own security.

79. At the 2570th meeting, the United States delegation
stressed that threats had been made against the United
States in connection with this debate. We are surely unanimous in rejecting any form of external pressure. regardless
of its nature, on one or more members of the Council that
could violate the independence or the functioning of a
principal body of the Organization.

74. Israel must comply with the relevant Security Cotmcil resolutions, including the provisions of resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982), and withdraw its troops from L&anon immediately, completely and unconditionally. Under
no pretext should Israel continue its occupation of southern Lebanon, pursue its “iron-fBt’* policy nor bully the
local inhabitants. l%e actions tab 4y Israel have aggravated the situation in the region and constitute a grave
threat to the peace and security of the region. This cannot
but arouse the concern of the international community.

80. As my predecessor stressed in the Council on 31
August 1984 [255&h meeting]. Israel must respect intemational conventions on human rights which are applicable
in cases of armed conflict. Like all States which have
signed the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of It August 1949.’
Israel must scrupulously implemeni its provisions. There
can be no loopholes here.
81. Armed Israeli forces-and we note this as a positive
element-have begun their withdrawal. But that does not
give them the right to attempt lo hamper action undertaken by UNIFIL in strict application of Council resolution 523 (1982)-which.
as we are all well aware,
authorited the Force “to carry out . . . interim tasks in the
humviM;gc
sd admkistrative fXds . . . end !c e&t !he
Government of Lebanon in ensuring the security of all the
Inhabitants of the area without any discrimination”.
In

75. The Chinese delegation condemns the atrcrities committed by Israel in southern Lebanon against the Lebanese people and supports the just propositions and
reasonable demands put forward by the Government of
Lebanon and the various demands cnntairwl in the rammunique adopted on 6 March by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries at its urgent session
held in New York [S/17008, ;mn~x]. We hold that the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Lebanon must bc respected, and that the Council should take
action IO check the wilful atrocities committed
by Israel in
t;,e occupied

Lebanese

ter:.itories

and make

Israel

this respect. the Secretan-General
stressed in his statement
of 26 February that seven Israeli operations had recently
taken place in the Force’s zone of operation.
WC know
that on several occasions
there have been clashes between
lsracli
li)rccs
and
UNIf-IL
clemcnts-in
par:icu-

rmple-

8

lar. units supplied by my country-which
were carrying
out, within the framework of their instructions. a mission
of peace and protection of civilian population. In our
view, such incidents are deeply regrettable and contrary to
the spirit in which peace-keeping operations undertaken
by the Security Council should be carried out. The Council cannot allow the existence of such an attitude.

88. On this sad occasion we convey our met sincere
condolrnces to Mr. Troyanovsky, representative of the
Soviet Union, to all members of the Soviet Mission, and
to the representatives of the Byelorussian and Ukrainian
Soviet Sccialist Republics and all the members of their
Missions. Through them, we convey our condolences to
the bereaved family and to the peopie and Government of
the friendly Soviet Union.

82. I take this opportunity to thank the SecretaryGeneral for th:: tribute which he has paid to the dedication and actions of the French contingent.

89. We are confident that the great Soviet people will be
capable of overcoming this tragedy and of continuing its
struggle, as it has always done in the past.

83. It should certainly be possible to reduce the present
tension considcmbly. thereby preventing the many resultant incidents, by returning to the negotiating table. We
hope, in thes: circumstances, that the parties concerned
will resume their talks in order to develop security arrangements which could make a real contribution to restoring
calm, facilitate-indeed,
hasten-the total withdrawal of
Israeli forces, and fi.lally permit a reestablishment in the
region of the authority of the Lebanese Government. That
would be a significant step forward in the action we are
taking to heip it to regain its sovereignty, independence,
unity and territorial integrity.

90. From the beginning of this debate, the Council has
heard statements by the representative of Lebanon in
which he adduced hard facts to describe the suffering and
tragedy of the Lebanese people, chafing under the yoke of
Israeli ticcrtpatiou and subjected to. continuing escalation
of the terrorist acts and pltictices carried out against that
people by the Israeli occupation authorities, in violation
of the norms of international law and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949,z which apply to civilians in
areas under occupation. Developments in the Arab region
since the Israeli invasion of Lebanese territory have
shown the inability of imperialist and Zionist circles to
restore colonialist hegemony to the Arab region in the
face of the growing heroic resistance and valiant struggle
of the Lebanese people. Lebanon has come before the
Council to stress the Council’s responsibility to put an
end to the Israeli occupation and aggression unleased
against the Lebanese people. It has made clear, frank
demands, namely for an end to the Israeli occupation of
southern Lebanon, for total Israeli withdrawal from L&anese territory, for implementation
of resolutions 508
(1982) and 509 (1982), unanimously adopted by the Council, for condemnation of Israel, its practices and its policies in contravention of the norms of international law
and agreemews, in particular
the fourth Geneva Convention, and for the immediate cessation of Israeli practices
and operations ag::!nst ;he populations of southern Lebanon, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district.

84. The Council knows that my Government’s most
ardent desire is for the establishment one day, not only in
Lebanon. bet throughout the &on, of the lasting peace
to which all the populations involved eagerly aspire.
85. Anxious to affmn its solidatity with Lebanon, which
has been scourged for far too long, France-which,
I
repeat, wishes to see the immediate restoration of the territorial integrity and unity of that country, with which we
have so many ties-while regretting that the amendments
it proposed were not taken into account in the draft m
lution before us [;5/17ooo],
which would without any
question have made it possible to gain the broad support
of the Council, will nevenheless vote in its favour.
86. The PRESIDENT (Inretptetorlonfiom
J%&): The
next speaker is the representative of Democratic Yemen, I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and to
make his statement.
87.

Mr. AL-ALFI

from

Arabic):

91. Israel’s aggressive policies and practices aimed
against the Lebanese people and against the Palestinian
camps in southern Lebanon must be considered together
with identical policies and practices aimed against the
Palestinian Arab people and the Syrian people whose territories are under fsraeli occupation in the West Bank, the
Gaza district, Jerusalem and the Golan Heights. It
appears that the escalation of these policies and practices
follows upon the heightened threat posed by the expansionist, aggressive policies of Zionism and imperialism,
which are designed to push through capitulationist
schemes and to undermine legitimate Arab causes and
rights. foremost
among them the cause of the Palestinian
Arab people and the rights of that people to return to its
homeland, to selfdetermination, and to the establishment
of an independent
national
State on its own national
soil.

(Democratic Yemen) (inferJwek?rion
the world learned with shock of the
passing of Mr. Konstantin Chernenko. President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR and General
Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist
Party of the Soviet Union. This tremendous misfortune
represents a loss IO the whole of mankind, which in President Chernenko lost a prominent militant who had
devoted his life to the strengthening of international peace
and security and to support for peoples struggling for liberToday.

ation, independence
development.
We

and independent

social and economic

Arab peoples will never forget Resident
Chemenko’s tireless elforts throughout his life-and espe-

cially since his assumption
of the leadership
of the friendly
Soviet Union--to
strengthen
cordial Arab-Soviet
relations
and to provide
honest support for vital Arab causes, foremost among
them the cause of the Arab
people
of
Palestine.

92.
Under these circumstances,
with the peoples of our
Arab region and our vital Arab caws
facing Zionist and
imperialist
conspiracies
and schemes. we heroic resistanre
9

of the Lcbaneve people against Israeli occupation-which
compelled the forces of occupation to withdraw after the
Lebanese people thwarted the attempted conspiracy by
the American Administration to impose the so-called 17
May 1983 agreement-is a fresh example of the vigilance
of the Arab peoples, their refusal to capitulate, and their
continuing struggle for their just, vital causes. That resistance is added to the record of resistance of tha Syrian and
Palestinian peoples against occupation and of struggle for
the liberation of their territories.

98. We express our gratitude also to your predecessor,
Mr. Krishnan, representative of one of our friends, India,
for the very skilful aud fair way in which he conducted the
work of the Council in February.
99. For some time now the Council and other United
Nations bodies have been considering the situation arising
from Israel’s criminal invasion and subsequent occupation of part of the territory of a State Member of the
Organisation, Lebanon, a country known historically for
its peaceful traditions.

93. Israel regards its expansion by force and aggression.
as well as its seizing and annexing territories, as one of the
component e!ements of its very being. To this end, it
enjoys unlimited American economic, political and mititary support. This is especially true because the ZionistAmerican strategic alliance affirms the real approach of
American imperialism in the area and confirms its encouragement of and suppori for the Zionists in their occupation of more Arab territories and their denial of the rights
of the Palestinian Arab peoples. This is the explanation
for Israel’s disregard for the Council and for international
law, as well as its failure to comply with the will of the
.&mational
community that an end be put to its occupation of southern Lebanon and its colonialist policies and
terrorist practices in the occupied territories. Why should
Israel not continue these practices when it enjoys the full
protection of the exercise of the United States veto in the
Security Council? This has rendered the Council unable to
shoulder its responsibilities,

100. In spite of the many resolutions adopted by the
Security Council and the General Assembly, and in spite
of the statements and decisions of many other imernational forums, particularly the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries, we are once again obliged to turn to the Council for further consideration of the criminal actions that the
Israeli occupation forces have been carrying out against
Lebanese civilians.
101. These events have aroused the indignation of world
public opinion and have been vigorously condemned by
the Member States that cherish peace and justice.
102. In this connection, my Government’s position has
heen set forth in a statement by the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs, which, with your permission and that of the other
members of the Council, 1 shall now read out:
“Repok from Lebanon inform us about genocidal
acts that have been carried out by Zionist occupation
troops of Israel against the people of southern Lcbanon. We received information daily about the estab
liihment of curfews, the destruction of the homes of
peaceful inhabitants, the detention of inhabitants in
concet..ration camps. indiscriminate attacks by atillery, aircraft and troops against civilians, and the unleashing of brutal repressior! against the inhabitants of
the &on of southern Lebanon.

94. Democratic Yemen, while reiterating its solidarity
with the Lebanese people in their struggle to put an end to
the Israeli occupation and to preserve the unity of L&anon and its Arab identity, regards the demands made by
the representative of Lebanon as just demands, which the
Council must take immediate action to implement,
thereby aflirming the credibility of its resolutions and its
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security. Dare we entertain the hope that it will
indeed do so?

“These criminal actions are an alarming indication
that the Zionists are planning to perpetuate their control over this part of Lebanon and to create a ‘buffer
State’, as originally envisaged in their plans for the
invasion known as ‘Peace for Galilee’ launched in June
1982.

95. The PRESIDENT (Inrerprerarlon/?om Flench): The
next speaker is the representative of Cuba. I invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

“The conticued pressure exerted on the occupation
forces by the resistance of the patriotic and pr&ve
Lebanese forces has obliged Israel to carry out partial
withdrawals. The strength of the patriotic resistance has
stymied the Israeli army, which has engaged in reprisals,
terrorizing and killing civilians.

96. Mr. ORAMAS OLIVA (Cuba) (inrerprero&
/ran,
S@Z&!I): I should like lo express to our colleague, Mr.
Troyanovsky, and to all the members of the Soviet mission
my heartfelt and deepest condolences on the passing of
the General Secretary of the Central Committee of the
Communist Party of the Suvier Union and President of
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet, Konstantin
Chemenko.

“Once again the ls.-aeli Government, with the support
of its strategic ally, the United States, is showing its
complete scorn for the most elementary niies of international life. brazenly and openly infringing the rights of
the Lebanese peopie. flagrantly violating the C+Iarter of
tSe United Nations and all the resolutionsof the Security

97. Mr. President, we are very piead lo see you, the
representative of a warthy African country with which
mine has close bnds of friendship, presiding over the
deliberations of the GXWHA tLio month. We are convinced thr your wi-;rlom, experience snd diplomatic
skills
ensure

that the Council

will successfully

carry

Council,
which require
immediate
and unconditional
withdrawal
from the occupied Lebanese territories,
and
once again trampling underfoot L&anon’s sovereignty
and territorial
integrity.

out its work

during the month of March.
10

“This esalation of a-ion
greatly increases the
danger th% mother war will break out in the region,
placing intt .r&ional peace and security at risk.

and beatings. During recent days, the suale of mass punitive operations has become particularly cruel, and their
extent has once again been pointed out today in the statement of the representative of Lebanon,

“The Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic
of Cuba vigorously condemns these crimes agair
humanity committed by the Zionist occupation forces
and calls the attention of world public opinion to the
overriding necessity of stopp.ing these reprehensible
actions and preventing Israel from slaughtering with
impunity the courayous and heroic Lebanese and
their legitimate patriotic resistance.*’

107. Numerous facts cited during meetings of the Council with absolute clarity attest to the crude violatiot\ by
Israel, the occupying Power, of the reIchant norms of
international humanitarian law, the Charter of the United
Nations and the provisions of the Gene,.? Convrntion
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of
War, of 12 Augusl 1949: Lnd the Regulations annexed to
the Hzgue Convention IV respecting the laws and customs
of war an land, of 1907.’ These actions arc in violation of
the relevant decisions of the Council, in particular
of the

103. Mr. OUDOVENKO
(Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist
Republic) (interpretation
from Russ!an): The people of the
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, like all the peoples of
the Soviet Union, profoundly regret the passing away of
Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko, the General Secretary
of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union and President of the Presidium of the
Supreme Soviet of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The name of thdt outstanding figure of the Communist
Party and of the Soviet State will remain forever enshrined
in the memory of our people. The entire lifeand activities of
Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko were dedicated to serving the interests of the Soviet people, to resolving major
economic and social problems in the development of the
country aud to advancing the struggle for ending the arms
race and eliminating the threat of nuclear war in order to
ensure the security of peoples.

unanimously

adopted

resolutions

512

(1982)

and

513

(1982).
108. There can be no doubt that the aggresso? would
not beha\= so insolently and provocatively wete it not for
the comprehensive assistance and support of the United
states.
109. SuI?ice it to recall that on 6 September I984 [2556th
the United States blocked the adoption by the
Council of a draft resolution [S/t6732l which, in view of
the existing serious situation, represented the bare minimum, calling as it did on Israel to comply strictly with the
provisions of the fourth Geneva Convention of 1949 v&-dtis the civilian Population of southern Lebanon.
meeting],

104. 1 he Ukrainian delegation shares the concern regarding the continuing tragedy in southern Lebanon, which has
been occupied by the Israeli military clique. The facts cited
in the statements of the representative of I.&anon and the
alarming information in the reports received daily from the
area attest to the extmely dangerous situation in the occupied southern part of the country and reaflirm how right the
Government of that country was to turn to the Council for
help.

I IO. Thhose same forces are to blame for the fact that
Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982). which were
adopted with their participation. remain unimplementedthe latter demanding the immediate and unconditiondl
withdrawal of the Ismeli forcea to the internationally teeognized borders of Lebanon, a most important prerequisite for a settlementof the situation in Lebanon.
I Il. Firmly condemning the continuing Israeli occupation of the territory of Lebanon and the moat recent wave
of terror and acts of oppression directed against the civilian population in southern I&anon,
the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic believes that the Council must
condemn the abuses of the Israeli occupiers, demand an
immediate unconditional and total withdrawal of Israeli
troops from that country in accordance with its resolution
509 (I982), and ensure compliance by the aggressor with
the norms of international humanitarian law regarding
the civilian population of the occupied territory. It is
necessary to ensure respect for the territorial integrity and
independence of Lebanon and to put an end to the arbitrary will and violence of the Israeli occupiers concerning
the civilian population, including the Palestinian refugees
in the camps. A demand for the immediate implementa*ifi* Y.
A .*a-.,.
*La ,,,W”Y.C”
-rnmsn- .a
L “..a%8
rLA ‘llY”C
--A- a,,
ta. ,l”*LA ~“1UI,,“IOLpC
*----e-:-*-L
..“I,

105. llte Ukrainian people languished under the yoke of
Hitlrrite occug~tion for a number of years and had to
endure all the ensuing terrible consequences. Our people,
like all the brotherly peoples of the Soviet Union which
bore the burdens of deprivation and Meting
of the
Second World War, and which made a decisive contribw
tion to defeating Hitlerite fascism and to achieving a historic victory-of
which the fortieth anniversary will be
widely celebrated in May by all progressive mankindshares in and understands the suffering of the l&mew
and other Arab peoplea in the continuing azcupation of
theii ancestral lands.
106. For almost three years now, the Israeli military
clique has been committing abuses on part of Lebanese
ccrritmy cxxll**
w a nmcl!! d !k +Jpd?!!
of !!w.
Since that time, the wave of terror and violence directed at
the Lebanese and Palestinians has for all practical purparts not slackened for a single day. By mobilizing infantry and tank units to carry out punitive operations, the
Israeli invaders have Mockaded towns and villages, carrying out general searches. round-ups and arrests, subjecting peaceful civilians to humiliations, torture, indignities

adopted
on 6 March
1985 by the Co-ordinating
Bureau of
the Movement
of Non-Aligned
Countries
at its urgent session. held in New York [s/17008,
atmex].

112. As to the concern expressed in the Council over
with regard to UNIFIL, the delegation

Israel’s activities
of the Ukrainian
11

SSR supports

the proposal

made

in the

course of the current debate to have the SecretaryGeneral regularly inform the Council with regard to all
cases where there are obstacles to U.&d Nations foices
carrying out their functions in that area.

ties ana work for the e&:ive and speedy resumption tlf
contacts between the military authorities in order to complete the withdrawal process already under way, so as
effectively to guarantee th? human rights of the civilian
population in keeping with the provisiole of the Geneva
Convention relattiie to the Prot&tion of Civilian Persons
in Time of War. of 12 August 1949.: If this is not attained-and
ir cannot fail t; be an aim shared by the
international community-the
present critlcal situation
couid wo.5en even more radically, jeopardizing a.ly potential rapp.whemetrt or initiative aimed at disentangling the
complex situation in the Middle Fast.

113. It is perfectly obvious that consideration of the Lel+
ane>e problem in isolation from the general explosive
situation in tha Middle Fast is impossibb. In this co:I:tection, we fully support the prowls
made on 29 July i984
by the Soviet Union cor;ceming a Middle East settlement
[s/16685, mmex] as the basis for the search for a comprehensive and just settlement ens&ring peace and security
for all States md peoples of the tegicn

120. The draft resolution before UJ [5/17ooO] refers to
the situation in which the civilian pcpulation of southern
Lebanon finds Itself. For practical and cur?structive reasons we would have preferred the text to have referred
more clearly to the objective of finding, even now, the
minimal machinery to stabilize and systematize the process of withdrawal of the occupying forces. We sincerely
believe that if there had been a specific reference to this
subject, the text would have been less narrow and the
situation could have become less dramatic and violent
than it is at present.

114. The delegation of the Ukrainian SSR suppotts the
draft resolution sponsored by L&uron
in document
s/17ooo.
115. Mr. LUNA (Peru) (i;lteraretorion from Spa&~):
Mr. President, I should like to extend to ;hc people and
the Government of the Soviet Union the heartfelt coadolences of the Government of Peru on the decease of Konstantin Chemenko, General Secretary of the Central
Committee of the Communist Party and President of the
Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of tbe Unicn of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

121. As regards certain aspects of the drafting of the
text, my delegation believes that, although in this specific
case we have not heard any denial of the complaints made
by Lebanon, condemnations should be in keeping with
facts that are suitably corroborated at tlte international
level.

116. In the current debate which has led to the convening of the Council for the second time in the past six
months as a result of new complaints by Lebanon concerning e.ents affecting the civilian population in southem Lebanon, the delegation of Peru would like at the
outset to express its sincere and profound solidarity with
Lebanon, which has long been the victim of circumstartces and events representing not only a tragedy but also
outrageous and cruel abuse of a State Member of the United
Nations, a country whose efforts and undeniable valour my
country much admires and aspects.

122. On the other band. I cannot fail to state most
clearly that my Government has noted the concern voiced
by the representative of the United States [257&h meeting]
with regard to blackmail by certain obscure extremist
groups, in a crude attempt to influence that country’s vote
on the current problem. In so far as that raises pressure
and violence to unheard of dimensions in this now nearly
anarchic international system, and is an attempt to bring
terrorism into this principal mechanism for collective
security of the international community, it is the duty of
each State individually and of the United Nations as a
whole to reject that attempt categorically.

117. As the Scc~etary-General warned some time ago,
the situation has now worsened significantly and reached
levels going beyond the survival, the dignity and the
resw
for the human rights of the inhabitants of tba
region and the minimum requirements for the peace and
security of the area.

123. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
shall now speak in my capacity as the representative of
MADAGASCAR.

118. As it has already stated, my delegation confirms its
determined support for Lebanon in these serious circumstances. We hope that, with the support of the other
members of the Council, a way will soon be found leading
to the immediate restoration to the people and the
Government of Lebanon of their right to real in&pendence and sovereignty, and consequently, to the full exercise of authority
throughout
their territory, thus
guaranteeing the preservation of their integrity and unity,
I therefore wish ta reanirm our PLI~M~* far rk .-..-.rm.~~
tions adop:ed by the Council on &%ijGi,
&ciically
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982).

124. On the occasion of the death of President Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. I wish offkially to reiterate the
profound condolences of my delegation to the delegation
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and to read out
the message sent by Mr. Diiier Ratsiraka, the President of
the Dcmocrads Republic of Madagascar, to the PresiAiuen
Ik ~~~~rnr
IdAm
a4 -*.-.
CnuLt --1
EMal-_--- nf
-_ -.--I.. ...- .Gni0I
..4..-. rS
Y. *ha
...w 1V...“..
“1
ist Republics. as ~bllows:
“It is with great regret that the Malagasy people, the
institutions of the Democratic Republic of Madagascar
and I myself learned the sad news of the death of President Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. I therefore
wish to express
our sincertit condolences
on the cruel

119. Within the general framework of our moral and
legal obligations, I wish to state that for Peru it is a matter
of the greatestpriority at this time that we should develop
the precarious machinery for a dialoguebetween theparI2

loss of this tminent Soviet statesman, Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. His work has come to an end at a
crucial time for tile future of peace in the world and at
a time of great distress for the third world. History will
long remember him as a man of principle who,
throughout his life, constantly worked to bring peoples
together, to achieve equitable international
cooperation and above all to safeguard the fragile edifice
of peace.”

Persons in Time of War, of I2 August 1949.’ But what
about its article 27, which prohibits physical and moral
assaults upon civilians in occupied territories? What about
article 39 which gives all facilities to civilian populations,
enabling them to turn to the International Committee of
the Red Cross for assistance? And what about article 31.
banning any physica’ or moral coercion of civilians to
obtain information from them? What of article 53, forbidding the destruction of prsonal and real property belonging individually Or collectively to individuals in occupied
territory? What c.:article SS.according to which theoccupying Power has the duty of ensuring the provision of food
aitd medical supplies of the population? And finally. what
about article 29, according to which the occupying Power
is held fully responsible for any mistreatment of local populations by its armed forces? We do not believe that the
repeated, systematic and flagrant violation of these articles
constitutes selfdefence.

That message fully reflects the feelings of my delegation at
this time.
125. Resuming sonsideration of the item on the agenda,
I wish to make the following s:atement.
126. It is difficurt to give a more faithful, more convincing and more moving eccount of Israeli actions in southern
Lebanon, the region of the western Bekaa and the district
of Rashaya than was done by the represen’ative of Lebanon in his statements before the Council on 28 February
and 7 March [2568th and 2570th meetings] and today.
Everything, or almost everything, has already been said
about sweeps, encircling operations, meticulous investigations, house-by-house searches, destruction, the placing of
plastic explosives, the desecration of houses of worship,
the rounding up of people, massacres and the brutal, humiliating and inhuman treatmen. meted out to the Lebanese
civilian population by the Israeli armed forces.

131. The Israeli occupier has given its armed forces curre
b&n& to oppress and repress the nationalists whose duty
is to oppose the occupation by all means. We have :reard
here reports from many delegations as to the meaning of
the resistance. Israel knew full well that the Shiite opposition in that area has always been very strong, so strong
that it called the arc of resistance “villages of hate”. But
what can be expected from populations that are victims of
unlawful occupation, therefore of aggression? Must they
applaud? Must they collaborate? Must they allow themselves to be manipulated by those who are at the orders
and in the pay of the occupiers? In voting unanimously in
favour of resolutions 508 (1982) and so9 (1982). we all
recognizd that Israel’s occupation of part of Lebanon
was illegal, and those of us who have had the sorry experience of occupation will surely agree that resistance is
legitimate, and that the origin of the cycle of violence
must be sought elsewhere than in Lebanese resistance.

127. Powerless, or perhaps indifferent, we hear the long
list of names of villages such as Aaichiye, Arab Salim,
Bazuriyah, Burj-Rahhal, Ma’mkeh. Rihane. Qusayeh, Sir
El-Gharbiyah, Shaqra, Kfa-Dounin, Qabrikha, Taura, Jib
Jam:ut, Kamid AI-Loz, Tair Dibbah, Deir Mimas, Kfar
Kila, Qar’oon, Deir Kanoun. El-Nahr and many more,
without really appreciating the horrors experienced by the
population under the iron rod of T&al.

132. Turning now to the argument that any Israeli operation in Lebanon is in one way or another linked to the
security of the Israeli populations on the border, we would
remind the Council that according to international law the
protection of the civilian population of a State takes place
within the boundaries of that State, and that no country
can, under that pretext, invade another country or interfere
in another country’s internal affairs. Israel’s “iron fist”
policy, instead of suppressing resistance, has only encouraged it, and certain circles say that this could provoke the
Shiite resistance to shoot at villages in Galilee and to justify
the maintainance of Tsahal beyond the internationally recognized borders of Lebanon.

128. And yet this is not deceitful or ill-intentioned propaganda. Reporters from l%e Washbqyon Post and ABC
radio have borne witness to it. Western obsetvers have
mported on it. Members of relief organizations and Of
UNIFIL have contirmed it. Some of them, French and
Finnish, have been accused of wanting to impede Tsahal’s
action against what people have conveniently called terrorists. The area occupied by Israel has become a real
battlefield-for
an unequal battle between civilian populations and highly trained and over-armed occupiers-and
the international community is denied the right to condemn this and to demand its immediate cessation.
129. In the circumstances, Israel puts forward three
arguments: the first is that it will not hesitate to resort to
the most extreme methods to protect its soldiers’ lives; the
second, that it cannot be held responsible for dissent

133. Titus we arrive at this paradox: that Lebanon, and
in particular the civilian populations of southern Lebanon, in western Bekaa and the Rarhaya district, have basi-

am-*--*am

rmllv
w,.,

ImIM-eYI..eo-

rnmrnn~~iti-*
-Y ..,... “. . . . . _d,

new4
-,a”

*ha
. ..e

thin-i
. . . . . -,

tkd
..,“.

it4. ie
.”

LA.._N

. ..-

uidi.,-...,,

L nfthn
". . ..- cnn*wav~mv
-....., ".-a",

in
..* Iarooli
."....a.

-Ii&.-al
y-e..
-.

only a question of Shiite terrorists. It does this in the hope
of reconciling certain opinions whose connivance with
neo-nazism and neo-fascism is all too familiar.

circles between those favouring total withdrawal and
those who, grudgingly.
have accepted a phased
redeployment.

130. Thus only the lives of the soldiers in the Tsahal

134. Our conclusions,
which concur with those put forward in the communiqut
adopted
on 6 March
by the
Coordinating
Bureau of the Movement
of Non-Aligned

count,
Geneva

and we must now forget
the obligations
of the
Convention
relative
to the Protection
of Civilian
I3

Countries at its urgent meeting in New York [s/17008,
umwx] are as follows.

an example of Israel’s repressive policy in the town of
Ma’rakah. Israeli forces surrounded and raided this town,
where they blew up its mosque. with IS people killed and
45 wounded, and blasted four houses.

135. Israel has deliberately placed itself outside international law and has en&,-d in reprehensible acts in occupied Lebanese territory.

143. The latest of these repressive azts was committed
on this very day, when Israeli forces raided the village of
Al-Zurarich in southe. n Lebanon, with the result that 24
people were killed.

136. Lebanon, regardless of the regional pclitical context, was right in bringing the question to the Council and
demanding that justice bc done, as is called for in the draft
resolution in docums.:t S/I7ooO.

144. The Israeli policy of collective punishment of the
civilian population of the occupied Lebanese regions is
merely an extension of the policy pursued by the occupying forces in the West Rank, Gaze and the Golan Heights
ever since they occupied those territories in 1967. Thr
Israeli military forces have committed those actions
against the civilian population only because those populations resist the occupation. The world recently witnessed
an intensification of that policy in occupied southern Lebant?. to the point where the only choice for Lebanon,
which has endured intolerable sufferings, was recourse to
the Council, in the hope that the Council could find a way
to deter Israel from continuing its campaign of repression
against the Lebanese people.

137. After our adoption of resolutions 425 (1978). So&
(19821 and 509 (19821. we have an obligation to condemn
Israel’s present practices in occupied Lebanese territory
and to demand the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel’s occupying forces from Lebanon. Otherwisp it will be vain to speak of strict respect for the
sovereignty, independence, unity and territorial integrity
of that Member State.
138. I now resume tr. functions as PRESIDENT.
139. The next speaker is the representative of Jordan. I
invite him to take a place as the Council table and to
make his statement.

145. Israel has harboured a perception of its security
founded on the use of force that can extend to the territory of neighbouring States and, where necessary, the
occupation of those territories, believing that such acts
can assure Israeli security. However, Israel has forgotten
that the denial of other people’s rights and the occupation
of their territories which accompanies application of that
perception leads to fierce resistance and rejection of its
policy and its occupation.

149. Mr. KASRAWI
(Jordan) (inrerpterorlon fiorn
Am&): At the outset I should like to convey to the Soviet
delegation our profound condolences on the occasion of
the death of President Konstantin Chemenko, Resident
of the Supreme Soviet and General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union. We share the general distress at the loss of one of
the champions of international d&ente and of rupproche146. The Lebanese experience has made it clear that that
meter. We should be grateful if our condolences could be
special theory of security has been a failure. Its implemenforwarded to the Government and people of that friendly
tation in Lebanon has cost Israel dear; it has led to the
country the Soviet Union and to the bereaved family.
absence of a just and lasting peace in the region. The
Council has again afftrmed that Israel must withdraw
141. The Council is meeting to resume its discussion of
from Lebanon and has called for complete and uncondiLebanon’s complaint against Israel, which is justified by
tional withdrawal from all the occupied Lebanese territe
the tyranny, high-handedand brutality of the Israeli
ries, as set out in its resolution 509 (1982). Israel has
occupation forces, which commit daily-with
impunitytrampled underfoot the Geneva Convention relative to
arbitrary actions and oppressive practices against the civilthe Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of I2
ian population of the areas under lsraeli occupation. The
August 1949,’ which forbids occupying forces to carry out
representative of Lebanon has sketched in the Council,
policies of terrorimtion, retaliation and coll,?ctive punishwith considerable supporting evidence. a tragic picture of
ment of the population, such policies have impelled Lebathe great hardship and suffering inflicted on the Lebanese
non to have recourse to the Council, asking it to take
population, which, under the heel of the Israeli occupameasures to stop those acts of brutality against the civiltion, has suRered a whole range of atrocities, including
ian population and to compel Israel to implement Counarrests, murder. humiliation, mass punishment, the encircil resolutions calling for its complete withdrawal from
cling of villages and towns by the Israeli army and indisoccupied territories.
criminate firing upon the people and their houses.
142. Each day the violence reaches new peaks, even to
the point where places of worship and hospitals are not
safe, desptte then rnvtolabthty enshrined in all intemational norms and conventions. Since the meeting of the
Council on 28 February [256&h meerg& the Israeli arbitrary actions have been intensified. Members of the Council have become aware of the details of those actions,
thanks to the letters from the representative of Lebanon,
particularly that of 4 March [S/169971, which describes

147. Lebanon% request is perfectly just. Lebanon is
thereby attempting to restore its sovereignty over all its
territory and to put an end to all those practices which so
gravely endanger its sovereignty and security. The inhabitants of the country. whether Lebanese or Palestinian,
have endured more hardship than anyone in the world.
The I&anese request is in keeping with the Charter of the
United N?tionr resolutions on Lebanon previously
adopted by the Council. It is incumbent on the Council to
I4

do its moral and political duty in response to the just and
legitimate Lebanese re.ptests.
I48 Events that have taken plare since the Lebanese
complaint have confirmed the importance of the statement made by the representative of Lebanon on 2g Pebruary, in which he said:
“Israeli military operations and inhumane practices
the regions still under Israeli occupation are daily
becoming mom severe and more violent, and now call
for speedy and urgent action by the Council, to which
we have come today with a legitimate compiaint based
on undeniable and irrefutable facts and evidence. To
seek to justify or excuse those actions will not do any
good whateqsr.” [2568rh meeiing, puru. 18.1
in

149. The arguments adduced by Israel to justify its
tyranny in southern Lebanon result from the continuation
of its occupation of Lebanese territory and from its practices. We should, therefore, not be surprised if that occupation has led to a stiffening of Lebanese resistance. The
resistance that Israel is encountering in southern Lebanon
is only a normal reacuon to its own use of force and its
occuuation.
150. The only solution for southern I.&anon is a withdrawal by the Israeli forces from all the recently occupied
Lebanese territories, not recourse to repression, which has
proved powerless to bring the Lebanese people to its
knees.
151. What is happening in Lebanon proves an essential
truth-that
in the face of foreign occupation the only
solution is withdrawal of the fore&n forces, because there
is no justification for such occupation, whatever pretexts
am. adduced.

154. The PRESIDENT (inrerprettukmjkvm I;tendt): The
next speaker is the representative of the German Deme
cratic Republic. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
155. Mr. O’IT (German Democratic Republic): It is
with deep sorrow that the delegation of the German Democratic Republic has learned of the decease of the General
Secretary of the Central Committee of tte Communist
Party of the Soviet Union and President of the Presidium
of the Supreme Soviet of the USSR, Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. Together with the fraternal Soviet
people, we mourn the death of a great statesman whose
life and work were dedicated to the welfare of the Soviet
Union and to the happiness of all people in the world. His
name remains inseparably littked with the struggle for the
preservation of peace and for friendship and understanding among peoples. His initiatives have contributed
greatly to the activitic:
‘the Organisation. The people of
the German Democllr..G Republic has lost a good friend
in Konstantin Ustinovich Chemenko. We wish to express
to the delegation of the Soviet Union, and especially to
you, Comrade Oleg Troyanovsky, and through you to the
family of Konstantin Chemenko and to all Soviet comrades and ftiends. our heartfelt condolences.
156. Speaking today before the Council, I am pleased to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency for this month. My delegation wishes you every
success in the tasks facing the Council.
157. I wish also to join previous speakers in expressing
thanks to the representative of India, Mr. Krishnan, for
his wise conduct of the proceedings of the Council last
month.
158. Since this is the first time this year that my delegation is speaking before the Council, I should like to congratulate the teprescntatives of Australia, Denmark,
Madagascar, Thailand and Trinidad and Tobago as new
member of the Council and to wish them much success.

152. The situation in southern Lebanon which is now
before the Council has come about because of the Council’s inability to implement the resolutions that it adopted
after the Israeli invasion of Lebanon in 1982, at a time
when it demanded that Israel withdraw from all occupied
Ihattese territories. In the past three years those resolutions have led to no international measures capable of
securing their enforcement. This has been interpreted by
certain warlike States as a green light justifying their
imposing their will on small States, which In consequence
lose contidence in the future of a world action based on
the concepts and principles on which the United Nations
was founded.

159, The Council has repeatedly had reason to deal with
the occupation of Arab territories by Israel, in opposition
to international law and with violations of human rights.
This time it is dealing with crimes committed against the
civilian population of southem Lebanon.
160. The representative of Lebanon gave a detailed
report before the Council on the extent of the excessesand
practices of the Israeli occupation troops.
161. The delegation of the German Democratic Repub
lit shams the view of many representatives who have
pointed out the causes of the aggravated situation in
M!!!hm wee!!.

153. The Council has spe&v responsibility in regard to
Lebanon and its just request;. How can that responsibility
be shouldered, except by acceding to the Lebanese
-.-.a
F“a. Y...Y..B
a-”
..,*:A.
-.A... ,,., UC,r.4
.q-e.s*
I”,“...““.
n ..I.,. Lw aCV.,Y.U
a&a.”..r,vy
ping Israeli practices, compelling Israel to respect and to
apply the terms of the fourth Geneva Convention and to
withdraw completely and unconditionally from the cccupied territories on the basis of resolutions 425 (1978), 5008
(1982) aid 509 (1982), and compelling it to respect the
sovereignty and territorial integrity
of Lebanon’!

162. Thus. the events in southern Lebanon demonstrate
again the arrogant way in which the ruling circles of Israel
disregard world public opinion and trample upon United
Nations resolutions, in particular resolutions 508 (1982)
and 509 (1982) of the Council. They would not act in such
15

a way were it not for the support given by well-known
imperialist circles.

your assumption of the presidency for this month. We are
certain that. with your well-known competence and your
long experience in the Organization, you will conduct the
work of the Council efficiently and objectively.

163. Present developments in thai region again show
that rhe ruling Israeli circles, encoura@ by the assistance
from their allies, despite various manoeuvres are not willing to abandon their policy of aggression and occupation. Rather, they are interested in maintaining the Middle
East as an area of tension, as was demonstrated by recent
events reflecting the imperia!ist policy of power. The brutal acts committed by the occupation troops against the
civilian population in southern Lebanon which were characterizcd by various mpresentativs here as a policy of
“the iron fis:‘* cannot therefore be considered in isolation
from the entire situation in the region.

170. I also wish to express our appreciation and admiration on the ideal way in which the representative of India
conducted the work of the Council last month.
171. I do not wish to repeat the details contained in the
statement made by the representative of Lebanon when
he addressed the Council on 28 February [256&h meeting1
and at previous meetings, concerning Israeli arbitrary
practices and the many kinds of torture, oppression and
displacement to which the civilians of southern Lebanon
have heen subjected. The news of such practices is daily
reported by the mass media; however, I should like to
take up some points in this regard.

164. They underline anew that it is imperative to bring
about a comprehensive solution of thr! Middle East conflict on the basis of United Nations resolutions demanding the withdrawal of Israel from all Arab territories
occupied since 1967. as well as the implementation of the
right to self-determination
of the Palestinian people,
including its right to establish a State of its own.

172. First, the Israeli acts of aggression against Lebanon
and the continued Israeli occupation of southern L&anon for more than two years are themselves flagrant violations of international
law and a clear crime against
humanity. We believe that the continued occupation, with
all the ensuing practices. is the crux of the problem. Therefore, the termination of Israeli occupation of southern
Lebanon and withdrawal of the Zionist invasion forces to
the international borders constitute the main task of the
Council. Without the fulfilment of that task, it would be
dimcult for us to imagine peace and stability being restored to Lebanon, in particular southern Lebanon. On
that basis, we reiterate what we have already said frequently, namely, the need to implement Council resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982). the latter calling for the
immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel to the
internationally recognised boundaries. Furthermore, we
believe that the current situation and current lsneli practices in southern Lebanon are but a direct result of the
non-implementation
of those resolutions.

165. The German Democratic Republic supports the
demand of the overwhelming majority of States for the
convening of an international Middle East peace conference with the participation of all sides concerned, including the PLO. The convocation of such a conference would
foster a comprehensive settlement of the Middle East conflict and thus secure peace in that region.
166. Aligning itself with the position expressed in the
communiquC adopted on 6 March by the coordinating
Bureau of the Movement of No+Aligned
Countries at its
urgent meeting, held in New York, concerning the situation in the areas occupied by Israel in southern Lebanon
[s/II&I&
Imneex],the German Democratic Republic nzsolutely condemns the latest Israeli acts of terror and
demands their immediate cessation. It shares the view of
those States that it is imperative to implement Council
resolutions 508 (1982) and 509 (1982) ard to bring about
the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel in
order to restore the unity, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Lebanon.

173. My second point is that the obstacles placed in the
way of the Council and preventing it from adopting a
resolution at its last series of meetings, in September last
year [2552d to 2556t/t meollngsl-owing
to some of its
members-contributed
to the increased tension and
strengthened Israel in its arbitrary practices against the
civilian population. The people in southern Lebanon then
lost hope that the Council would do them justice, and that
has led them to take measures to defend themselves and
their territory and to retaliate with violence against Israeli
violence. If the language of violence is the only one that
Israel understands, the Lebanese national resistance in all
1t.sdimensions represents me reJectIon by tne Lebanese
people of occupation and its readiness to sacrifice martyrs
in defence of its land and dignity.

167. The PRESIDENT (intprprer~r~onfiom Frpnclr): The
next speaker is the representative of the U-ited Arab
Emirates. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.
168. Mr.

AL-SHAALI
(United Arab Emirates) (Inrerfrom A&/c): It was with deep sorrow that we
received the news this morning of the death of the Soviet
President, Konstantin Chernenko. On this occasion and
in the name of the delegation of the United Arab Emir-

pretution

ates,

I extend

mr

deqnea!

~nn&ie~

!Q !ig

*v+!

&k-

L11ior1.

174. Therefore the struggle of the Lebanese national reJistance against the Israeli occupation authorities is not
just an absolute right to that resistance; it isalsoa national

IhY.
I have thr honour,
in the name of the delegation
of
the linited
Arab tmirates.
to congratulate
you, Sir, on

duty founded
on the experience
of many peoples in their
lilxrdtion
wars against
foreign
occupation
and invasion
and confirmed
by the right of peoples IO live in peace and

gation.
Ikmily

We hope that it will transmit them to the bereaved
and to the Government and people of the Soviet

16

freedom. Moreover, this resistance is sanctioned by numerous United Nations resolutions.
175. In the light of the well-known Israeli policies, we
must recall that the Lebanese national resistance has been
the prime mover behind Israel’s declared intention to pull
out of Lebanon. In view of the complex circumstances
here in the Council and in the Lebanese territories, there
is no other element that could compel Israel to commit
itself to that declaration but the continued resistance
against the Israeli forces.
176. On that basis, the United Arab Emirates welcomes
the Lebanese national resistance struggle and holds it in
high esteem. It reaffirms its support to the fraternal Lebanese people in its just struggle to regain its freedom, liberate its territory and restore its sovereignty over all its
territories.
177. I now come to my third point. We have listened
with deep concern to some statements in support of not
adopting a resolution that would condemn Israeli practices;and invoking various pretexts such as Israel’s intention to pull out and the danger that some interests would
face. We believe that those pretexts have but one objective: to put pressure on the members of the Council. lltey
can be understood only within the framework of the policies that their supporters and advocates pursue in their
support of the expansionist and terrorist Israeli practices.
Therefore we reject those pretexts and believe that prevarication about the Council’s adopting the draft resolution
[s/!7ooO] threatens the lives of more Lebanese civilians.

181. Mr. WASIUDDIN (Bangladesh): I should likeat the
outset to express our profound shock and grief at the sudden demise of Mr. Konstantin Chemenko. General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
the Soviet Union and Pmsident of the Presidium of the
Suprems Soviet of the USSR. On behalf of the members of
my Mission and on my own behalf, 1 should like to convey
our sincere and heartfelt condolences to ;he representative
of the Soviet Union, the members of his Mission and the
bereaved family on their great national loss.
182. Since the Bangladesh delegation is participating for
the first ihe this year in a Council meeting, I shall begin
my statement by expressing our warm felicitations to you,
Sir, on the election of your great country to the Council
and also on your assumption of the presidency for the
current month. We are confident that the delibemtions 01
the Council will immensely benefit from your vast experience and proven diplomatic skill.
183. Let me take this opportunity also, Sir, to convey our
deep appreciation to your predecessor, Mr. Natardjan
Krishnan, representative of India, for the exemplary
manner in which he guided the work of the Council during
the month of February.
184. The Council is again seized of a crisis threatening
international peace and security, arising out of the latest
Israeli operations and inhumane practices against the
civilian population in the Lebanese territories occupied by
Israel. These incidents are by no means isolated events of
repression, but constitute yet another link in the long
chain of Israel’s policies of relentless expansion, occupation attd unabated aggression again1 its Arab neighbours.

178. Every day the people of southern Lebanon are subjected to more arbitrary practices, more collective killings,
more demolition of houses and more orgrutized oppreasion. Clear evidence of that is the massacre perpetrated by
the Israeli occupation forces in the village of Ma’rakah
only a few days after the Council had started its discussion on this item. The continued daily massacres ate hard
evidence of the fact that Israel flouts international legltimacy because of the protection it enjoys through the
American veto.

185. The representative of Lebanon. in his statements
made to the Council at the 2368th meeting on 28 February.
the 2570th meeting on 7 March and today, has already given
a graphic description of the coercive methods and abusive
practices employed by Israel against the civilian population
in southem Lebanon, the western Rekaa and the Rashaya
district. The international press and other news media have
also given us a vivid picture of the sulfering of the Lebanese
civilian population in the occupied territories.

179. In order for the Council to fulfil its responsibility
towards international peace and security and the prevention of aggression and to reaflirm its credibility so that
helpless States will not lose confidence in it and the
United Nations in general, and on the basis of the complaints in numerous letters addressed by Lebanon to the
Council and the Secretary-GeneraI, we appeal to all the
members of the Council to help Lebanon regain sovereignty over its national soil, to stop the bloodshed on its
territory and to put an end to the Israeli practices on
Lebanese territory by voting in favour of the draft resolution submiired io ihis Councii by Lebanon.

186. Their villages and towns have been seized, their
homes have been demolished, and they have been sub
jetted to indiscriminate killing, detention, kidnapping,
repression and humiliation. Only last week, a huge bomb
exploded in a mosque in the village of Ma’rakah in southem Lebanon, killing at least I5 people. It is abundantly
clear that the Israeli forces, which had earlier seized the
town, are directly responsible for the incident. Bangladesh
and the entire Islamic world received this news with deep
shock and indignation.
187. The recent Israeli actions in southern Lebanon and
in other occupied territories are clearly in violation (11.the
principles and purposes al’ the Charter of the I;IIII~~
Nations. the provisions of the Gcncvii (‘c>n\-cntion rclative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in ‘lime of War.
of 12 August 19491 and the norms ol irlicrnational I:I\\

180. The PRESIDENT (inqrre~uorionfierrt Freac/r): The
next speaker is the representative of Bangladesh. 1 invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
17

They are also clearly intended to intimidate and terrorize
the civilian population in the occupied territories. But the
heroic Lebanese fighters have demonstrated once again
that they cannot be suppressed or silenced.

recent weeks, we have noted with interest that a number
of concrete proposals have been made to initiate the peace
process in the region. Israel. on the other hand, has
further aggravated the situation in the region through its
policy of terror and harassment in the occupied cerritories, with a view to obstructing the initiation of the peace
process in the Middle East.

188. The position of Bangladesh on the question of Lebanon has been firm and consistent. We have expressed in
the strongest terms our condemnation of Israeli aggression against Lebanon and have teafftrmed our total and
unflinching solidarity with our Lebanese brethren. My
Government has repeatedly called for the immediate and
unconditional withdrawal of Israeli forces from Lebanon.
We have also reiterated our unequivocal support to our
Lebanese brethren in the achievement of national reconciliation and in preservation of the independence and tenitorial integrity of Lebanon.

193. The failure of the Council in the past to act firmly
and decisively has only encouraged Israel to intensify its
aggression and barbarity. In the present circumstances, it
is imperative that the Council proceed urgently, with all
the authority and resources at its disposal, to avert a
further blood-bath in southern Lebanon and other cccupied territories and to secure the implementation of its
own resolutions, particularly resolutions 425 (1978). 508
(1982) and 509 (1982). in order to ensure Israel’s immediate and unconditional withdrawal from the Lebanese
territories to the internationally recognized boundaries.

189. The question of Lebanon, however, should not be
viewed in isolation, as it constitutes an integral part of the
overall Middle East question. In other words, any solution of the problem of Lebanon cannot be separated from
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle
East. The firm and unequivocal position of Bangladesh
on the question of the Middle East has been based on our
firm belief in the principles and purposes of the Charter
and on our enduring commitment to the cause of
oppressed peoples all over the world struggling to free
themselves from the bondage of colonialism, aggression
and exploitation, peoples committed to establishing their
inalienable right to self-determination, national freedom
and political independence.

194. The latest Israeli actions and measures are in clear
violation of the fourth Geneva Convention and other
norms of international law. Israel, the occupying Power,
must be asked to desist forthwith from its illegal and abusive practices against the civilian population in southern
Lebanon, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district,
and to restore normal conditionc in those areas. The sitttation in the region should also be kept under constant
review, and the Secretary-General should be entrusted
with reporting to the Council on the implementation of its
resolutions.
195. In cottclttttion, let me thank the members of the
Council for giving us this opportunity to take part in the
current debate.

1%. Bangladesh views the essentials of any meaningful
peace pIan for the Middle East as a composite whole, a
comprehensive settlement, every part thereof king integrally related to the others. We are Brmly convinced that
there cannot be any lasting peace in the region without a
total withdrawal of Israeli forces from all occupied Arab
and Palestinian tenitorles, including the Holy City of Jerusalem. and without the restoration of the inalienable rights of
the Palestinian people, including their right to an independent State of their own. It is equally essential that the PLG,
the sole legitimate representative of the Palestinian people,
participate in any peace process on an equal footing Any
comprehensive plan must include these essential elements to
restore just and lasting peace to the region.

1%. The PRESIDENT (Interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Viet Nam. I invite
him to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.
197. Mr. LE KIM CHUNG (Viet Nam) (htqmwut~un
/ram fiettch): First, on behalf of the delegation of the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam, I extend to Comrade Oleg
Troyanovsky and the delegations of the Soviet Union. the
Byelotussian SSR and the Ukrainian SSR our deepest
condolences on the death of Konstantin Chemenko. General Secretary of the Communist Party and President of
the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union,
an outstanding leader of the Soviet people and a great
friend of the Vietnamese people. The death of President
Chemenko is a cruel loss indeed, not only for the Soviet
Union but also for the cause of friendship and understanding among peoples and peace in the world. I request
the delegation of the Soviet Union to transmit to the Communist Party, the Government and the people of the
Soviet Union and to the kreaved family our deepeet &slings of fraternal sympathy.

191. The developments in the Middle East over nearly
decades have demonstrated beyond any shadow of doubt
that the complex problem of the Middle East cannot be
solved by a few countries or by a major Power and its allies.
The situation clearly calls for an international effort under
the aegis of the United Nations to ensure that the interests
and rights of all the parties concerned are met in a fully
impartial and rational manner, with a view to evolving a
just, viable and lasting settlement of the problem.
192. It is in this context that Bangladesh supported the
props al for the early convening of an international conference on peace in the Middle East. The Arab peace plan,
which my delegation has fully supported as a sound basis
for the restoration of peace in the region, is already before
the international community [see S/15510, annex]. In

[lk

speaker continued in &tgli$h.]

198. Now, Sir, allow me to congratulate you warmly on
your assumption of the presidency for this month. We are
18

confident that with your talents. your diplomatic skill and
your long experience at the United Nations, you will guide
the work of the Council to success.

Israel must withdraw its troops from Lebanon without
any conditions and with strict respect for Lebanon’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity; it must
resume the talks with Lebanon so as to work out ways
and means to ensure the latter’s takeover.

199. I should like also to congratulate Mr. Krishnan,
representative of India. on his efforts to fultil his responsibility as President for the month of February.

205. My delegation fully supports I.&anon
in its
genuine efforts to recover its sovereignty, unity and territorial integrity. In this spirit, my delegation fully supports
the communique adopted on 6 March by the Coordinating Bureau of the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries at its urgent meeting, held in New York
[S/17008, annex] and which the representative of India
presented to the Council at its 2570th meeting. My delegation also strongly supports the just demands of Lebanon
as contained in draft resolution !Vl7CKD, now before the
Council. Furthermore, my delegation earnestly urges the
Council to take appropriate measures to ensure the full
implementation
by Israel of all the Council’s relevant
resolutions.

200. Our participation today in a meeting of the Council
for the first time in 1985 gives us a chance to welcome the
new members of the Council and to thank all the
members of the Council for giving us this opportunity to
speak.
201. The entire world has been tilled with shock and
indignation at the new horrendous crimes committed by
Israeli aggressors in the occupied areas in southern Lebanon, the western Bekaa and the Rashaya district. If the
aggressions committed by Israel agains. Lebanon in 1978
and 1982 showed the true colours of the aggressors, then
these new crimes serve as further proof of what they actually are, as they retreat. In order to extricate itself from its
economic difftculties and to avoid military defeat, kiael
finally has to withdraw from Lebanon. Yet the so-called
three-stage withdrawal plan has not been drawn up in
gaod faith; it is simply a ploy to hoodwink public opinion.

296. The present developments in Lebanon are only
part of the complicated situation in the Middle East. This
situation can be solved only through a comprehensive
peaceful settlement that guarantees the exercise of the
right to selfdetermination
by the Palestinian people and
respect for the legitimate interests of all countries in the
region, including an independent State of Palestine. Such
a solution can be achieved only within the framework of
an international conference on the Middle East. This is in
complete conformity with the position taken by the
United Nations and by the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries.

202. First, Israel unilaterally cancelled the talks with the
Government of Lebanon concerning the recovery of
Lebanon’s sovereignty over the areas from which Israeli
troops are withdrawing. Secondly, Israel still reserves the
right not only to teach Lebanon another lesson but also to
come back whenever it likes; and, thirdly, it has obviously
been trying to prepare the soil for sowing the seeds of
Israeli-chosen henchmen. with the ultimate objective of
“invisible Israel’s occupation of Lebanon”. To facilitate
this, Israel is stepping up its suppression of the people
opposing its occupation, and this has resulted in the killing or wounding of hundreds of innocent persons. These
new acts are reminiscent of the genocide-like killings in
Sabra and Shatila, so vehemently denounced and condemned throughout the world. We shall not yield to the
temptation to cite all the specift cases set forth in document s/l6974 and S/l6974/Add.I.

207. The PRESIDENT (Inrerprercrflonfient Frorscit): The
next speaker is the observer of the Palestine Liberation
Organisation. I invite him to take a place at the Council
table and to make his statement.
208. Mr. TERZI (Palestine Liberation Organization):
We have learned with grief and distress of the passing
away of Konstantin Chemenko, General Secretary of the
Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet
Union and President of the Presidium of the Supreme
Soviet of the Soviet Union. His death is a great loss to all
mankind. Great peoples produce great leaders. The pursuit of peace has been the comer-etone of the foreign
policy of the Soviet Union. We are certain that the Soviet
Union will pursue its goal of attaining peace in the world,
and in particular in our area-peace through a just solution to the question of Palestine conducive to a cornprehensive and just solution to the Arablsraeli
conflict,
peace to be achieved within the framework of an international peace conference on the Middle East held under the
auspices of the United Nations. We wish to express our

203. What is even more gtave is that while the representative of Lebanon, with a sinking heart, was submitting
the case before the Council and while the Council was
seriously considering it, Israel wns committing more and
mote crimes. They have been described in detail by many
previous speakers, Nothing can justify Ismel’s acts of genocide against innocent people in Lebanon or elsewhere in
the areas it occupies; nor can anything save it from
defeat-no matter how large the assistance given to it by
its most powerful strategic ally is. or will be.

gut&~*+

204. -=I
we Icaciiiiiti~
&mad
ihai irrdci pui tin imrndiaic
end to its abusive practices and its massacre of people in
Lebanon, and that it respect the resolutions on the subject
adopted so far by the Council and the rules and principles
of international law, particularly the relevant provisions
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection of
Civilian Persons in Time of War, of I2 August l949?

!n ihe Saiet

penp.tes and tn our cnlleagtes

in

the Mission of the Soviet Unron.
209. We deem it a great honour that the Council has
extended an invitation to the PLO to participate in this
debate. We wish to thank all the mcmhcr~ 01. the Council.
regardless of the attitude of some.
I9

It is sign&ant to note here his reference to “places where
we don’t exist today but which have biblical names”. The
Zionist &bensrotuu in Lebanon is common knowledge; t
dates back to 1919, when the Zionist organiultion made
public its aim for a Zionist homeland, as fcliows:

210. Let me express at the outset our great satisfaction
that you, Sir. a son of Africa and the representative of a
country member of the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Bights of the Palestinian People, should have
assumed the responsibility of presiding over the deliberations of the Council on an issue threatening international
peace rind security-deliberations
mainly on acts of savagery by neo-Fascist troops of occupation in Lebanon. We
are certain that, with your wisdom and dedication to the
cause of oppressed peoples and to the cause of peace, you
will guide these deliberations to results in conformity with
the aims of the United Nations as spelled out in the Charter of the United Nations.

“at a point an the Mediterranean Sea in the vicinity
of Sidon and following the watersheds of the foothills
of the Lebanon as far as Jisr El-Kara’on, then to
El-Bire . . .“.
That is but one of their ambitions

in Lebanon.

216. According to the memoirs, dated 27 FebNary
1934, of a former Israeli Prime Minister, Share& the following is noted:

211. For the past few weeks the world has been witnessing on television screens and reading in the press horrors
reminiscent of Nazi crimes and the holocaust. The Council is being informed daily of such acts of savagery ag,inst
civilians in Lebanese territory under Israeli occupation.
‘Ihe latest such information was given to the Council at
the kginning of these meetings: Nazi-like atrocities, such
as standing people up against a wall and shooting them in
cold blood

“Ben Gurion passed on to another issue. This is *he
time, he said, to push Lebanon, that is, the Maronites
in that country, to proclaim a Christian State. I said
.&at this was nonsense. The Maronites are divided. The
partisans of Christian separatism are weak and will
dare to do nothing. A Christian Lebanon would mean
their giving up Tyre, Tripoli, the Bekaa. There is no
force that could bring Lebanon back to its pr&World
War I dimensions, and all the more so because in that
case it would lose its economic raison d’&re. Ben Gurion reacted furiously. He began to enumerate the historical justification for a restricted Christian Lebanon.
If such a development were to take place, the Christian
Powers would not dare oppose it. I claimed that there
was no factor ready to create such a situation and that
if we were to push and encourage it on our own we
would get ourselves into an adventure that would place
shame on us.”

212. I wish to recall that on a number of rxcasions
Chairman Yasser Arafat alerted the Secretary-Geneml
and the Security Council in letters expressing his grave
concern about the future of civilian populations, including Palestinian refugees. He also stressed the responsibilities of the United Nations. We Palestinians have suffered
and we continue to suffer the atrocities perpetrated by the
neo-Fascists of Tel Aviv.
213. ‘Ibose neo-Fascist troops in southern Lebanon
have shown no discrimination as to whether the victims
are men, women or children-whether
Lebanese or Palestinian, farmers ploughing their fields or worshippers of
one faith or sect or another fullllling their religious obligations. To the neo-Fascists, all those who resist the continuation of the occupation are the “enemy”.

217. I have sensed no Christian support for the Nazilike crimes which are committed by the Israeli forces of
occupation-not
only not from Christian sources. but
from any other source.

214, This modur opera& of the Fascists is not incidental, nor is it a newly developed method of action. We
Palestinians have been and are still being subjected to
such acts of State terrorism against civilian populations in
the occupied territories-h
it in southern Lebanon or
Bethlehem. And here one must surely wonder whether
these acts are in retaliation or whether they are the implementation of an ideology aimed at the elimination of all
“alien elements* from the racist, exclusivist State of
Israel. Are these acts in pursuance of a Lubensrauwr
PolW

218. According to Share& Ben Gurion was not satisfied
and addressed a letter to him on 27 February 1934, in
which he said:
“It is clear that Lebanon is the weakest link in the Arab
League. The other minorities in the Arab States are all
Moslem, except for the Copts. But Egypt is the most
compact and solid of the Arab States and the majority
there consists of one solid block, of one race, religion
and language, and the Christian minority does not
seriously alfect their political and national unity. Not
so the Christiins in Lebanon. They are a majority in
the historical Lebanon and thii majority has a tradii
tion and a culture different from those of the other
P,,, L.
0, .ri-..a.-- Y.
At -a..”
.-ML.
Ctwm-nla
.d ..*w
rlu y”~Y.
I mama” . . . “M.
--*,. p.“......., V.
sion. or revolution or civil war, things take on another
aspect, and even the weak declares himself to be a
hero.”

215. Members of the Council will recall that on 29 October I%7 the then Prime Minister of Israel, Eshkol, was
reported by the Associated Press to have appealed for
_^- r‘rmu&IP”“”
:--1-*:-A---._._m IWl‘“Iba
--r:--- .-L” IIR1SOa-s
:---- --- UK
-L,,#eaa
,,“,I, ,,I
“SHG,,,
Jewish population of Israel and to settle the occupied
West Bank. He was quoted as having said:
“We need more Jews here in Israel . . .“. They were
also needed “in places where we don’t exist today but
which have biblical names.”

219. 1 shall not take up any more of the Council’s time
by citing everything that went on. But we know that on I6
20

May. Dayan-and
everyone remembers who he wassaid, according to Sharett’s memoirs,

tions 425 (1978). 426 (1978). SO8 (1982) and 509 (1982).
The Israeli Cabinet had decided, in the .second phase, to
deploy-mark
my word-to
deploy in the eastern sector
of Lebanon, and. in the third phase, “Ismel has decided
that the IDF will deploy along the Israeli/Lebanese international border while maintaining a zone in southern Lebanon where local forces [South Lebanese Army] will
operate with IDF backing.”

“According to Dayan the only thing that’s necessary is
to find an off!cer, even just a major. We should either
win his heart or buy him with money to make him
agree to declare himself the saviour of the Maronite
population.”
220. We can clearly see what the Israelis p.r: up to: they
want that part of southern Lebanon.

226. The Lebanese people, the heroes who are putting
up armed resistance, do not suffer over diplomatic niceties. For them, as for us Palestinians, deployment is not
withdrawal; and the third phase of the socalled withdrawal is the implementation and entrenchment of the
Zionist aims and ambitions in Lebanon, as exmd
by
Moshe Sharett and to which we referred earlier.

221. Again one may recall that in 1978, in another
Israeli act of aggression which resulted in the occupation
of southern Lebanon, the then Israeli Chief of Staff. Morde&i Gur, had no hesitation in boasting about acts of
savagery against the civilians under Israeli occupation, He
told a journalist:

227. ‘Ihe heroes in that area are serlding to Tel Aviv a
very lotid and clear message: resolution 509 (1982) calls
for the total and unconditional withdrawal >f Israel and,
ultimately, Israeli troops from all of Lebanon; maintsining Israeli control by proxy is not the will of the Lebanese
people and consequently they exercise their right and
carry out their duty to resist foreign occupation, including
by the method of armed struggle.

“I do not lie to myself. I gave this order to the army.
When I give an order to the IDF [Israeli Defense Forces] to enter a populated area, and when I authorize a
doctrine of tire. I know what I am doinn. When I
ordered Yam& [Commander-in-Chief
of %e Northem Zone] to use planes, artillery and tanks, 1 knew
what I was doing. When I told Yanush ‘Move tanks
into Maroun El-Ras as quickly as possible and shell the
village from a distance before our men arrive and
elIgage in a face-teface battle’, I did know what I was
doing. I was the one who gave that order.”

228. The press has been reporting Rabin’s “iron-fist”
policy arid action against Lebanon. As far as we
remember, the “iron-fist” methodology to fulfil Zionist
aims was predicated by the twisted thinking of a Zionist
leader called Jabotinsky, whose memory is perpetuated
on Israeli currency. Thus one can discern no difference in
the attitude of Zionists towards others in the pursuit of
achieving Zionist aims. Be they the Herut or the Labour
Party, they are all criminally inclined to achieve their aim,
namely, the elimination of others.

So, that spirit of criminal instinct is nothing new.
222. Need one recall that at Nuremburg, Nazi officers
were brought to t+l because they killed civilian hostages,
and it did not help those offtcers to claim that the civilian
j@uhtion
was hostile to them. Those ofliccrs, as we
recall, were sentenced to death and executed, and that was
heeause Nazi racism, Nazi Lebensruum and Nazi brutality
were defeated. Soon the world will celebrate its triumph
40 years ago over facism and Nazism.

229. Unfortunately.
this is also a method that the
United States Government subscribes to. as was stated in
this chamber before the Council by a distinguished-if
I
may say that-representative
of the United States, when
he used his negative vote [2556h mccr&] to veto a draft
resolution [S/6673Zj calling for a cessation of hostilities in
Lebanon simply because it did not include reference to the
elimination of Palestinian armed elements.

223. I wonder whether the neo-Nazis in the Zionist
junta will participate in celebrating this commemorative
event, or will lament the defeat of their allies and collaborators? Naturally, this is not the subjea of our debate
to&y. but, of course, when one refers to the collaboration
between the Irgun Zvai Leumi a Id the Nazis, one has to
ternember those things.

230. The Council has been subjected to attempts at
diverting its attention. For exanaple, the representative of
the United States mentioned a cycle of violence. Now this
is a malicious attempt to divzn the attention and thrust of
this deliberation and debate. In our opinion there is no
cycle of violence; there is on the one hand Israeli aggression, Israeli fascist crimes, Israeli occupation, and on the
other hand, there is the noble cause of resistance against
occupation and therr are the Lebanese who are heroically
carrying out their duty. as well as exercising their right. So
the cycle of vioknce does not exist.

224. When we speak about the civilian population beiig
hostile to the forces of occupation, hostility per se is not
suflicient. What is needed is activity and militant resistance against the forces of occupation. It is armed struggle.
It is a right, it is an inalienabk right, a right of peopk to
mist. This has also been Icgitim&d
hy the C~neml
Assembly.
225. It has been claimed that these acts of violence are
committed when Israel “has embarked on withdrawing its
tr@opa from Lebanon”. This is a big lie, because the
Israeli Cabinet has not-l
repeat,
has not-decided
to
withdraw

from

Lebanon

:n pursuance

of Council

231.

The repentative
of the United
States spoke
about
a rationale
of conduct.
She expr4
concern
about the rejection
of what she called threats to members
of the Council
and their nationals.
Now. this is demented
logic, for how can we describe the acts of aggression
by

resolu21

the United States when it mined the territorial waters of
Nicaragua, which was then a rriember of the Council?
How can we explain the issuance by the United States
Congress of Public Law 9g-ISI of 14 November 1983? I
will spare the Council a reading of that. I trust that it may
appear in the record. But that is a threat to the developing
economiee of nations. Is it not a crime in itself to institutional&? such threats against developing nations?
232. Let me assure the representative of the United
States that all the support it shows to the junta in Tel Aviv
and all the contacts, deliberations and bargaining by
Assistant Secretary of State Murphy in the area, including
the use of Lebanon and the Lebanese people as a bargaining chip in some deliberations and negotiations, will fail.
We thought that the Washington Administration
had
learned a lesson when the Camp David process failed to
bring peace to the area. At that dme, the future of the
Palestinian people was used as a bargaining chip. As the
Camp David Accords were doomed to fail, so too ace
Murphy’s deliberations.
233. Finally, the total and unconditional withdrawal of
Israel from all of Lebanon will definitely provide the
atmosphere for no resistance, and consequently there will
be no need for further deliberation in the Council, at least
in so far as Lebanon is concerned.
234. In fulfilment of their obligations under the Charter,
the members of the Council are dalled upon to deem it
propar now to impose mandatory sanctions against Israel
as a pttnlshment for its acts of savagery and its continued
threat to peace in the area, as well as to international
peace and security.

speakers this evening und proceed to a vote on the draft
resolution. Is the representative of the United Kingdom
satisfied with this response7
238. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom); Mr.
President, thank you for recalling what you said before.
As I have already explained, I would prefer the Council to
continue its discussion tomorrow morning, since we still
have a lengthy list of speakers and there may well be
more. If we do proceed to a vote tonight, there will certainly be a number of explanations of vote, so we shall not
be hearing just 10 speakers; we shall get up to I do not
know what number. In short, I hope we can continue
tomorrow.
239. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): As
you know, I am in the hands of the members of the Council. Would the representative of the United Kingdom like
to call for the app!ication of rule 33 to end the meeting? If
so, 1 should be happy to ask the Council if it agrees to the
application of that rule.
240. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom):
should be happy if we could do that.

Yes, I

241. The PRESIDENT (interpretutiott jbom Frettch): The
point raised by the representative of the United Kingdom
falls under rule 33. which reads:
“The following motions shall have precedence in the
order named over all principal motions and draft resolutions relative to the subject before the meeting:

235. The PRESIDENT (Inrerpre&rr~ox from F&xc&: I
call on the representative of the United Kingdom on a
point of order.
236. Sir John THOMSON
(United Kingdom): Mr.
President, I wonder what your intentions are about how
we should proceed futther in this debate. I notice we still
have a lengthy list of speakers, and I do not even know
whether the list in front of me is a comprehensive list or
whether there may yet be more. Given the lateness of the
hour and contlicting engagements which some of us have,
I personally would find it convenient if we were to close
our deliberations for this evening rather soon.

“1. To suspend the meeting;
“2. To adjourn the meeting;
“3. To adjourn the meeting to a certain day or hour;
“4. To refer any matter to a committee, to the
Secretary-General or to a rnpporteur,
“5. To postpone discussion of the question to a certain day or indetlnitely; or
“6. To introduce an amendment.
“Any motion for the suspension or frr the simple
adjournment of the meeting shall be da5ded without
debate.”
242. The members of the Council have heard the prop
sal made by the representative of the United Kingdom. Is
there any objection to approval of that proposal? It
appears not. The proposal is approved.

237.

The PRESIDENT (lnterpretarion from FM&):
I
like to recall that at c.tr 2570th meeting I said I
intended at today’s meeting ‘o continue the debate on the
item on our agenda so that the Council might hear those
representatives that had not been able to speak, and that
we would then proceed to a vote on the draft resolution
[s/17woJ. That is what was agreed at the 2570th meeting.
There are now 10 speakers on my list. Since there had
been no formal request for suspension of the meeting, it
was my intention to proceed in accordance with what I
said at the 2570th meeting, that is, to exhaust our list of
should

Litbo

ia United

Nationr,

New

York

The meeting rose at 7.15 p.m.

NOTES

1 UI1IIl.U
.,-L-A ..~,.“,*a(
Wm.:--- I,‘“,,
T---*.. “‘,...I(
F-l-- 1”s.
..^I 9*
U^ PT’I
,a. ,.“.
,*a.
2 Ibid... No. 973.
’ Carnegie
Endowment
for International
Race. 7%~ Hague Cmrvemrim and Declararionr
of 1899 and 1907 (New York. Oxford University
Press. 1915).

00400

90-61439-June

MM--l,925
