S/PV.8151

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8151

st meeting
Friday, 22 December 2017, 1 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Bessho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Aboulatta
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Safronkov
Mr. Seck
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni
Mr. Yelchenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-46039 (E)
*1746039*

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 1.20 p.m.

negotiations of resolution 2397 (2017). I want to thank
all other members of the Council that quickly moved to
make action and allow this to come forward.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of the Republic of Korea to participate
in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/1092, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President: The draft resolution received 15
votes in favour. The draft resolution has been adopted
unanimously as resolution 2397 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Before I
begin, I want to take a moment to honour some very
important people. As we gather together in the Security
Council, many around the world are preparing to gather
with their families to celebrate a season of peace and
generosity. Amid this celebration, we remember the
men and women of our military who are away from
their families, fulfilling their solemn vow to defend our
nation and its allies against those who would harm us.
My prayer this Christmas is that our words and deeds
today will contribute to our shared cause of peace and
that they honour those who keep us safe.
And with that, I would like to specifically thank
my Chinese colleagues for working with us on the
2/13

22/12/2017

Today, for the tenth time, the Council stands united
against a North Korean regime that rejects the pursuit of
peace. The Kim regime continues to defy the resolutions
of the Council, the norms of civilized behaviour and the
patience of the international community. Its arrogance
and hostility to anything productive has set its country
on a destructive path. Nine times before today, we have
asked the North Korean regime to choose the path of
peace. And it should do so, we would welcome it back
into the community of nations. But Pyongyang has
chosen the path of isolation. As we have in the past,
we will continue to match the Kim regime’s choice
of aggressive actions with actions of international
sanction. I commend the members of the Security
Council for their unity and persistence in this sustained
international defence of peace and security.
On November 29, Pyongyang launched an
intercontinental ballistic missile. This was another
attempt by the Kim regime to masquerade as a great
Power, while its people starve and its soldiers defect.
But for the international community, this is an
unprecedented challenge from a defiant State. We have
therefore leveled an unprecedented response.
Resolution 2397 (2017) ratchets up the pressure
on North Korea even further, building on our previous
resolution on this topic, resolution 2375 (2017), which
included the strongest sanctions ever imposed on that
country. Those sanctions fully banned textile exports
from North Korea. They banned all joint ventures and all
new work permits for overseas North Korean labourers.
And, critical to the regime’s ability to develop its nuclear
and missile programmes, the previous resolution cut
off 55 per cent of refined petroleum products going to
North Korea.
Today, we cut deeper. After North Korea’s
September nuclear test, the Council capped refined
petroleum exports into North Korea. Today’s resolution
achieves an 89 per cent total reduction of the Kim
regime’s ability to import gasoline, diesel and other
refined products. And should the North Korean regime
conduct another nuclear or ballistic missile test, the
resolution commits the Security Council to take even
further action. It sends the unambiguous message to
Pyongyang that further defiance will invite further
punishment and isolation.
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8151

Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted in September,
banned all new permits for North Koreans who work
abroad and send the majority of their earnings to
Pyongyang. That is a source of over $500 million
each year to the Kim regime. Today’s resolution goes
further; it requires that countries expel all North Korean
workers within 24 months. Previous resolutions banned
90 per cent of North Korea’s exports. This resolution
bans all remaining categories of major North Korean
exports — a loss of nearly $250 million in revenue
to the regime. Previous resolutions cracked down on
the smuggling of banned items, such as oil and coal.
But sanctions evasion has continued, so this resolution
closes the loopholes in the system and requires countries
to seize and impound ships caught smuggling illicit
goods. The list goes on.

Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): Last week, we
sat in this Chamber and heard about the many ways
that North Korea has violated multiple United Nations
resolutions and the will of the Security Council (see
S/PV.8137): the illegal nuclear programme; multiple
launches of ballistic missiles; the appalling human right
violations. We condemned, in the strongest possible
terms, these reckless acts by North Korea and we
called on the regime to stop immediately all activity in
defiance of the Council. We also offered Kim Jong Un
a clear choice — different path that leads to prosperity
and security. However, last Friday, the Permanent
Representative of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea defiantly made clear that North Korea has
no intention of changing its path. It has no intention of
abandoning their nuclear programme.

The unity that the Council has shown in leveling
these unprecedented sanctions is a reflection of the
international outrage at the Kim regime’s actions. But
we are not the only ones who are appalled by the North
Korean regime. We are not the only ones sacrificing for
a solution — not even close. At our most recent meeting
on North Korea (see S/PV.8137), I called on all nations
to sever diplomatic and trade relations with North
Korea. I reiterate that call today. I would ask any nation
that continues to support the Kim regime to consider
the nature of that regime, and to consider this crisis
through the eyes of the North Korean people.

Instead, unbelievably, it claims that it will be
a responsible nuclear Power. It shows no sense of
responsibility to its neighbours — over whom it fires
their ballistic missiles — and it shows no sense of
responsibility to the people it forces into modern slavery.
As North Korea’s missile capabilities advance, so do
the contempt and disregard it shows for the Council.
It has repeatedly and wilfully rebuffed our unanimous
will. It continues to act in brazen violation of its legal
obligations, and it seeks to undermine our systems and
our collective values.

I would ask them to imagine being a North Korean
soldier, so desperate and so ravaged by hunger and
disease that he would take five bullets from his fellow
soldiers in order to escape across the Demilitarized
Zone; to imagine being a 12-year-old in North Korea
and being forced to attend public executions as a
reminder of what would happen if he stepped out of
line; to imagine being a mother, so desperate for a
better life for her child that she would risk rape, torture
and imprisonment if she were caught trying to leave
the country; and then to imagine getting caught, being
forced to abort her baby without anesthesia, and then
trying again and again to escape. These are real stories
of real people. These things happened. They should
motivate us to do more.
I am grateful to my colleagues for the serious
measures we have enacted on behalf of the North
Korean people. And I ask them keep those people in
their thoughts and prayers this holiday season as we
continue to fight against this, the most tragic example
of evil in the modern world.

Last week, we all confirmed that we must use all
the diplomatic and economic tools at our disposal to
deliver the uncompromising message that this path is
unacceptable. Today, we are doing just that. Through the
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), we are showing the
regime that our will is strong and that these provocative
actions have severe consequences.
Today, we have banned the import of nearly 90 per
cent of refined petroleum products into North Korea.
These products are used by the regime to resource its
illegal nuclear and ballistic missile programmes. By
cutting off this supply, we will restrict its ability to
develop and deploy these weapons. We have also banned
North Korean exports of food products, machinery and
industrial and electrical equipment. We have taken
another important step towards ending the exploitation
of North Korean workers sent overseas with the sole
aim of generating earnings for the regime.
We have taken these steps to restrict the income
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea uses
to fund its prohibited nuclear and ballistic missile

17-460393/13

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

programmes. I congratulate the United States on this
diplomatic achievement and we join it in leaving no
stone unturned in pursuit of a diplomatic solution.
We call on all States to implement this and previous
resolutions fully. It is only by all of us doing this that
they will have the intended impact.
These measures are not designed to hurt the North
Korean people. We are not targeting the ordinary citizens
of North Korea. There are humanitarian exemptions
and protections in place to protect the people who
already suffer so much at the hands of the Government.
It is the regime that bears full responsibility for the
measures we have enacted today. Any consequences
the people suffer are because of the regime’s reckless
choices — its choice to develop its nuclear programme
over providing for its people.
We must stand united and be clear that we are
adopting these measures today to force Kim Jong Un to
see that he has the choice of two paths. The current path
does not advance the prosperity and security of North
Korea; instead, it poses a very real threat to the entire
international community. We therefore call on North
Korea once again to change course. Let us all call on
that regime once again to prioritize the well-being of its
people over its illegal pursuit of nuclear weapons. Let
us call on it once again to engage meaningfully with the
international community.
The United Kingdom will continue to work with
the members of the Council, our allies and our partners
to increase diplomatic pressure. The resolution just
adopted gives us an opportunity to do just that. We
must all enforce these new measures and work together,
using all the diplomatic and economic tools at our
disposal to deliver this clear, uncompromising message
to the Kim regime.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): We very much regret
that North Korea continues to tirelessly develop its
nuclear programme, which is in grave violation of
numerous Security Council resolutions. Proceeding
from its principled position on nuclear disarmament
and non-proliferation, Kazakhstan has supported the
new resolution 2397 (2017) on sanctions. We hope
that it will send a very clear and definite message to
Pyongyang that the world community does not approve
of North Korea’s nuclear policy.
Joining the international community, we wish to
lead the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to a very
clear understanding of the cause-and-effect relationship
4/13

22/12/2017

of its actions and of what is happening, namely, that
these actions are the outcome of its utter disregard
of its obligations under Council resolutions. We have
learned from Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s
recent visit that Pyongyang receives the decisions of the
Security Council in a different way — as new perilous
circumstances that have been inflicted on it, rather than
as consequences of its nuclear track, which is totally
unacceptable to the world community.
This is happening partly due to the lack of mutual
understanding and dialogue, which are often most
difficult and demanding to pursue but will nevertheless
lead to optimal positive gains for all. Seeking the
path of peace is the only way to save us from making
irreparable mistakes, prevent major catastrophes, lead
to a common goodwill and fulfil the world’s wish to
move towards a peaceful future. In that regard, we call
on all parties to settle down to a course of peaceful
solutions, mediation and interaction in which the
sanctions are just an interim phase of the long-awaited
way to peace and stability on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Aboulatta (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): Egypt
continues to condemn in the strongest terms the
activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
related to nuclear weapons and the launch of ballistic
missiles, which are a violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and undermine regional and
international peace and security.
Egypt voted in favour of resolution 2397 (2017)
today, based on its commitment to maintaining the
credibility of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and of the Security Council.
Egypt is committed to seeing that all bodies of the
United Nations, international organizations and the
international community act decisively in the face of
any threat to the non-proliferation system, without
selectivity or double standards.
It is well known to everyone that Egypt attaches
great importance to the respect by all parties of binding
international consensus that the NPT is a key pillar of
the international security system. It is important for the
Security Council to address any threat to this system
and any action that may undermine the achievement
of its universality, in a consistent manner, without
discrimination or distinction. Egypt is aware of the
nature of the repeated threats by North Korea, its
violations of Security Council resolutions and the threat
it poses to regional stability in North-East Asia and
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

S/PV. 8151

regional security in neighbouring countries, including
Japan and South Korea, with which Egypt maintains
friendly relations.

stated aim of the resolution is to strip that country of
financial resources intended for its illegal nuclear
weapons programme.

In the light of all this, Egypt calls on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea once again to cease all
actions and activities that violate Security Council
resolutions and any provocation that could heighten
tensions and instability, which undermine regional
and international peace and security. We call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to rejoin the
NPT as a non-nuclear State and to adopt a comprehensive
safeguards agreement with the International Atomic
Energy Agency.

In the wake of the intercontinental ballistic missile
test in November, the international community as a
whole, and the Security Council in particular, had an
obligation to respond by applying increased pressure
on the Pyongyang authorities. Today’s unanimous vote
therefore sends a strong message from the Security
Council and is a logical reaction to the methodical
pursuit by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of its military nuclear programme.

Egypt stresses once again that the Security Council
and all bodies of the United Nations must assume their
responsibilities in this respect by striving to reach
a comprehensive settlement of the very concerning
conditions and situation in the Korean peninsula. Such
a settlement should include total nuclear disarmament
and achieving sustainable peace between the two
Koreas, pursuant to the provisions of the relevant
Security Council resolutions, including the revival of
negotiations and the establishment of the necessary
conditions in which to hold them so that we can break
the vicious cycle of North Korea’s repeated violations
of Security Council resolutions, which compel the
Council to impose further sanctions and leave no
clear political horizon for resolving the problem. The
current situation leaves no room for anything other
than further deterioration into what could become an
international crisis.
In this respect, Egypt believes that continued
attempts to promote dialogue and diplomacy with North
Korea are important in order to maintain prospects for
relaunching dialogue and negotiations in order to reach
a settlement of this alarming crisis, which undermines
the security of all. The international community should
not lose hope of finding a peaceful settlement based
on the conditions and provisions of Security Council
resolutions on nuclear disarmament and achieving
sustainable peace on the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
Senegalese delegation welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), which reinforces
the range of existing sanctions, specifically with
respect to prohibitions on coal, crude oil exports,
condensates, refined oils and natural liquefied gas
from the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The

Although it has already been mentioned, it bears
repeating that said programme is a deliberate violation
of the relevant Security Council resolutions and
gravely undermines the international non-proliferation
regimes. Furthermore, the programme constitutes a
direct threat to air security and the safety of millions of
people residing, working or travelling in those densely
populated and busy areas. The North Korean launches
and tests are not subject to either prior notification or
authorization. Because it seeks to ensure the welfare
of the people of North Korea, the Security Council
has sought to provide for humanitarian exemptions
to preclude any negative humanitarian repercussions
of the measures imposed that could afflict the North
Korean population.
The Senegalese delegation reaffirms that this range
of highly targeted measures imposed to respond to the
challenges posed by the North Korean ballistic-missile
programme, must be part and parcel of a comprehensive
political strategy to resolutely engage stakeholders in
meaningful, good-faith dialogue, with the support of the
international community. Senegal therefore solemnly
reaffirms its call to resume the Six-Party Talks so as to
arrive at the verifiable and irreversible denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula, and the peaceful coexistence
of the countries in the region.
I should like to conclude by reaffirming our call
for unity among Security Council members and the
international community in order to tackle this critical
phase of the situation on the Korean peninsula. The
Olympic Winter Games, which are set to commence in
several weeks in the Republic of Korea, could provide a
good opportunity to move in that direction.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2397
(2017), which marks a significant step in strengthening

17-460395/13

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

sanctions against the North Korean regime. We thank
the United States, China and each of the Council
members for their resolute commitment. I would like
to thank my American colleague Mrs. Nikki Haley
in particular. Her commitment contributed greatly to
this result.
Today’s vote is commensurate with the gravity
of the issue and the magnitude of the threat to peace
and security today. This year, North Korea accelerated
its irresponsible, even methodical, race towards the
development of an operational nuclear arsenal, at the cost
of sacrificing its own population. Its many destabilizing
actions have fuelled a serious rise in tensions in the
region, from intercontinental ballistic missile launches
to the nuclear test carried out in September, not to
mention the two flights over Japanese territory. Beyond
that — and let us make no mistake about it — the North
Korean threat is a threat to everyone’s safety, because
every country is now affected by the range of North
Korean missiles.
The Council was able to respond in a unified
manner to each of North Korea’s actions, effectively and
firmly. Our response to this direct threat to regional and
international peace and security, which is also a blatant
attack against the nuclear non-proliferation regime,
speaks to our credibility. That is why the day after
the ballistic missile launch on 28 November, France
advocated the strengthening of sanctions. That is what
we have done today with today’s adoption of resolution
2397 (2017), which allows us to send an unambiguous
double message about unity and determination.
The resolution complements the arsenal of measures
reinforced by resolutions 2371 (2017) and 2375 (2017),
adopted this summer. It sanctions the actors at the heart
of the operation of the regime. It also sharply increases
the constraints on the resources of the North Korean
regime, particularly North Korean workers, as well
as those placed on oil exports to North Korea. We are
strengthening the tools at our disposal to prevent the
circumvention of sanctions, particularly in the maritime
field. Finally, the Council is committed to adopting new,
appropriate and targeted measures on oil should North
Korea conduct a new nuclear test or pursue the path of
developing intercontinental ballistic capabilities.
By way of the provisions I have just recalled,
resolution 2397 (2017) targets the regime, its actors and
its resources in order to change North Korean strategy
and policy. The resolution is therefore part of the
6/13

22/12/2017

maximum pressure that we wish to exert on the regime
with a view to returning it to the negotiating table.
Indeed, the necessary firmness that we are expressing
today serves the only political strategy that can put an
end to the North Korean crisis.
France is of course in favour of resumed dialogue,
and the sooner the better. However, we are still
impatiently awaiting concrete signs from the North
Korean regime of its own willingness to engage in such
dialogue. France is of the view that applying maximum
pressure on the North Korean regime is our best means
of enabling the dialogue that itself is the condition for
a political settlement. To put it simply and clearly, the
firm resolve that we have shown unanimously today is
our best antidote to the risks of war and our best chance
for paving the way for dialogue and, therefore, for the
political solution we are seeking.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) in response to the
ballistic missile launch by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea on 28 November, in violation of
relevant Security Council resolutions.
As has been repeatedly stated here in the Council,
only a peaceful and diplomatic path exists to resolving
the crisis in the Korean peninsula because we all know
that the other alternative is unthinkable. Therefore, the
Security Council has no other option but to put greater
pressure on the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
acting under Article 41 of the Charter of the United
Nations, to suspend all its nuclear and ballistic missile
activities and return to the negotiating table.
No doubt, the various additional new restrictive
measures introduced by resolution 2397 (2017) will
further tighten the sanctions regime on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which is already one of
the toughest regimes ever imposed by the Council. We
appreciate the consensus achieved on the resolution, and
we commend the United States and China on their efforts
in that regard. We look forward to the resumption of the
Six-Party Talks, which are prominently highlighted in
the resolution we have just adopted.
As we have stated time and again, the unity of
the Council in handling the issue of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is absolutely indispensable.
Here too, there is no better option because it is a
basis for avoiding the unthinkable. That is why the
call for unity in the Council is not vacuous. We are
pleased that this has again been demonstrated today,
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

with the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017), thereby
sending an unmistakable message to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea to immediately abandon
all nuclear weapons and existing nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. The
full and effective implementation of that and previous
resolutions adopted by the Council on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea remains very critical to
achieving the objective of curbing the advancement of
the nuclear and ballistic missile-related programmes of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, while, at
the same time, making it clear to the country that it has
no other option but to return to the negotiating table.
We therefore take this opportunity to reaffirm
Ethiopia’s commitment to continue fulfilling its
obligations in that regard. It is our hope that the unity
within the Council will continue to be maintained.
There is no other sane option.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2397 (2017). I would
like to congratulate Ambassador Nikki Haley and the
delegation of the United States on their outstanding
action and determination on this issue. We share with
them, together with the other members of the Security
Council, in particular China and Japan, the sense of
urgency regarding the importance of addressing the
dangerous illegal activities of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, by applying further economic and
diplomatic pressure.
Today’s resolution, which is the fourth adopted this
year, introduces further meaningful restrictive measures
with regard to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, following the country’s intercontinental
ballistic missile launch on 28 November. North Korea’s
continued defiant and reckless actions constitute the
gravest threat to the international community. We
voted in favour of resolution 2397 (2017) because such
provocative acts deserve a strong and unified response
in defending our collective security and the integrity of
the non-proliferation regime, as well as the authority
of the Council. Once again, we strongly condemn the
illegal activities of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea and call on the regime to put an immediate end to
the development of its missile and nuclear programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner,
thereby making credible progress on its obligations
to denuclearize.

S/PV. 8151

The measures adopted today provide a complex
response commensurate with the threat we face. By
applying further restrictions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea exports and foreign workers, we
limit the ability of the regime to earn foreign currency
and thus financing its illegal weapons and missiles
programmes. Likewise, the timing of restrictions, along
with the announcement of information-sharing among
the States Members of the United Nations, reduces the
scope for illegal attempts by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to circumvent sanctions. We
welcome the fact that the text renews our commitment
to avoiding unintended humanitarian consequences
for the local population. It is of paramount importance
that such effects be avoided. We should never lose
sight of the fact that the citizens of North Korea are
first and foremost the victims of the regime’s selfisolation policies.
We reaffirm our concerns about the humanitarian
situation in the country and our support for the assistance
provided by United Nations agencies in order to alleviate
the suffering of the North Korean people. Resolution
2397 (2017) expresses our commitment to a peaceful,
diplomatic and political solution, and welcomes efforts
to achieve true dialogue. Italy is committed to that
goal, while recognizing that the way to open a window
of opportunity towards meaningful negotiations is to
apply maximum economic and diplomatic pressure, in
order to bring about veritable change in the regime’s
current policy.
Lastly, as the outgoing Chair of the Committee
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), we again call
upon all States Members of the United Nations
to implement all relevant Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea sanctions resolutions in a full and
comprehensive manner.
Mr. Bermúdez Álvarez (Uruguay) (spoke in
Spanish): For the sixth time in its two years as a
member of the Security Council, Uruguay has voted in
favour of a resolution with regard to the provocative
acts of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
That underscores the gravity of the threat posed to
international peace and security.
As my delegation has already stated, the sanctions
imposed on North Korea should be the means to lead
the Government of the country to the negotiating table.
Sanctions must be implemented in a complete and
effective manner by all States Members of the United

17-460397/13

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Nations, and should have no adverse effects on the
people of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
Uruguay’s support of resolution 2397 (2017) is based
on the belief that the implementation of the sanctions
imposed on North Korea will cause no direct harm to
the civilian population, whose humanitarian situation
is already dire and requires the immediate attention
of the international community. We reiterate that we
must work to engage in sustainable dialogue that leads
to concrete results as soon as possible. There is no
military solution to the situation in North Korea.
Despite all the calls made by the international
community to start dialogue, it is not possible at present
to open negotiations, which are key to resolving the
complex situation. The solution for the denuclearization
of the Korean peninsula must be peaceful. It must be
reached through diplomatic negotiations that lead to a
political commitment among the parties, which must
be emphasized, without delay, before it is too late and
we end up regretting the consequences of a large-scale
disaster. The needs and legitimate concerns of all
parties concerned in the matter must therefore be met.
Ms. Schoulgin Nyoni (Sweden): The actions of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea are violations of
international law. Such actions are also contrary to the
existing global norm against nuclear testing, stipulated
in the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and
global non-proliferation norms.
The Security Council has responded to the actions
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea in
numerous resolutions. Resolution 2375 (2017), adopted
in September, toughened the targeted sanctions against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, which
constitute the most rigorous sanctions regime ever
imposed on the country. Today, in response to the North
Korean launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile
on 28 November, which Sweden strongly condemns,
the Council has strengthened those measures further.
Resolution 2397 (2017), which we have just adopted,
reaffirms that the world does not accept the nuclear
weapons and ballistic missile programmes of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, and that the
Council continues to stand united in its resolve to
address the urgent threat to international peace and
security.
In parallel to effectively implementing the
sanctions regime, including through full cooperation
with the Panel of Experts on the Democratic People’s
8/13

22/12/2017

Republic of Korea, further work to reduce tensions
and to advance the prospects for a comprehensive
settlement needs to be undertaken. Sanctions alone
will not resolve the situation. Today, the Council has
reiterated its commitment to a peaceful, diplomatic and
political resolution. Creative efforts that pave the way
for such a solution must be urgently pursued. Sweden is
contributing to those efforts.
We welcome Under-Secretary-General Feltman’s
recent visit to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, as well as the Secretary-General’s readiness to
provide his good offices to that end. Furthermore, it
is of the utmost importance that none of the measures
adopted in today’s resolution or in previous resolutions
should prevent or impede the ongoing efforts of the
United Nations and other humanitarian actors to reach
those in need.
The Council has the responsibility to uphold
international peace and security. For that reason, the
situation on the Korean peninsula has rightly occupied
our time for much of this year. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has carried out numerous
provocations, and the Council has been unified in its
response by imposing unprecedented sanctions.
As we have reiterated at every meeting, there is
no military solution to the situation on the Korean
peninsula. As we approach the end of the year, we have
seen, for example with Mr. Feltman’s visit, the faint
glimmer of an opportunity for diplomacy and dialogue.
In 2018, we must grasp it. In the words of the SecretaryGeneral, we need to spread and to deepen the spirit of
hope and possibility. We need to ensure that, in the
search for a comprehensive settlement, every avenue
for peace is explored and exhausted. For the sake of
the North Korean people and for the world, we cannot
afford to fail.
Mr. Yelchenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes
the unanimous adoption of resolution 2397 (2017),
which designates additional individuals and entities
for inclusion on the relevant control lists, as well as
strengthening prohibitions and restrictions, in response
to the continuous provocations by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Indeed, to date,
Pyongyang’s policy continues to be very persistent and
clear in ignoring international law and the numerous
calls to halt its illegal activity. Besides nuclear tests
and missile launches, there is also an intricate system
of sanctions evasion in place.
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Today’s resolution not only strengthens the already
existing sanctions regime by imposing additional
sectoral and targeted measures. It also clearly proves
that the Council remains united and decisive in its
response to the growing nuclear threat on the Korean
peninsula. On the other hand, the resolution confirms
the Council’s openness to dialogue on a peaceful
and diplomatic solution to the situation in the region
and its intention to avoid affecting the North Korean
population. We believe that our message today must be
heard by the North Korean leadership.
I also wish to reiterate the key importance of the
full and comprehensive implementation of all Security
Council resolutions related to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea by all Member States. Joint actions
are needed to change Pyongyang’s reckless behaviour.
A united and uncompromising stance at the global level
is crucial to prevent the risk of further provocations
and to preserve the nuclear non-proliferation regime as
a whole.
Finally, let me underline that Ukraine voted in
favour of the resolution in the belief that any responsible
member of the international community must spare no
effort in restoring respect for international law and in
finding solutions to counter the greatest threat to global
peace and security.
Mr. Inchauste Jordán (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia voted in favour of
resolution 2397 (2017) because of its pacifist beliefs.
We do not believe in war as a means of solving the
global problems facing the international community.
We therefore call for any military solution to be ruled
out. Bolivia also voted in favour of the resolution
because we believe that the unity and consensus of
the Security Council on this issue is fundamental to a
peaceful solution and because we welcome the fact that
the resolution includes the support of and request for
the resumption of the six-party talks.
However, we regret that there was not more time
to discuss the text. We therefore express our concern
about the possible repercussions and humanitarian
consequences that the sanctions may have on the
civilian population. We are also concerned about the
repercussions for workers outside the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, who are expected to be
deported, as well as the possible non-observance of the
human rights of migrant workers.

S/PV. 8151

Bolivia once again condemns the implementation
of unilateral sanctions, since they constitute a flagrant
violation of international law by being illegal measures
that extend the jurisdiction and national legislation of
one State over another, violating the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of States. We also believe that
sanctions should not be an end in themselves. In the
current situation, they should serve to bring the parties
involved to the negotiating table.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for the
Russian-Chinese proposal and its respective road map,
which includes the Chinese initiative of simultaneous
suspensions. which we believe to be currently the only
concrete proposal to resolve the conflict and that will
allow for a simultaneous cessation of both the launching
of ballistic missiles and nuclear tests and the execution
of unilateral or joint military exercises on the Korean
peninsula. We therefore call on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to abandon its nuclear programme
and ballistic missiles in a complete, verifiable and
irreversible way and to comply with the provisions of
the Security Council resolutions.
To conclude, it is important to emphasize that
we are at a stage where we must initiate a dialogue
without conditions in order to build mutual trust. That
is essential to reduce the risk of miscalculations or
misunderstandings and to reduce tensions in the region.
We therefore underscore the need to keep open the
possible channels of communication established since
Under-Secretary General Jeffrey Feltman’s visit to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. In addition,
the good offices of the Secretary-General may be key to
facilitating a dialogue that leads to a peaceful solution
of the conflict.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese):
Resolution 2397 (2017), adopted by the Security
Council today, reflects the unanimous position of the
international community in opposing the development
of nuclear and ballistic missile capabilities by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and in
maintaining the international nuclear non-proliferation
regime. China urges the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to seriously heed the demands of
the international community, abide by and implement
the Security Council resolutions and refrain from
conducting any further nuclear and missile tests.
At the same time, the resolution underscores that
the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula need to be

17-460399/13

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

22/12/2017

resolved peacefully by political and diplomatic means.
It also stipulates that the measures it contains are
not intended to have an adverse impact on economic
activities and cooperation, food aid or humanitarian
assistance. China hopes that all the parties will
implement the resolution fully and comprehensively.

direction leading towards a peaceful settlement and
resume dialogue and negotiations at an early date. Any
unilateral sanctions imposed outside the purview of the
Security Council would only undermine the Council’s
unity and jeopardize the legitimate rights and interests
of other countries, and should therefore be rejected.

At present, the situation on the Korean peninsula
is one of constant tension. While the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has continued to conduct
nuclear tests and missile launches, in defiance of the
universal opposition by the international community,
the other parties concerned have continued to expand
military exercises and scale up their shows of force.
The escalation of tension on the Korean peninsula,
which has reached the point of risking spiralling out of
control, is not in the interests of any party.

China has always advocated for denuclearization
of the peninsula, its peace and stability, and finding
a solution through dialogue and consultations. We are
opposed to turmoil and war on the peninsula. China has
made enormous efforts to reach settlements through
dialogue and negotiations, and has paid a higher price
than all other parties in implementing the relevant
Security Council resolutions.

The nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula has lasted
for more than two decades. Reviewing the evolution of
the nuclear issue of the Korean peninsula, We can see
that dialogue and negotiations have led to progress in
the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and the
improvement of relations among the parties concerned,
while tough posturing and confrontation have impeded
denuclearization and resulted in deteriorating relations
among the parties concerned. It is imperative to learn
from past good practices and mistakes.
The nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula should
be solved peacefully and comprehensively. Security is at
the heart of the nuclear issue on the peninsula while the
fundamental solution rests on addressing the security
concerns of all parties, including the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. There is no military
option for settling the nuclear issue on the peninsula.
Resorting to force will only lead to disaster. Sanctions
are only a means to an end. One should not expect to
settle the issue through unilateral sanctions or pressure.
History has proven that dialogue and negotiations are
the fundamental way in which to de-escalate tension
and promote denuclearization on the peninsula.
To that end, it is imperative to end immediately all
rhetoric and action that are detrimental to achieving
denuclearization, peace and stability on the peninsula.
In order to de-escalate the situation as soon as possible,
it is important to strictly follow the letter and spirit of
the relevant Security Council resolutions to arrive at an
acceptable settlement. All parties should shoulder their
respective responsibilities and effectively assume their
obligations. It is imperative to follow the overarching
10/13

In view of the situation on the peninsula, China
has proposed the suspension-for-suspension initiative,
which would entail the suspension by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of its nuclear and missile
activities along with the suspension by the United States
and Republic of Korea of large-scale military exercises.
We have also proposed the dual-track approach of
promoting parallel progress in denuclearization
efforts and the establishment of a peace mechanism
on the peninsula. Russia has also put forward the
idea of a phased approach for that purpose. Based on
those proposals, China and Russia have issued a joint
statement setting out a road map for resolving the
issue. The joint proposal of China and Russia is aimed
at peacefully settling the issue and the maintenance of
peace and stability on the peninsula. Accordingly, we
hope that the proposal will elicit responses and support
from the concerned parties.
If the situation on the peninsula is allowed to remain
stuck in the current vicious cycle, the road will continue
to narrow. A peaceful settlement will be reached only
when the parties meet each other halfway, in dialogue
and consultations. The parties concerned should fulfil
their historical responsibilities and relaunch dialogue
and negotiations as soon as possible so as to settle the
issue appropriately and at an early date. China is ready
to join with the international community, persuade
the parties to return to the proper track of peaceful
settlement, and play a positive and constructive role in
achieving denuclearization, lasting peace and stability
on the peninsula.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation understands the
critical importance of halting Pyongyang’s nuclear and
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

missile programmes, which are unacceptable to us. The
launch of ballistic missiles without warning from North
Korean territory poses tremendous risks to maritime
and air transit in the region and a serious threat to the
lives of ordinary civilians. Such activity must stop
immediately. Notwithstanding, Russia calls on that all
parties remain open to genuine political dialogue.
We once again reject the methodology underlying
the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea introduced by
the United States. Many hours are spent in the United
Nations and the Security Council in discussions, and
hundreds of documents are drafted in consideration of
the importance of crafting realistic and implementable
decisions that reflect the political concerns and mutual
responsibilities of the parties. When we addressed the
specific country situation in this case, such standards
were overlooked. Consequently, the agreement reached
comprises with artificial timetables while the wording
was amended only minutes before the voting.
The adoption of resolution 2397 (2017) was made
possible solely thanks to the fact that our concerns
were reflected and taken into consideration, although
unfortunately this occurred only at the very last minute
and at enormous effort. We stress that sanctions-based
measures do not apply to the activities of diplomatic
missions in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea, the projects they undertake with the regime,
restrictions on Korean civilian aircraft, or the provision
of the relevant spare parts. Turning to the last-minute
insertion in paragraph 8 concerning the 24-month
period for the repatriation of North Korean workers,
that is the minimum acceptable time frame necessary
to address the logistical aspects of the issue.
Unfortunately, our call on stakeholders to avoid
further escalation of tensions and to revise the policy
of mutual intimidation was not heeded. We proposed
reasonable and realistic alternatives to the ultimatumbased logic of sanctions. That has implications for the
implementation not only of the sanctions provisions
of resolution 2397 (2017), but also of those calling for
a peaceful, diplomatic and political settlement to the
situation through dialogue and talks, as well as those
provisions of all Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, without
exception. Such disregard constitutes a breach of the
consensus-based agreements reached on the Council.
Unity is of course important, but unity is important

S/PV. 8151

with regard not only to favouring sanctions, but also
with to supporting a political settlement.
We stress once again that the normalization of the
situation on the Korean peninsula requires an approach
that demands both the cessation of nuclear missile tests
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and an
end to the build-up of military infrastructure and the
downsizing of manoeuvres. We must urgently create an
atmosphere of trust among States in the region. It is
important that both parties abandon obsolete formulas
for addressing the nuclear issue on the Korean peninsula
that have proven to be ineffective, and to resolve the
situation through creative approaches. Isolation and
pressure must be supplanted by dialogue and talks.
We call on the stakeholders once again to promptly
undertake practical measures aimed at de-escalating
tensions. Russia stands ready to promote such efforts
and is already doing so. We are in a position to closely
engage with all partners so as to expeditiously address
the host of issues on the Korean peninsula through the
only possible avenues, namely, mutually respectful
dialogue in a political and diplomatic format. That is
the specific goal of the Russian-Chinese road map for
resolving the issue, which remains a practical proposal
at our disposal.
We note the approach of the Secretary-General for
arriving at a political settlement to the problems on
the Korean peninsula. We advocate the development
of dialogue between the United Nations and the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. Momentum
to that end was achieved by the political mission led
by Under-Secretary-General Feltman to Pyongyang.
It must be based upon a robust humanitarian track to
assist the 25 million people who are truly in need of
assistance. Urgent measures must be taken to engage in
political dialogue so as to avoid catastrophic scenarios
that could trigger horrific repercussions. The military
option is not viable. We are all duty-bound to provide
opportunities for diplomacy.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Japan.
Japan welcomes the unanimous adoption of
resolution 2397 (2017). We would like to express our
great appreciation to the leadership of the United
States, which made this possible. We also thank all
other members of the Council for their support.

17-4603911/13

S/PV.8151

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

At the ministerial meeting held on 15 December,
over which Foreign Minister Kono presided (see
S/PV.8137), the Security Council made it clear to the
world that the international community would never
accept a nuclear-armed North Korea. Today, by adopting
resolution 2397 (2017), the Security Council sends a
clear signal to North Korea that the continuation of its
nuclear and missile development can never be tolerated,
including the third ballistic missile launch — the
longest to date, with a range of an intercontinental
ballistic missile — on 29 November.
Resolution 2397 (2017) will further strengthen the
sanctions measures against North Korea, which were
already at an unprecedented level. The new impactful
measures include the reduction of the refined petroleum
cap by 89 per cent since January this year, commitment
to future oil reductions in case of North Korea’s further
provocations, repatriation of all North Korean workers
within 24 months and additional restrictions of export
and import with North Korea.
Today’s resolution exemplifies the serious,
collective will of the international community that we
will continue to put maximum pressure on North Korea
until it shows seriousness and takes concrete actions
toward the goal of denuclearization. In this regard,
operative paragraph 28 of the resolution clearly states
that the Council
“shall keep the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s actions under continuous review and is
prepared to strengthen, modify, suspend or lift the
measures as may be needed in light of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s compliance”.
Operative paragraph 28 also clearly states that
“if the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
conducts a further nuclear test or a launch of
a ballistic missile system capable of reaching
intercontinental ranges or contributing to the
development of a ballistic missile system capable
of such ranges, then the Security Council will take
action to restrict further the export to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of petroleum”.
Let me reiterate again that North Korea can make a
choice towards a peaceful, diplomatic solution. If North
Korea wants peace and security, it needs to demonstrate
its sincere commitment and concrete measures for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula, comply fully
with the relevant Security Council resolutions and Joint
12/13

22/12/2017

Statement of the six-Party Talks, and come back to the
table for meaningful dialogue.
In order to make North Korea realize the
determination of the international community to
achieve the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,
all members of the United Nations must renew their
commitment to fully implementing the existing Security
Council resolutions, including resolutions 2371 (2017)
and 2375 92017), and the resolution just adopted today.
Japan looks forward to continuing to work closely with
relevant partners and all other Member States to reach
a comprehensive solution to the problems related to
North Korea.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Republic of Korea.
Mr. Chull (Republic of Korea): Let me begin
by thanking you, Sir, for convening today’s meeting
to follow up on our discussion of three weeks ago in
response to North Korea’s launch of a ballistic missile
on 29 November. I also very much appreciate your
invitation to this important meeting.
Exactly one week ago in this very Chamber
(see S/PV.8137), delegations and representatives
from 16 countries, including my own, reiterated our
condemnation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s provocative behaviour as one of the most
serious threats to international peace and security
and a flagrant violation of relevant Security Council
resolutions. We also reaffirmed our unwavering
commitment to the denuclearization of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The stark contrast that
we witnessed last Friday between the representative
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and the
Council revealed once again how isolated the regime
is and how unconvincing its claims have been. We as
the international community must continue to stand
united and demonstrate our resolute determination
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that a
nuclear North Korea will never be recognized and, that
if it continues down this path, there will continue to
be consequences.
In this context, the Republic of Korea welcomes and
fully supports the adoption of resolution 2397 (2017),
which introduces robust measures that build on and
tighten the existing sanctions against the Democratic
17-46039

22/12/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

People’s Republic of Korea. I would like to thank each
and every member of the Council, including the United
States, for their hard work to unanimously adopt the
resolution. I should like to take this opportunity to
emphasize loud and clear the importance of seamless
and complete implementation. The Republic of Korea
remains committed to supporting any other Member
State in its efforts to fully and effectively implement
all relevant resolutions, including the resolution
adopted today.
I wish to draw the Council’s attention to a view
widely shared by the participants at last week’s Security
Council ministerial meeting. Sanctions are not an end
in themselves but an effective means to bring North
Korea back on track towards a peaceful, diplomatic
and political solution. However narrow and bumpy it
may seem, the road towards peaceful denuclearization
through dialogue is still open and available. The
Government of the Republic of Korea urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to participate
in the PyeongChang Winter Olympic Games and to
stop its destabilizing provocations in the lead up to the
Olympics of peace.
I sincerely hope that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will take this message seriously and
seize the opportunity to create a conducive atmosphere
for sincere dialogue towards denuclearization. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea should abandon
the delusional idea of pursuing security through the
development of illegal nuclear weapons and ballistic

S/PV. 8151

missiles. Instead, it should engage in constructive
dialogue and redirect its efforts to deliver prosperity
and a better livelihood to its people. The choice is up to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
Before adjourning the meeting, as this is the
last scheduled meeting of the Council for the month
of December, I would like to express the sincere
appreciation of the delegation of Japan to the members of
the Council, especially the Permanent Representatives
and their respective staff, and to the Secretariat for all
the support they have given us.
It has been a busy month indeed, and one in
which we rallied to consensus on several important
issues within our purview. We could not have done it
alone and without the hard work, support and positive
contributions of every delegation and the representatives
of the Secretariat, as well as of all relevant conference
service officers, interpreters and security staff.
As we end our presidency, I know that I speak
on behalf of the Council in wishing the delegation of
Kazakhstan good luck in the month of January. I would
like, on behalf of the Council, to express the sincere
appreciation to the six outgoing members, namely,
Egypt, Italy, Japan, Senegal, Ukraine and Uruguay.
I commend their hard work and contributions during
their terms on the Security Council.
The meeting rose at 2.30 p.m.

17-4603913/13
