S/PV.9152

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9152nd meeting

Thursday, 13 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Kamboj
Ms. Moran
Mr. Kiboino
Mr. Ochoa Martínez
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kirpichenko
Mr. Abushahab
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-62867 (E)
*2262867*

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Saudi Arabia
and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen; and Ms. Joyce Msuya, Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Humanitarian Affairs and Deputy
Emergency Relief Coordinator.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I give the floor to Mr. Grundberg.
Mr. Grundberg: Six and a half months ago, on
2 April, the nationwide truce in Yemen came into effect.
Over the course of the past six and a half months, the
truce has started to alleviate the suffering of Yemeni
men and women and, after almost eight years of
conflict, offered a truly historic opportunity to build
trust and to work towards a peaceful settlement of the
conflict. On 2 October, the day the second extension of
the truce ended, the parties regrettably did not reach an
agreement on the extension and expansion of the truce.
That has caused new uncertainty for the country and a
heightened risk of war. In this briefing I will provide an
overview of what was put before the parties and outline
the way forward.
Efforts to not only extend but also to expand and
build on the elements of the truce have been ongoing
since early July. On 18 September, I shared a proposal
for a six-month extension and the expansion of the truce
elements with the parties. And in the weeks leading up
to 2 October, I intensified my discussions with them,
conducting several rounds of negotiations in Aden,
Sana’a, Riyadh and Muscat. I subsequently shared a
revised proposal with them on 1 October.
My proposal addressed the key competing demands
of both sides in a balanced manner. Allow me to outline
the elements of the proposal and what the Yemeni
2/19

13/10/2022

people — men, women and children — stand to lose:
first, the continued halt of all offensive operations and
an enhanced Military Coordination Committee as a
robust de-escalation communication and coordination
channel; secondly, a transparent and effective
disbursement mechanism for the regular payment of
civil servant salaries and pensions; thirdly, the phased
opening of roads in Taiz and other governorates;
fourthly, an increase in the number of flights and
destinations to and from Sana’a International Airport;
fifthly, the regular and unhindered flow of fuel to the
ports of Al-Hudaydah; and sixthly, a commitment to
urgently release detainees.
In addition, for long-term progress towards a
settlement of the conflict, the proposal also includes
the establishment of structures for the initiation of
negotiations over economic issues, a durable ceasefire
and, most important, the resumption of a Yemeniled, inclusive political process to work towards a
comprehensive resolution of the conflict.
In the light of that, it is deeply regrettable that,
on 2 October, an agreement was not reached on the
extension and expansion of the truce. I appreciate the
position of the Government of Yemen on engaging
positively with my proposal, and I regret that Ansar
Allah came up with additional demands that could not
be met. As I continue to work with both sides to find
solutions, I urge them to demonstrate the leadership
and flexibility required to reach an extended and
expanded agreement.
I welcome that the parties have shown restraint
since the expiration of the truce on 2 October, as we
have fortunately not witnessed any major military
escalation, only sporadic exchanges of artillery and
small arms fire in front-line areas in Taiz, Ma’rib,
Al-Hudaydah and Dhale. I urge the parties to continue
to exercise maximum restraint.
Since 2 October, flights between Sana’a
International Airport and Amman have continued
to operate, and I want to once more express my deep
appreciation to the Kingdom of Jordan for its unwavering
support and facilitation. Similarly, fuel ships have
continued to regularly enter the ports of Al-Hudaydah.
I therefore I call on the parties to uphold and safeguard
the arrangements that operated under the truce, which
have brought vital benefits to the Yemeni people.
The achievement and benefits of the truce should
not be underestimated. The truce came into effect
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

after almost eight years of conflict and brought about
the longest period of calm yet. In six months, its
benefits for the people of Yemen included: no major
military operations and a 60 per cent decrease in
casualties; the reopening of the Sana’a airport, with
56 commercial roundtrip flights to date, transporting
almost 27,000 passengers who sought medical attention
or educational or business opportunities abroad; over
1.4 million metric tons of fuel product delivered to
Al-Hudaydah ports, more than three times the amount
of fuel products entering in 2021; and face-to-face
meetings of the parties under United Nations auspices
on military de-escalation and road openings in Taiz and
other governorates.
It is important to remember that the truce was
never intended as an end in itself, but as a building
block to enhance trust between the parties and establish
a conducive environment to work towards a political
solution to the conflict.
The parties now have a choice before them. They can
choose to preserve and build on the truce and take the
path towards peace, as the Yemeni people expect them
to do. Otherwise, a return to war would mean renewed
and increased suffering for the civilian population, as
my colleague from the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs, Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya, will explain. Women, who represent over
half of the Yemeni population, would — as always — be
disproportionately affected and bear the brunt of the
conflict. The choice to go back to war would also have
destabilizing effects for the whole region. And should
the cycles of violence and escalation start, it could be
long before a window for peace will open again. Yemen
urgently needs to avoid that scenario.
Allow me now to turn to the way forward. In
the 11 days since the expiration of the truce, I have
continued my relentless efforts to engage the parties,
as well as regional and international partners, on
options for the renewal of the truce. I have just returned
from visits to Abu Dhabi and Muscat, where I held
important discussions to explore ways forward, in close
coordination with Yemen’s neighbours. I personally
believe that there is still a possibility for the parties to
come to an agreement.
With the stakes this high, it is critical that we do not
lose this opportunity. The parties need to demonstrate
the leadership, compromise and flexibility required
to urgently reach an agreement on the renewal and

S/PV.9152

expansion of the truce. The members of the Council
and the international community are following the
situation in Yemen with concern. Yet, ultimately, the
parties’ duty is to the men and women of Yemen — to
find solutions that are in the best interest of the Yemeni
population and to pursue every avenue for peace.
In that context, I would also like to reiterate my
appreciation for the continued steadfast support of the
Council, as well as the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and
the Sultanate of Oman. The Council’s united position
on the renewal and expansion of the truce has made
it clear that the international community expects the
parties to reach an agreement with a sense of urgency.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Msuya.
Ms. Msuya: I spent the past six days in Yemen,
where I visited Aden, Ma’rib, Sana’a and Al-Hudaydah.
During that time, I met dozens of people who told me
about their lives — women who fear for their safety
both inside and outside of their homes and displaced
people whose biggest wish, to return home, remains
unfulfilled year after year. Those same people also
told me about their hopes for the future — not just for
themselves, but for their communities and their country.
I am honoured and privileged to relay those voices to
the Security Council today.
As Mr. Grundberg mentioned just now, we have not
seen any significant intensification of clashes since the
expiry of the truce on 2 October. We know the havoc
that this conflict has wreaked on civilians in Yemen.
I saw it clearly during this trip. For their sake, I urge
the parties to avoid any escalation in violence and to
engage with the Special Envoy in order to agree on an
extended and expanded truce.
Although the conflict has not resurged, civilians
still face terrible dangers. Landmines and other
explosive hazards have continued to be the main cause
of civilian casualties. In September, 70 civilians were
reportedly killed or injured by landmines, improvised
explosive devices and unexploded ordnance. The
impact of those hazards go far beyond killing and
maiming. They convert simple everyday activities, like
farming, fishing or walking to school, into possible
life-or-death scenarios.
Al-Hudaydah — where I am briefing from
today — is the governorate most impacted by landmines

22-628673/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

13/10/2022

and explosive hazards. Just this morning, I met Yousef,
a 12-year-old boy who lost both of his legs after
stepping on a landmine a few weeks ago. He had to
travel two long hours to get to the hospital and now, like
many other survivors, will need lifelong support and
assistance. We need urgent action to reduce this threat,
including increased support for demining projects and
facilitated equipment importation.

I visited a therapeutic feeding centre in Al-Thawra
hospital, which has admitted more than 700 children
suffering from severe acute malnutrition so far this year.
In Ma’rib, I visited a school that provides education to
almost 600 displaced children on a daily basis. Those
are just two examples of the humanitarian interventions
that are supporting more than 10 million people every
month in Yemen.

Civilians in Yemen face many perils beyond the
direct impact of conflict. As we have noted in the
Council before, the country’s deteriorating economy
and collapsing basic services are the main drivers of
people’s needs. Over the past six days, I witnessed the
impact of those trends first-hand. I saw markets with
food and basic goods, but at prices that most people
simply cannot afford. I visited hospitals and schools
that lack basic equipment and met doctors and teachers
who are not being paid enough, if at all.

As a result of those efforts, some gains have
been made in preventing famine. According to new
estimates that will be released tomorrow, 17 million
people will be facing acute food insecurity during the
last three months of this year. While that is still an
alarmingly high number, it is 2 million people less than
earlier projections.

In Ma’rib, I met Amal, a mother of four who
lost her income and belongings when her family was
forced to flee Sirwah district. She now relies wholly
on humanitarian assistance, but wants the opportunity
to work so that she can support her family and send
her children to school. Similar stories were echoed
in my interactions around the country, with people
consistently raising the need for livelihoods and
economic empowerment as well as functional and
accessible basic services.
Humanitarians are doing their very best to address
the most urgent needs, but we cannot do it alone and we
cannot substitute the roles of others. Substantial support
from donors, development actors and international
financial institutions is needed to turn this tide and
chart a path forward.
Preserving the continued flow of commercial
imports is also crucial. During the previous Council
meeting on Yemen (see S/PV.9110), we warned that the
United Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism
for Yemen was at risk of closing due to lack of funds.
I am pleased to report that additional contributions
have been received from the European Union, the
United States and the United Kingdom, preventing a
shutdown of the Mechanism and ensuring its continued
uninterrupted operation for the months ahead.
While long-term support is essential, millions of
people continue to depend on humanitarian assistance.
I have seen the impact of the aid operation myself
over the past few days. Earlier today in Al-Hudaydah,
4/19

Moreover, the number of people estimated to be in
famine-like conditions is projected to decrease from
161,000 people to zero. That is a major achievement,
but the global food security situation remains fragile,
and we cannot let those and other gains go to waste.
To do that, we need continued donor support.
The humanitarian appeal has received $2 billion thus
far — more than half of which has been provided by a
single donor, the United States. Despite those generous
contributions, we are still only 48 per cent funded, with
less than three months left in the year. That is why
we allocated $20 million from the Central Emergency
Response Fund just last month, which will be used
to support underfunded sectors in the humanitarian
response. That brings total CERF funding for Yemen to
$60 million for 2022.
We hope that further funding will be forthcoming.
In the meantime, we continue to focus on making the aid
operation as accountable, effective and transparent as
possible. That includes ongoing work to strengthen our
partnerships with local organizations, who are the ones
closest to the needs and priorities of the communities
we serve.
Humanitarians depend on a conducive operating
environment to do their work. Unfortunately, that is
becoming increasingly elusive in Yemen. Attempted
interference, bureaucratic impediments, security
incidents and other access constraints continue to affect
humanitarian delivery to millions of people.
Two United Nations colleagues have been detained
in Sana’a for almost a year, while five United Nations
staff are still missing after having been abducted
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

in Abyan in February. We renew our call for their
immediate release.
During my visit, I discussed those issues with the
Government of Yemen, including the continued impact
of security incidents on the humanitarian operation.
I also raised the issue of access constraints with
the Houthi de facto authority, including movement
restrictions that affect national humanitarian staff,
particularly female staff, as well as the need to ensure
adequate conditions for the principled, timely and
effective delivery of humanitarian assistance.
As we stare down an uncertain road, the aid
operation will be even more essential. Every single
effort to address access constraints means that we can
reach more people with the assistance they need. That
is also what international humanitarian law requires:
the facilitation of rapid and unimpeded passage of
humanitarian relief and the protection of humanitarian
personnel and assets.
I have seen for myself the destruction that conflict
has brought on this country, but I have also witnessed
the courage and resilience that have pulled people
through it. The truce sparked hope that peace may
finally be possible. We cannot let that be extinguished.
That is what people such as Yousef and Amal want and
so deserve, so that they can be empowered, rebuild
their lives and dream of a better future.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Msuya
for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.

S/PV.9152

has flowed into Al-Hudaydah than in the whole of last
year; and tens of thousands of Yemenis have been able
to fly out of Sana’a to visit loved ones and receive vital
medical treatment. The protection of those measures
must be a priority.
The United Kingdom calls on the parties to continue
to implement those measures and to return to the
negotiating table to expand those benefits, as outlined
in the United Nations proposal. That includes paying
nurses, teachers and other civil servants their hardearned salaries for the first time in years; the opening
of roads around the country, including in Taiz; more
commercial flights to more destinations; and further
easing the flow of fuel into Al-Hudaydah.
There is even more to lose. The refusal to extend
the truce threatens to dismantle the foundation built
for a negotiated peace settlement. A resolution to this
terrible war depends on it.
However, the door for an extended truce remains
open. It is clear from Special Envoy Grundberg’s
briefing that the United Nations is dedicated to
achieving that outcome. The United Kingdom reiterates
its full support for those efforts. I would also like to
take this opportunity to welcome Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya’s visit to the region.
It is imperative that the international community
learn lessons from the recent inter-agency humanitarian
evaluation, not just in Yemen, but globally. We praise the
continued work of humanitarians to deliver life-saving
support, but only an end to the conflict will deliver the
lasting relief the Yemeni people need.

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank
Special Envoy of the Secretary-General Grundberg and
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya for their powerful
briefings and for the tireless work they and their teams
are doing on behalf of the Yemeni people.

At this fragile moment, it is encouraging that there
has not yet been a return to war. We urge all parties to
refrain from provocations. The cost of an end to the truce
will be devastating. Now is the time for the parties to
show leadership, to act on behalf of the Yemeni people
and to continue on the path towards lasting peace.

After six months of relative peace, it is deeply
disappointing that the truce in Yemen has not been
extended. The Houthi introduction of new maximalist
demands in the final days of negotiations hindered
the ability of the Special Envoy to broker agreement.
As we have heard today, that seriously jeopardizes
the tangible benefits that the truce has brought to the
Yemeni people. In the past six months, Yemenis have
been able to live more safely and travel more freely than
at any time since the war began; four times more oil

As we just heard from the Special Envoy, we are
now at a pivotal moment where Yemen could continue
on the path to a durable peace or descend into another
destructive cycle of violence. It is our responsibility,
as the Security Council, to be clear about why Yemen

Mr. Mills (United States of America): We thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings today on the situation
in Yemen. Their dedication and efforts to help facilitate
peace are truly commendable.

22-628675/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

has been diverted from the path to peace. It is because
of the actions of the Houthis, who failed to accept the
United Nations truce proposal and whose inflammatory
threats to commercial enterprises are an offence to the
entire international community.
It is the Houthis who must take action to prevent
further suffering and enable even greater benefits for
Yemenis under an expanded truce agreement. They have
a moral responsibility not to deprive Yemenis of those
benefits, including salary payments for nurses, teachers
and tens of thousands of other civil servants who have not
been paid in years. Other benefits would include, as the
Special Envoy has just indicated, streamlined processes
for imports through Al-Hudaydah port to ensure that
the flow of fuel continues completely unimpeded; the
opening of roads around Taiz and across the country
in line with the previous truce terms; and expanded
commercial flights from Sana’a so that Yemenis can
reunite with loved ones and seek medical care.
The United States is encouraged that the parties
largely continue to abide by the terms of the truce and
that the United Nations-led negotiations are continuing.
We appreciate the commitments of the Yemeni
Government and Saudi Arabia to maintaining the
terms of the truce and exercising restraint during this
sensitive period. We implore the Houthis to do the same
and seize the opportunity to do the right thing for the
Yemeni people before it is too late. At a time of global
turmoil and division, there is a remarkable international
consensus in support of the United Nations truce. There
can be no military solution to the conflict in Yemen. An
inclusive, durable peace agreement remains the only
option for preventing more suffering for Yemenis, a
resurgence in civilian deaths and a deeper humanitarian
crisis. We therefore hope that the Houthis do not reject
the pleas of the Yemeni people for peace and ignore the
international consensus on extending the truce. Rather,
we urge them to engage in good-faith negotiations to
ensure an inclusive, durable peace in Yemen.
We also appreciate the strong commitment of
regional partners such as Oman, Saudi Arabia and
others to ending the devastating cycle of destruction in
Yemen and bringing the country new opportunities. We
call on the Houthis to cease their rhetoric threatening
commercial shipping and oil companies in the region.
Such threats are unacceptable, and even a small
incident or provocation could have an outsize impact
on Yemen’s future. We therefore urge all parties to
exercise restraint during this sensitive time.
6/19

13/10/2022

Even as we seek a way forward on the truce, the
United States commends the significant progress made
on the FSO SAFER oil tanker. Enough donations have
been made to enable the emergency United Nations
project to avert an environmental and economic
catastrophe in the Red Sea. We thank the broad coalition
of countries, organizations and individuals around the
world who have come together to support that critical
project. The United States has disbursed its $10 million
commitment, and we call on others to do the same so
that the implementation of this important project can
begin expeditiously before weather conditions make the
operation even riskier.
In conclusion, the Houthis have a historic decision
to make, one that will be remembered for generations
to come. Given the chance, will they choose peace
and prosperity for their people, or will they choose to
continue the cycle of pointless destruction, relentless
violence and economic deprivation that has plagued
Yemen for the past eight years? We stand ready with
the rest of the international community to support
Yemen’s path to an inclusive, durable peace settlement
and subsequent recovery efforts, but it is up to the
Yemeni parties — and specifically the Houthis — to
choose peace.
Mr. Abushahab (United Arab Emirates) (spoke
in Arabic): I thank Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for
their thorough briefings on the latest developments in
Yemen. We also welcome the participation of Yemen
and Saudi Arabia in this meeting.
We meet today when Yemen is at a critical juncture.
After a truce was reach that would have paved the way
for a resumption of negotiations, the Houthi militias
unfortunately rejected the Special Envoy’s proposals to
extend it. However, their rejection is neither surprising
nor unusual. It is not the first time they have tried to
obstruct international efforts aimed at reaching a
peaceful solution to the Yemeni crisis, a solution that
we have never stopped supporting or calling for. For the
past eight years, the Houthi militias have chosen a path
of war and destruction in disregard of the suffering of
Yemenis and their national interests. This time, not
only have they refused to renew the truce, but they
have also made threats indicating that they intend to
attack civilian facilities in Yemen and neighbouring
countries, as well as international maritime navigation
and global oil supplies in transit through the Red Sea
and the Bab Al-Mandab strait. According to their
claims, those waterways are becoming more dangerous
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

since they have been able to acquire new and advanced
naval weapons. These developments are clear evidence
of the terrorist Houthi militias’ intransigence and their
insistence on continuing their aggressive approach,
which is a threat to regional and international security.
Previous experience has shown the truth about
the Houthi militias and their flimsy excuses for their
refusal to abide by their commitments. If they want
peace, as they claim, they should return to the truce
and implement their obligations under previous
agreements. If they want to alleviate the suffering of
civilians, they must lift the siege imposed on Taiz city
and release the detainees. If they truly seek to pay the
salaries and pensions of public-sector employees, they
should put the revenue from Al-Hudaydah port towards
paying civil servants, in accordance with the Stockholm
Agreement. If they truly care about the future of Yemen,
they must stop systematically recruiting children and
forcing them to fight on the front lines. If they want
Yemenis to coexist as brothers, they must stop imposing
their sectarian beliefs by force and delaying progress
towards reaching a peaceful solution.
In the light of all of this, it is imperative that
the Council prevent the Houthis from waging their
brutal war and compel them to return to a path of
de-escalation. That includes continued support for
all the diplomatic efforts led by the Special Envoy to
bring the Houthis back to the implementation of the
truce, in line with the recent Security Council press
statement (SC/15054). The truce, which has brought a
sense of stability to the lives of Yemenis over the past
six months, is a fundamental step towards resuming
negotiations on a comprehensive solution to the crisis.
That is the ultimate goal we all seek to achieve. It is our
responsibility, as members of the Council, to identify
who is hindering those efforts and take a firm stand
against them, including by adopting deterrent and
punitive measures. The Council must also take serious
steps to stop systematic violations of the arms embargo
imposed by its relevant resolutions.
In that connection, we commend the positive
response of the Presidential Leadership Council to
proposals by the United Nations to renew the truce and
reaffirm our support for its efforts to bring stability to
Yemen. We also commend the leading role played by
Saudi Arabia and its efforts to end the crisis in Yemen,
as well as Oman’s mediation role.

S/PV.9152

In conclusion, the Houthis’ persistence on
resuming fighting will further exacerbate the economic
and humanitarian crisis caused by the ongoing war
and global inflation. The Houthi militias have put
additional burdens on the Yemeni people, including
by forcing them to pay illegal taxes, similar to those
imposed by other terrorist groups, such as Da’esh.
In addition, they continue harassing and bullying
humanitarian organizations, limiting their ability to
carry out their relief tasks and preventing the people
who are in dire need of assistance from accessing it.
The Yemeni people cannot bear any additional living
burdens under those difficult circumstances. All that
calls for concerted efforts to alleviate the humanitarian
situation and provide them with humanitarian and
economic assistance.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I thank Mr. Hans Grundberg
and Ms. Joyce Msuya for their updates on the latest
developments in Yemen.
India is deeply disappointed to learn that the
parties have not agreed to an extension and expansion
of the truce. We saw the tangible benefits of the truce in
the past six months: active military operations ceased;
cross-border strikes into Yemen’s neighbours halted;
the number of civilian casualties significantly dropped;
fuel imports through Al-Hudaydah port eased shortages;
and international commercial flights out of Sana’a
airport resumed. It is time for the warring parties to
take a human-centric approach to the conflict, and not
merely view it as a military or political game. We take
note that negotiations on a truce renewal, facilitated by
the Special Envoy, are under way, and we hope that a
mutually satisfactory agreement will soon be reached.
We appreciate the flexibility shown by the Yemeni
Government regarding the proposals made by the
Special Envoy. We urge Ansar Allah to reciprocate
that flexibility and engage with the Special Envoy
constructively. In the meantime, we urge all parties
to maintain the spirit of the truce and refrain from
provocations or any military action that could lead to a
resumption of active hostilities.
The conflict has already resulted in an unprecedented
humanitarian tragedy in Yemen, with an enormous loss
of lives, endangering millions of civilians with chronic
food insecurity and exacerbating the miseries of the
people, particularly women and children. As we said
before, the only sustainable solution to the conflict is a
peacefully negotiated, Yemeni-led and Yemeni-owned

22-628677/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

political settlement that prioritizes the well-being of all
Yemenis and meets their legitimate aspirations.
I conclude by reaffirming India’s strong commitment
to Yemen’s unity, independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity. The Government of India will
remain steadfast and unwavering in its continued
support to the people of Yemen in their endeavour to
seek peace, stability and economic development.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
I thank Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant
Secretary-General Msuya for their briefings. China
firmly supports their work. I also welcome the
Permanent Representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia
to today’s meeting.
The six-month truce brought a glimmer of hope
to Yemen. The people of Yemen and the international
community in general expect that the truce will be
extended and gradually expanded into a comprehensive
political process. Regrettably, despite the intensive
efforts of the Special Envoy, the Yemeni Government
and countries of the region, such as Saudi Arabia and
Oman, that goal has not yet been achieved. We do
not want to see a restart of the war in Yemen, and we
are deeply concerned about the evolving situation on
the ground.
The top priority now is to maintain the current
security situation, which is relatively stable. China calls
on the parties concerned to put the interests of the Yemeni
people first, exercise restraint, act prudently, refrain
from any unilateral actions and provocative language
that may escalate the situation and leave enough space
for the political process. Any attack on civilians and
civilian infrastructure should be condemned. At this
critical moment, all parties in Yemen should maintain
communication and avoid miscalculation.
Dialogue and consultation are the only way to
resolve the Yemeni issue. The Special Envoy is working
tirelessly and conducting good offices to help to restore
the truce. The Yemeni Presidential Leadership Council
has engaged positively with the Special Envoy, and it
has kept Sana’a airport and Al-Hudaydah port open,
fully demonstrating its sincerity and goodwill.
On 5 October, the President of the Security Council
issued a press statement (SC/15054) that called on the
Yemeni parties, in particular the Houthis, to return to
constructive engagement in the negotiations under the
auspices of the United Nations. We hope that that appeal
8/19

13/10/2022

can be implemented and that the parties concerned can
return to the negotiating table as soon as possible so as to
properly resolve their differences through dialogue and
consultation and strive to reach a new truce agreement
at an early date. China supports the Gulf Cooperation
Council’s initiative on the issue of Yemen, and we
encourage the countries with influence on the situation
in Yemen to continue to provide constructive assistance
towards de-escalating the situation, restoring the truce
and achieving a political settlement.
The humanitarian crisis in Yemen persists, and the
United Nations humanitarian operations are severely
underfunded. Dozens of operations have been curtailed
or terminated due to the lack of funding. Yemen cannot
be forgotten by the international community. We call for
the allocation of adequate funding to be guaranteed for
United Nations assistance operations in Yemen. Fundraising for the first phase of the action plan regarding
the FSO SAFER oil tanker were completed. That is
encouraging news. We hope that the relevant operation
can be implemented as soon as possible to eliminate the
potential risks posed by the oil tanker.
Mr. Kirpichenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Envoy Hans Grundberg
and the Assistant Secretary-General for Humanitarian
Affairs, Ms. Msuya, for their briefings on the political
and humanitarian developments in Yemen.
The renewed truce between the Yemeni authorities
and the Ansar Allah movement that had been in effect
since April expired on 2 October. Unfortunately, the
sides failed to agree on the further renewal of the
agreement. Nevertheless, we commend the efforts of
Mr. Grundberg and his team, who continue to try and
find some common ground between the Presidential
Leadership Council and the Houthis, even in that
hopeless situation.
At this stage, our main task is to prevent a fullfledged military escalation. A resumption of hostilities
would result in a political and humanitarian disaster.
We believe that the members of the Security Council
need to do their utmost to convince the sides in Yemen
to pursue dialogue on the most urgent issues, even in
the absence of a signed ceasefire agreement. At the
same time, we emphasize that attempts to antagonize
one of the parties to the conflict and make it solely
responsible for the current situation will not help to
bring about a settlement. We call on the Yemeni sides to
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

show maximum restraint, refrain from provocations and
continue to work constructively with the Special Envoy.
For our part, we will continue to provide all
possible assistance to the United Nations mediation.
We maintain contacts with all leading political forces
in Yemen and are actively encouraging them to make
compromises. We call on all States that can influence
the stakeholders in Yemen to take similar action. We
see no alternative to finding the necessary political
solutions through broad intra-Yemeni dialogue with the
participation of all parties to the conflict. Only direct
negotiations between the official Yemeni authorities
and the Ansar Allah movement on the issues that have
accumulated will break the deadlock.
We would note that even under current conditions,
the leading Yemeni political forces clearly recognize
the danger of sliding back into full-fledged military
confrontation, and, for the moment, they have refrained
from measures that would lead to further escalation.
Hostilities that have resumed in a number of Yemeni
provinces are sporadic in nature. In any event, at
present, the situation on the ground is better than
the circumstances that prevailed prior to the initial
announcement of the ceasefire. That gives us reason to
believe that the parties are not completely abandoning
the idea of returning to the negotiating table and resolve
mutual tensions through diplomatic channels. The
Security Council should help them in this.
We view the extension of the ceasefire in Yemen for
a longer duration and its eventual expansion, including
into security and economic areas, as the only way
out for this country. We hope that the parties will be
able to overcome their differences and that conditions
conducive to further stabilization and transition to a
full-fledged political process will be created. We wish
to recall the numerous benefits for ordinary Yemenis
of the six-month truce, including the establishment of
fuel deliveries through the Al-Hudaydah ports and the
maintenance of commercial flights from Sana’a airport.
The truce provisions have on the whole been
complied with, with an insignificant number of
violations, and this has improved the day-to-day lives
of Yemeni people. Nonetheless, the humanitarian
situation in the country remains dire. The residents of
many regions, including those in Taiz, are suffering
a shortage of the most basic necessities. We firmly
believe that despite the clear backsliding on the political
track, the provision of food and medicine to the Yemeni

S/PV.9152

people should continue on a non-discriminatory basis.
In this regard, we call for work to be continued with
international financial organizations and for the
relevant efforts of specialized United Nations bodies
to be maintained. Any limitations on the provisions of
humanitarian assistance or any obstacles for the work
of humanitarian personnel are not acceptable.
Mr. Ochoa Martínez (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish):
At the outset, I would like to thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya
for their briefings. We also welcome the delegations of
Yemen and Saudi Arabia to the Security Council.
Mexico regrets that it has not been possible to
renew and expand the truce in Yemen. The benefits of
the truce were evident during the six months it was in
effect. The truce is an opportunity to make progress
in the political transition, reactivate the economy and,
in short, build the road to sustainable peace. We call
on the parties, particularly the Houthis, to engage
constructively in the negotiations for its renewal.
As the Special Envoy mentioned, during the
months that the truce was in effect, the number of
civilian casualties and internally displaced persons
was substantially reduced. The regular inflow of fuel
and basic necessities brought relief to millions of
families. The resumption of commercial flights from
Sana’a airport allowed for family reunification and the
possibility of receiving medical care abroad.
We recognize the efforts of the Special Envoy
and his team, as well as the support offered by Saudi
Arabia and Oman, inter alia, to renew the truce. The
commitment to peace expressed by President Al-Alimi
during his participation in the high-level debate of
the General Assembly (see A/77/PV.8) is also an
encouraging sign, as is the decision to continue to
enforce some provisions of the truce, in particular for
the entry of fuel and the continuity of flights from
Sana’a.
We urge those States with influence to persuade
Ansar Allah to engage constructively in the negotiations
under the auspices of the Special Envoy. We also
reiterate the call for the immediate opening of access to
Taiz, which has been under Houthi siege for more than
seven years, as well as for an agreement on the payment
of salaries and pensions of civil servants.
We call on the parties to refrain from provocations
or threats or any actions that could lead to further

22-628679/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

violence. The solution to the conflict in Yemen cannot
be found by armed means, but through dialogue
and consultation.
On the economic front, we welcome the recent
agreement reached between the Government of
Yemen and the International Monetary Fund. The
implementation of structural reforms will contribute to
economic recovery.
The humanitarian situation remains a matter
of deep concern. The numbers of people facing
food insecurity are simply unacceptable. Without a
cessation of violence, it will be difficult to move from
humanitarian assistance to development assistance.
In this context, it is imperative to ensure unrestricted
access for humanitarian operations, including, as
mentioned by Assistant Secretary-General Msuya, for
priority mine-clearance tasks. We urge the parties to
remove all bureaucratic and administrative obstacles
and to ensure the safety of humanitarian personnel.
On the other hand, we welcome the financial support
received that will allow the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism to continue operating until
the end of the year. This mechanism has facilitated
commercial imports through the Al-Hudaydah ports
since 2016, and its work has been crucial during the
truce for the entry of fuel and essential goods.
We welcome the additional contributions that will
enable the first phase of the fuel transfer from the FSO
SAFER tanker to be carried out and in so doing hope
that an ecological and humanitarian catastrophe can be
averted. We have taken note of the recently circulated
operational plan and will be attentive to the start of
the work.
Before concluding, let me stress the importance of
building on the progress derived from the truce as the
foundation for a sustainable and lasting peace agreement,
as well as a platform for relaunching an inclusive
political process led by the Yemenis themselves.
Mr. Kiboino (Kenya): I thank Special Envoy
Hans Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General
Joyce Msuya for their briefings. I also welcome the
participation of the representatives of Yemen and Saudi
Arabia in this meeting.
Kenya shares in the disappointment over the lapse
of the truce and the failure to reach a much-needed
agreement to extend it. Despite the challenges, the
truce had brought some reprieve and tangible benefits
10/19

13/10/2022

to millions of Yemenis in the past six months. But
now any gains made are in danger of being lost if the
parties do not quickly re-engage to restore the truce and
recommit to working together to achieve lasting peace.
Kenya commends and fully supports the efforts
of the Special Envoy to mediate the conflict. But,
ultimately, it will be up to the Yemeni people themselves
to reason together and agree on a path to sustainable
peace. We urge them to set aside their individual narrow
interests, prioritize the wider interest of their country
and people, and engage in a Yemeni-led and Yemeniowned process facilitated by the Special Envoy, with a
view to negotiating a sustainable political solution.
Now is not the time to escalate tensions or
reactivate the frontlines. There is too much at stake,
and an eruption of another cycle of violence would lead
to further civilian casualties, internal displacement and
disruption of the much-needed humanitarian assistance
and access.
We are concerned over recent reports of fighting
in Taiz, Shabwa, Abyan and Ma’rib. Such situations
could easily be exploited by terrorist groups such as
Al-Qaida that wish to conduct terrorist attacks. We
call for maximum restraint by the parties concerned to
avoid any further escalations.
As we have heard from Ms. Msuya, the humanitarian
actors alone cannot address the worsening humanitarian
crisis that has been exacerbated by increasingly scarce
supplies and unaffordable food prices, insecurity and
humanitarian-access challenges. The situation calls
for an increased concerted response effort, including
through investments in development projects aimed
at enhancing the resilience of the population and
gradually eliminating the dependence on humanitarian
assistance. It also calls for the parties, the Houthis in
particular, to demonstrate a commitment to making
efforts to improve the livelihoods of the millions of
Yemenis in areas under their control.
We are deeply concerned about the presence of
landmines and explosive remnants and their destructive
impact on civilians, including women and children. We
call for increased de-mining action in all the affected
areas and support to the victims.
We welcome the positive progress made on the
FSO SAFER oil tanker and appreciate the generous
contributions made to date. We now count on all donors
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9152

to fulfil their pledges and hope that the emergency
operation can commence as soon as possible.

shared efforts: ensuring the welfare of Yemeni men,
women and children.

To conclude, Kenya reaffirms its solidarity with
the people of Yemen in their desire and quest for a
comprehensive and lasting peace and stability.

For that reason, we feel encouraged by the latest
news concerning the FSO SAFER supertanker. Funding
targets have been met, and the crucial operation to
salvage the FSO SAFER can now begin. We extend
our sincere gratitude to all contributors for their
selfless generosity.

Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): I thank
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for their informative
briefings. I welcome the delegations of Yemen and
Saudi Arabia to today’s meeting.
A lot has changed in Yemen since our meeting last
month (see S/PV.9110), and not for the better. The truce
agreement has unfortunately expired, bringing to an
end the most promising opportunity for a long-lasting
ceasefire and an enduring political solution to the eightyear-long crisis in the country.
The Yemeni people have suffered for far too long
the consequences of this devastating war, with hundreds
of thousands of lives lost and millions of people facing
extreme hunger. It is with distress that we have learned
that 19 million people in Yemen are estimated to be
suffering from acute food insecurity.
While we are relieved to learn that no major
confrontation has taken place thus far, it is with concern
that we take note of the outbreak of clashes between
Houthi troops and pro-Government forces, resulting in
multiple victims. As we have collectively affirmed in a
recent Security Council press statement (SC/15054) on
the matter, Brazil deeply regrets that outcome and calls
on both sides to resume negotiations in good faith with
the utmost urgency.
We urge the representatives of Ansar Allah, in
particular, to choose compromise over conflict and
cooperation over rivalry and thus open the way for a
new chapter for Yemen — a chapter that will hopefully
bring more tangible results in the day-to-day lives
of all Yemenis than those we have seen over the past
six months — including the reduction in civilian
casualties, the increase in fuel deliveries and the
resumption of international flights to and from Sana’a.
An extension of the truce could provide, furthermore,
the opportunity to ultimately reach a Yemeni-led
inclusive and comprehensive political settlement under
the auspices of the United Nations.
We face the risk of a no-truce scenario. We must
not give in to pessimism or a sense of “business as
usual” with regard to another cycle of violence, but
rather persevere in pursuit of the ultimate goal of our

On that positive note, we wish to reaffirm Brazil’s
steadfast commitment to implementing the mandate
bestowed on the United Nations Mission to Support the
Hudaydah Agreement, under the guidance of General
Michael Beary. We also reiterate our unwavering
support for the tireless efforts undertaken by Special
Envoy Grundberg in engaging with and fostering
dialogue among all parties to the conflict.
Brazil remains alert and ready to work alongside
the Council to help create the necessary conditions for
the future of peace, stability and development that the
Yemeni people so rightly deserve.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): Let me begin by thanking
Special Envoy Hans Grunberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Joyce Msuya for their briefings. I also welcome
the representatives of Yemen and Saudi Arabia to
today’s meeting.
As we consider the situation in Yemen, we deeply
regret the inability of the parties to reach an agreement
to extend the truce for six months as proposed by the
Special Envoy. Rather than a historic step forward
towards the consolidation and expansion of the truce,
the people of Yemen now must dread the prospect of a
return to the dark days of violence, and indiscriminate
killings and the destruction of what is left of
civilian infrastructure.
The international community must therefore do
everything within its power to get the parties to extend
the truce agreement in order to forestall any possible
return to military hostilities and their attendant
consequences for civilian lives. Particularly, regional
stakeholders with influence over the parties must
leverage their relationships with the parties to facilitate
an agreement as soon as practicable.
We applaud the efforts of the Special Envoy, the
entire United Nations team and all other stakeholders
involved in the negotiation process. We know
that change does not happen overnight, but with
perseverance and dedication, a solution to the Yemeni

22-6286711/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

crisis will be found. We therefore want to encourage the
Special Envoy not to be daunted by the current setback,
but to continue to be focused in his pursuit of peace for
the benefit of all Yemenis.
As we welcome the continuing engagement of
the Government of Yemen with the Special Envoy in
his quest to extend the truce, we note with regret the
maximalist demands of the Houthis over the past days
of the negotiations, which have unfortunately stalled
efforts to renew the truce.
It is imperative that the interests of ordinary
Yemenis, who have endured a lot of hardship and
suffering over the past seven years, reign supreme as
the parties engage in the negotiations. In that regard,
we call on the parties to be flexible and engage
constructively in the spirit of compromise as they
return to the negotiating table, even in dealing with
contentious issues, such as the reopening of roads in
Taiz and the payments of salaries of civil servants in
Houthi-held areas, among others.
Ahead of the renewal of the truce, any escalation
of hostilities by the parties will not only reverse the
marginal progress made in the past six months but will
likely also exacerbate the humanitarian situation in the
country and worsen the plight of many Yemenis. Even
though there is currently no formal truce in place, we
implore the parties to refrain from actions that may
derail the relative calm and tranquillity that the people
of Yemen have enjoyed in recent times.
On the humanitarian front, we call for continued
international support to address the widespread food
insecurity in Yemen, which puts part of the country’s
population at high risk for famine. We acknowledge
the recent support from the international community,
including some members of the Security Council, but as
Assistant Secretary-General Msuya pointed out in her
briefing, more still needs to be done to help to bridge
the humanitarian funding gap and ensure that food and
other essential supplies reach all those in desperate
need, particularly women and children.
We also remain concerned about the fate of
missing and detained humanitarian workers in the
country and want to use this opportunity to call for
information on their whereabouts and their immediate
and unconditional release. Those who have chosen to
take this illegal action are reminded that they will be
held to account for targeting humanitarian workers
and impeding the delivery of humanitarian assistance,
12/19

13/10/2022

which runs counter to international human rights and
humanitarian laws.
Equally concerning are the risks that misinformation
and disinformation campaigns continue to pose to
such workers in Yemen. We call for more discussions
and exchanges within humanitarian organizations, as
well as awareness-raising programmes among civilian
populations on humanitarian and human rights laws in
order to help bridge the knowledge gap so as to help
deter such a menace.
As highlighted in today’s briefing, the danger posed
by explosive remnants of war in Yemen, particularly in
Al-Hudaydah, remains high. We are deeply concerned
that, notwithstanding the lull in hostilities, landmines
continue to pose a serious threat — not only to the
safety of civilians, but also to agricultural land, which
unfortunately disrupts agricultural production and
jeopardizes livelihoods and recovery efforts. We call
for concerted global efforts to address the situation.
While the lull in hostilities may have marginally
boosted the country’s economy, the economic decline
continues to afflict the people of Yemen. It is our hope
that much of the country’s population, who have been
pushed into poverty, hunger and desperation over the
past eight years, will be allowed to enjoy the dividends
of the expired truce that was beginning to return dignity
to them through the gradual restoration of some basic
services and the steady return of economic activities,
including increased fuel availability and the rise in the
number and frequency of commercial flights into and
out of Yemen, among other things.
It is regrettable that the continuing blockage of
roads into and out of the city of Taiz remains one of the
main sticking points of negotiations to extend the truce.
The curtailment of the right of civilians to move freely
in a safe and secure manner through the blockage of the
main roads linking the city with other parts of Yemen is
unacceptable. That unfortunate development continues
to bring immense suffering and hardship to the people
of Taiz and the affected governorates, whose access to
essential supplies have been unfairly limited for years.
We call on the parties, particularly the Houthis, to take
immediate steps towards lifting the siege in order to
help ease the suffering of the affected people.
In the midst of the current uncertainty in Yemen,
we are pleased to note that there is a glimmer of light
at the end of the tunnel, as the needed funding goal for
the first phase of the controlled dismantling of the FSO
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

SAFER oil tanker has been reached. We commend all
stakeholders that have made contributions to enable the
first phase of the operation to commence and call for
expedited action by the United Nations and all those
involved in the process in order to avert a humanitarian
and environmental disaster.
Another positive development is the generous
contributions of the European Union, the United
Kingdom and the United States of America in order
to ensure the uninterrupted operation of the United
Nations Verification and Inspection Mechanism for
Yemen so as to enable it to continue its monitoring and
inspection role with regard to commercial and bilateral
assistance cargo destined to the Red Sea ports in Yemen.
In conclusion, we entreat the parties to be flexible
and to make the necessary concessions in order to renew
the truce agreement, in the interest of all Yemenis. For
once, the parties need to prove to the international
community that, notwithstanding their differences,
they can prioritize the needs of the people they are
seeking to govern. Their main preoccupation as they
return to the negotiation table should therefore not only
be limited to the extension of the truce, but should be
geared towards a nationwide ceasefire as a prelude
to negotiations towards a comprehensive and durable
political solution spearheaded by Yemenis, with the
support of the international community.
Ms. Moran (Ireland): I too would like to thank
Special Envoy Grundberg and Assistant SecretaryGeneral Msuya for their briefings and commend their
work and continued focus on the Yemeni people in
difficult circumstances. It is much appreciated.
We share in the deep disappointment that has been
expressed around this table that the United Nationsmediated truce in Yemen was not extended or expanded
before its expiration on the 2 October. The truce had
brought significant relief to the Yemeni people. It
represented the longest break in hostilities since the
conflict began more than seven years ago.
In recent months we have witnessed a significant
decrease in civilian casualties and in the displacement
of vulnerable Yemenis. Steady flows of fuel into
Al-Hudaydah port and commercial flights through
Sana’a airport have brought tangible benefits and
improved everyday lives. We fully support the
continued efforts of the Special Envoy, including
through the comprehensive proposal submitted to the
parties on the 1 October. We know that this has not been

S/PV.9152

straightforward and that the context is challenging. It
is deeply regrettable that this latest proposal by the
Special Envoy was rejected by the Houthis. We call
on all sides, in particular the Houthis, to immediately
re-engage with the negotiation process in good faith.
We reiterate that there can be no military solution to
the conflict in Yemen. A commitment to genuine and
inclusive dialogue and to compromise is required and is
past due. We urge regional actors to use their influence
to that end.
It is welcome that there has been no significant
military escalation on the ground since the lapse in the
truce. It is also positive to see the humanitarian elements
of the truce mostly continue to hold. We implore all
actors to avoid any escalatory or provocative words or
actions at this sensitive juncture.
We welcome too that the United Nations Verification
and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen, which plays
a vital role in facilitating life-saving commercial
imports, can continue to operate following receipt of
additional funding, including €2.2 million from the
European Union. In another positive development,
the long-awaited salvage mission for the FSO SAFER
oil tanker looks likely to begin next month. That will
hopefully avert a serious environmental, humanitarian
and maritime catastrophe for Yemen and for the region.
We pay tribute to the leadership of the Netherlands on
the matter. Donor assistance, which includes funding
from the European Union, has been critical in enabling
that work.
The recent white note on conflict and food
insecurity issued by the Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs, in accordance with
resolution 2417 (2018), was unequivocal about the dire
humanitarian situation facing Yemen. We welcome the
Assistant Secretary-General’s updates on improvements
in the situation. We urge continued funding by the
international community and the implementation of the
urgent steps needed to tackle the country’s economic
crisis, as elaborated by the Assistant Secretary-General
today. Wider economic issues, including basic public
services, formed an important part of the Special
Envoy’s revised truce proposal. We support his efforts
to tackle that issue as part of a comprehensive plan
going forward.
In conclusion, Yemenis had been living without
the possibility of peace for too many years. The truce
represented a window of hope that an end to this conflict

22-6286713/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

was in sight. We continue to believe that the truce
presents such an opportunity. The Council was clear
and united in its press statement last week (SC/15054)
that the truce should be reinstated and that the truce
represents the best way to permanently end this war.
We reiterate that message today.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for their briefings.
France deeply regrets the non-renewal of the truce,
which expired on 2 October. It was a missed opportunity
for the parties and, above all, a missed opportunity for
the Yemeni people, who have suffered this conflict for
eight years. The Houthis have a clear responsibility, and
the threat they pose to regional and maritime security
is unacceptable. This is a time for the much-needed
resumption of negotiations, not provocations.
It is not too late to reach an agreement. France
reiterates its call for a lasting national ceasefire. It
commends the efforts made by the Yemeni Government
since April and calls on the Houthis to face up to their
responsibility and to accept the renewal of the truce for
six months. The Houthis must stop their uncompromising
demands, which will get them nowhere.
Each day without agreement on a truce increases
the risk of instability on the ground. France is
very concerned about the ongoing clashes in some
governorates and calls on all parties to show restraint.
The instability on the ground and the deterioration of
the economic and security situation render the Yemeni
civilian population even more vulnerable. Millions
of Yemenis are currently food insecure. The rates
of malnutrition for women and children are among
the highest in the world. We urge both the Houthis
and the Government of Yemen to implement their
commitments regarding the use of children in armed
conflict, the killing of children and attacks on schools,
in accordance with the action plan signed in April with
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
Humanitarian actors still face numerous obstacles.
France insists on the importance of ensuring full access
to all those in need, as the humanitarian situation
continues to deteriorate. We are concerned about the
recent regulations regarding the mahram, the male
guards imposed on all female humanitarian workers
in Houthi-controlled areas. Finally, we call for the
immediate release, without preconditions, of United
Nations and humanitarian personnel detained by
the Houthis.
14/19

13/10/2022

Regarding the situation of the FSO SAFER oil
tanker, France welcomes the announcement of financial
contributions that should allow the rapid start of the
first phase of the salvage operation.
France commends the efforts of the Special Envoy
to relaunch the political process and notes that only an
inclusive political solution, with the full participation
of women and in accordance with Security Council
resolutions, can bring an end to the conflict. The
Council has a responsibility to speak with one voice on
that issue in order to support the Organization’s efforts
to achieve a lasting cessation of hostilities as a first step
towards the resumption of a political process.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I thank Special Envoy
Grundberg and Assistant Secretary-General Msuya
for their briefings, as well as for all their hard work
and efforts in the past weeks and months to bring the
parties together on a path towards peace.
Norway regrets that the parties have not yet
succeeded in extending the truce. In this crucial
moment, the Security Council has a responsibility to do
its utmost to secure a return to the truce, and we urge
the parties, especially the Houthis, to restrain from
their maximalist demands and commit to the terms of
the truce. We cannot risk the lack of a truce to create
the conditions for incidents on the ground to spiral out
of control and for the Yemeni-people to wake up to fullfledged conflict.
While we recognize that the truce has had its
limitations, we must acknowledge the gains for the
civilian population. During the six months of the truce,
there has been a significant reduction of violence and
civilian causalities. Non-governmental organizations
report that child casualties decreased by 34 per cent.
The truce has also allowed for direct dialogue between
the parties for the first time in years. Only through
dialogue can the parties build the necessary trust. And
Norway encourages them to engage constructively in
dialogue with the Special Envoy. It is vital that the
parties now commit to an extension of the truce that
can lead to an expanded ceasefire and the start of a
political process. Only that will give the Yemeni people
hope for a more peaceful future.
The humanitarian situation in Yemen remains
dire. The calls for more funding are clear. And we
continue to be concerned about all acts hindering full
and safe humanitarian access, especially in the north,
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

as well as an increasing number of threats against
humanitarian workers.
Before concluding, Norway would like to commend
United Nations Resident and Humanitarian Coordinator
David Gressly, the Netherlands and other donors for
bringing in sufficient pledges to the United Nations
plan for the FSO SAFER oil tanker. We are glad to hear
that enough funding has been secured to begin the first
phase of the operation to prevent an oil spill in the Red
Sea. Norway supports those efforts, and we hope that
the emergency operation will start as soon as possible.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania) (spoke in French): As I take
the floor for the first time this month due to business
travel, I cannot begin without congratulating you,
Mr. President, on your presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and on the exemplary
conduct of the work during these first two weeks.
(spoke in English)
I would like to thank Special Envoy Grundberg
for the update and all his tireless efforts. It was also
heartening and timely to listen to the account of
Ms. Msuya from Yemen.
We believe it is paramount that the Council, the
regional actors and the international community as a
whole remain united and not let the country slide back
into conflict. We should continue to show strong resolve
to bring the parties closer together and keep the United
Nations-led process on track. I would like to praise
the efforts of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia — and
welcome the presence of the Ambassador here — and
the Sultanate of Oman for the truce renewal. It did not
happen, although it should have. We continue to hope
that reason will again prevail.
We commend the leadership of the Government
of Yemen in accepting the truce proposal. That is the
right decision, attitude and response to the call of the
people of Yemen, who have been ravaged by war and
want to live in peace and dignity. We regret that the
same call of the Yemeni people was not heeded by the
Houthis, who instead of thinking about, and working
for, the future of the Yemeni people, seem embarked on
a dangerous course.
Although open conflict has been avoided, since
the expiration of the truce we see growing clashes
and worrisome signs of escalation — as explained by
the Special Envoy, especially in Ma’rib and Taiz. We
call on the Houthis to stop their escalatory steps and

S/PV.9152

get back to the negotiations. After their long years of
suffering, the Yemeni people need hope, not more war;
they need a perspective and a future. Houthis must not
undo the achievements and benefits of the truce. Hardwon progress must not be wasted. Showing restraint
is therefore a must, and work towards a nationwide
comprehensive ceasefire must not stop.
Yemen cannot be synonymous with war, and
we must do whatever we can so that Yemenis do not
succumb to such a terrible predicament. We fully
support the efforts of the Special Envoy and share his
call — as outlined today — for calm and restraint by
all parties.
It is crucial that flights from the Sana’a airport
continue and expand and that fuel shipments in the
Al-Hudaydah port be maintained. They are important
dividends of the truce and must be preserved. They
have demonstrated how important and life-changing
they are for the Yemeni people. Threats to commercial
ships and oil companies are counterproductive and
must be withdrawn.
The information that Ms. Msuya provided
regarding the humanitarian crisis needs no comment.
Humanitarian assistance must reach all those in need,
and the humanitarian workers and their work must be
respected by all.
We are also very worried about the unknown fate
of the staff of United Nations and non-governmental
organizations, as well as that of other civilians,
abducted by armed groups or forcibly disappeared,
including from the continued incarceration of the
Yemenis employed by the United States and the United
Nations. We reiterate our call for their release.
On a positive note, we would like to thank all the
countries, especially the United States and the United
Kingdom, for making it possible for the United Nations
Verification and Inspection Mechanism for Yemen to
overcome the financial gap without any suspension of
its work. In the same vein, we are very happy to see that
the international community, the regional actors and the
private sector have made it possible for the operation
for the FSO SAFER oil tanker to finally start soon.
We commend the stewardship of Resident Coordinator
David Gressly, as well as his efforts to overcome one of
the biggest environmental challenges in the Red Sea.
Let me conclude by saying that war has not been
the solution in Yemen and war cannot and should not be

22-6286715/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

13/10/2022

the way. It is time that that be understood and accepted
by all on the ground.

to an escalation. We reiterate that there is no military
solution in Yemen.

The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of
Gabon.

On the humanitarian front, the situation remains
worrisome. The protracted war has destroyed the
country’s economy, adding to the suffering of the
Yemeni people. Three quarters of the population are in
need of humanitarian aid and protection. In addition,
there is the threat of food insecurity, exacerbated by
the rising cost of basic necessities and the devastating
floods that have left thousands of households in need
and led to the displacement of people.

The situation in Yemen is troubling. The briefing
of Special Envoy Hans Grundberg and the moving
testimony of Assistant Secretary-General Msuya attest
to the volatility of the situation in Yemen.
We are concerned that the truce in force in Yemen
since 2 April has not been renewed since its expiration
on 2 October. That non-renewal further darkens the
horizon for peace to which the Yemeni people aspire. It
is undeniable that the truce of the past six months has
had a positive impact on the daily lives of the people,
who had not seen a respite for many years, particularly
with regard to a reduction of civilian casualties, but also
in terms of access to regular fuel supplies, the provision
of basic services and the freedom of movement, with the
resumption of commercial flights to and from Sana’a.
We remain hopeful that Special Envoy Grundberg’s
new proposal will be accepted by all. That proposal
entails the extension of the truce for six months; the
payment of salaries and pensions to civil servants;
the opening of specific roads in Taiz and other
governorates; the opening of additional destinations for
flights to and from Sana’a airport; the unhindered entry
of oil tankers into the port of Al-Hudaydah; and the
strengthening of de-escalation mechanisms through the
Military Coordination Committee and a commitment
to the immediate release of detainees.
Launching negotiations towards a ceasefire, the
resumption of an inclusive political process and broader
economic issues, including public services, are also
priorities for the Yemeni peace agenda. We believe that
it is crucial to restart negotiations on the terms of a new
agreement, based on a multidimensional framework
that addresses political, security and economic issues,
in order to achieve a comprehensive negotiated
settlement of the conflict through an inclusive dialogue
that involves women.
On the security front, we note that, notwithstanding
a few incidents, there has been no major military
offensive on the ground since the end of the truce,
although the operational environment remains very
difficult for humanitarian agencies. We call on the
parties to refrain from any provocations that could lead
16/19

We call for the release of United Nations personnel
detained by the Houthis. We also note with appreciation
that the funding target for the first phase of the
emergency operation to transfer and remove oil from
the FSO SAFER tanker was met.
Finally, we reiterate our support to Special Envoy
Grunberg for his tireless efforts to maintain dialogue
between the parties in order to achieve a cessation
of hostilities and a comprehensive peace agreement
in Yemen.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Yemen.
Mr. Al-Saadi (Yemen) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, allow me to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. I wish you and your friendly
delegation every success. I would like to thank your
predecessor, the Permanent Representative of France,
for his successful presidency last month. I would
also like to thank Mr. Grundberg and Ms. Msuya for
their briefings.
The Government of Yemen welcomes Ms. Msuya’s
visit to the country to see first-hand the humanitarian
situation caused by the armed Houthi militias. Now
more than ever, that situation requires that the Security
Council and the international community shoulder
their moral and historical responsibilities and take a
firm position of deterrence to put an end to the acts
and provocations of those militias, as they impede the
peace efforts and the political process. They must be
pushed to engage constructively in the efforts of the
Security Council and the United Nations to stop the
bloodshed of the Yemeni people and to agree to extend
the truce as a glimmer of hope until we achieve a total
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

ceasefire and resume the political process to put an end
to the conflict.
The United Nations-led peace efforts in Yemen have
suffered a major setback due to the intransigence of the
Houthi militias and their insistence on exploiting the
suffering of the Yemeni people for political and military
gains. The militias have not responded to the calls by
the Security Council and the international community
to abandon the choice of war and give precedence to the
language of dialogue and the interests of Yemenis by
extending and expanding the truce that has been in place
since 2 April. The truce brought many benefits to the
Yemeni people as a result of the significant concessions
made by the Yemeni Government to alleviate the human
suffering. The Yemeni Government has shown all kinds
of flexibility and cooperation with the Special Envoy
to overcome all the obstacles created by the Houthi
militias. In that context, the Presidential Leadership
Council reaffirms its firm commitment and adherence
to peace and to constructive engagement in all regional
and international efforts to establish peace and stability
in Yemen and end the conflict in accordance with the
agreed political terms of reference, namely, the Gulf
Cooperation Council Initiative and its Implementation
Mechanism, the outcome of the comprehensive National
Dialogue Conference and the relevant Security Council
resolutions, in particular resolution 2216 (2015).
While the Government commends all the efforts of
the Special Envoy of the Secretary-General to extend
and expand the truce and continues its support for him
in achieving a comprehensive and just peace, it stresses
that expanding the truce should not be at the expense of
the future and aspirations of Yemenis or the country’s
sovereignty, and empowering the Houthi militias.
We also commend the position of the international
community and the Security Council on the crisis in
Yemen, and we call for the activation of that position to
deter the conduct of the militias and bring more pressure
to bear on them to choose peace and end the war.
The Yemeni Government received the Special
Envoy’s recent proposal positively and, by renewing
the truce, sought to expand the benefits to all Yemenis.
That is in line with our efforts to alleviate the human
suffering of all our people in all governorates without
discrimination. The main objective of the truce is to
stop the bloodshed of Yemenis caused by the war of
the Houthi militias and ensure the free movement of
civilians, commercial goods and humanitarian aid.
However, the Houthi militias have deliberately evaded

S/PV.9152

commitments to peace by fabricating successive
complications and imposing conditions to thwart the
truce, thereby prolonging the war and exacerbating
the humanitarian crisis. The Yemeni people are aware
of such conduct, and the international community is
witnessing it first-hand.
Despite the Houthi militias’ evasion of their
obligations over the past six months pursuant to the
truce, and despite their intransigence to open the main
roads in Taiz and lift the siege that has continued
on that city for eight years, the Yemeni Government
has maintained the truce by exercising restraint and
facilitating the delivery of more than 1,435,000 tons of
fuel through Al-Hudaydah port. The tax and customs
revenues from that delivery amounted to more than
203 billion Yemeni rials, looted by the Houthi militias,
who deprived civil servants in areas under their
control of their salaries and, instead, used the money
for their military operations and personal benefit. The
Government also facilitated 102 commercial flights
to and from Sana’a airport, overcoming the obstacles
created by the Houthi militias through demanding
official travel documents.
Despite the Houthis’ rejection to extend and expand
the truce, the Yemeni Government has continued since
2 October to facilitate the regular arrival of fuel vessels
into Al-Hudaydah port and the commercial flights
through Sana’a airport to ensure the interests of the
Yemeni people and support the efforts of the United
Nations to achieve a comprehensive and sustainable
peace, while the Houthi militias continue to escalate
their military operations on various fronts, resulting
in more than 1,400 dead or injured persons among the
military ranks and 96 civilians during the period of
the truce. In addition to their violations and military
parades in Al-Hudaydah, in flagrant violation of the
Stockholm Agreement and resolutions 2451 (2018)
and 2452 (2019), the leaders of those militias even
issued statements and threatened oil companies and
facilities, as well as cargo ships, that they would disrupt
international navigation. This is a serious threat and a
dangerous escalation that will have repercussions on the
Yemeni economy and infrastructure. It will also lead
to deepening the economic and humanitarian crises as
well as threatening security and peace in Yemen and
the region, in addition to fuel supplies.
Such threats and terrorist acts necessitate a firm
stance from the international community and the
Security Council to stop the exploitation of Yemen by

22-6286717/19

S/PV.9152

The situation in the Middle East

those militias as well as their efforts to hinder the peace
process. Pressure must be brought to bear on them to
engage with peace efforts under the leadership of the
United Nations without preconditions, and dialogue
must be prioritized in the interests of the Yemeni
people, instead of war and satisfying the ambitions of
the Iranian regime in Yemen and the region.
This war has led to the loss of hundreds of
thousands of lives and left dozens of thousands of
casualties. It has pushed more than 20 million civilians
into a cycle of hunger. It has also displaced millions
of people across countries and continents and pushed
more than 4 million people to internally displaced
persons camps, where they live under very harsh
conditions. It has destroyed livelihoods and brought
pandemics. Climate-change-related are causing costly
destruction and death, especially with the collapse of the
Government-sponsored protection and care network.
We therefore have limited options to save lives. The
price hikes on fuel and basic goods and the disruption
of global supply chains owing to the latest geopolitical
challenges and the coronavirus disease pandemic have
doubled the humanitarian and economic suffering in
Yemen and exacerbated food insecurity in the country.
Accordingly, the Yemeni Government reiterates
its support and appreciation for the United Nationsled relief efforts in Yemen to alleviate the suffering of
our people. We commend the engagement of the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs with
the Government to ensure the best implementation of
humanitarian programmes.
The Government also commends the generous
support of our brothers in the sisterly Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia and the sisterly United Arab Emirates in various
fields, including through the implementation of service
projects with costs exceeding $1 billion. We also
commend the support of the United States of America
and acknowledge the humanitarian relief pledges from
the European Union and the United Kingdom.
Nevertheless, the funding gap is widening,
thereby threatening to end additional life-saving relief
programmes, including the provision of food and
health care. We thank all donor countries that have
provided the financing needed to ensure the extend
the mandate of the United Nations Verification and
Inspection Mechanism.
The Yemeni Government continues to develop
a matrix of financial and administrative reforms to
18/19

13/10/2022

manage resources and monitor and follow up on the
swift processing of the support provided by our brothers
and international partners, as well as to implement a
package of projects that would enhance services, protect
the livelihoods of our people and empower State lawenforcement institutions. We look forward to receiving
further contributions from the international community
to close the financial gap in the humanitarian response
plan and to support the Government programmes and
plans for ensuring stability and economic recovery,
which would alleviate the humanitarian suffering
of Yemenis.
In conclusion, the Government of Yemen appreciates
all efforts aimed at avoiding an environmental,
humanitarian and economic catastrophe off the coast
of Yemen, which would have repercussions for the
region and the world. We reiterate the need to make
greater efforts and mobilize the necessary resources
to fill the financial gap and drain the FSO SAFER oil
tanker without delay. The obstacles posed by the Houthi
militias must not prevent us from shouldering our
moral responsibility to stop more than a million barrels
of oil leaking into the Red Sea, which would threaten
to cause an imminent and destructive catastrophe that
could surpass by a factor of four the repercussions
of the accident involving the Exxon Valdez oil tanker
in the Pacific Ocean. We should put an end to the
manipulation of the militias and their use of this dossier
as a card for political blackmail.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): At
the outset, I would like to sincerely thank Mr. Hans
Grundberg, Special Envoy of the Secretary-General
for Yemen, and the Assistant Secretary-General for
Humanitarian Affairs, Ms. Joyce Msuya, for their
briefings and efforts to bring about peace and security
in Yemen and relieve the suffering of our brotherly
Yemeni people.
We all bore witness on 2 October to the rejection
by the Houthi militia of the proposal made by Special
Envoy Grundberg to extend the ceasefire in Yemen.
The rejection was no surprise for those who are aware
of the nature of that extremist terrorist militia, which
has taken the Yemeni people hostage and is controlling
their fate and subjecting entire generations to the
dangers posed by war and armed conflict. That militia
puts its extremist ideological interests at the forefront,
22-62867

13/10/2022

The situation in the Middle East

thereby threatening peace and stability in Yemen and
the entire region and preventing a comprehensive
peaceful solution of the conflict in the country.
Last week, for the first time, the Security Council
issued a press statement (SC/15054) firmly and clearly
stating that the Houthis were responsible for hindering
a proposal to extend the truce. It called on the Houthis
to cease their provocations and military operations in
Yemen, in the region and in the Red Sea and to return
to dialogue. I note in that regard that the practices of
the extremist Houthi militia, including its rejection of
proposals made by the Special Envoy for extending
the truce, are a part of the dark period that began in
2014, when that militia undertook a coup against the
legitimate Government. Since then, Yemen and the
entire region have been suffering from the terrorist acts
of that militia.
I would like to pose some questions about the
nature of what has been happening in Yemen by the
Houthis. Although they claim that they seek to ensure
the interests of the Yemeni people, what causes the
Houthis to reject a truce proposal? That truce proposal
includes the following: first, maintaining the cessation
of military operations; secondly, increasing commercial
air flights; thirdly, putting oil revenue in a joint account
to pay civil-servant salaries; and fourthly, opening
the roads to Taiz and other regions, which are under
Houthi control, for humanitarian purposes. Those who
are rejecting the Special Envoy’s proposal are also
hampering the repairs of the FSO SAFER oil tanker,
which risks causing an unprecedented environmental
disaster in the Red Sea. These are the very people who
continue to recruit children and lay mines that kill
innocent and civilian people. They continue to smuggle
illegal weapons, hijack humanitarian assistance,
support inhumane military activities and target the civil
infrastructure of neighbouring States using drones.
That militia is not a peaceful group. It does not care
about the interest of the Yemeni people. In brief, it is a
terrorist group pursuant to resolution 2624 (2022).

S/PV.9152

Although the proposals to extend the truce might
in some way partially favour the Houthi militias, the
Yemeni Presidential Council accepted them for the sake
of the Yemeni people. The international community
welcomed that step. My country’s Government has
supported the efforts of the Special Envoy to ensure
the truce, in addition to those of the sisterly countries
and members of the Coalition to Support Legitimacy
in Yemen, the United States, the United Kingdom and
many other countries. The objective is to achieve a
comprehensive political solution in Yemen.
Let us recall that the Houthi militia had already
violated the truce many times. They refused to transfer
the oil revenue into the Central Bank so that civilservant salaries might be paid. They organized military
parades in the city of Hudaydah in flagrant violation
of the Stockholm Agreement, which stipulates that the
city should be free of a military presence. In addition,
the militia continues to besiege the city of Taiz.
As we have exhausted our efforts, the Houthi
militia rejects all measures that might lead to a peaceful
solution. It insists on rejecting the calls for achieving
peace and stability in Yemen. It is therefore incumbent
upon the international community and the Security
Council in particular to reconsider that extremist
group, which is holding the entire future of Yemen
hostage. It is time for the Houthi militia to be classified
as a terrorist group and to be boycotted and its funding
sources to be dried up.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
reiterates its commitment to supporting international
efforts aimed at achieving peace in Yemen. We also
reiterate our right to defend ourselves in case that
militia resumes attacks against us. We will spare no
effort to deter its hostile acts.
President (spoke in French): There are no more
names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.50 a.m.

22-6286719/19
