UNITED NATIONS

/ NAZYZONSUNZES

SECWRPTY

COUNCIL

OFFICIAL

RECORDS
NINETEENTH
YEAR
ndMEETING4MARCH
1964
dmeShNCE:4MARS1964
DIX-NEWVIhME
ANNdE

1102
CONSEIL

DE StiCURITti

DOCUMENTS

OFFICIELS

NEW

YORK

TABLE
ROViliONl
Adoption

rgendl (S/Agen&/lIO2)
of the agenda

OF

CONTENTS

. . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..~

Letter
&tad 26 December
1963 from the Prrmonent
Reprrrrntativs
thr Rotidrnt
of the Security Council (S/S+M):
(& Later
&cod 15 Februwy
1964 from the Pwmanrnt
Repraront~tin
a&orsad
to the Ptyidmt
of the fimurlty
Council (S/SS4S);
(lo) Later
dated 15 February
1964 from the Fwmanent
Roprrranmtiva
to tie Ruridmt
of the Security Council (S/SW)
..~........~....,~~,.~.,.~.,

TABLE

DES

of cvprur

addroar&

to

of cho ulltod

f(ft@om

of Cyprw

Udmrsd

MATIiRES

Or&c du Jour povlrolrr (S/Apnda/l102) ~~~~~.~~~~~~~~~~~~~I~~~,~~~.,~~.~,,
Adopdon

de l’ordre

du Jour ..L*.....*................e.......

Lettre,
en date du 26 dkembre
lY63, adressGe
au PrZxldent
repr&entant
permanent
de Cllypre (S/54d8):
g) Lettre,
en date du 15 fikler
lY64. adress&
au Prbsident
repr6sentant
permanent
du Koyaume-LJni
(S/5543):
LI) Lettre,
en date du I5 f&vrler
1904, adressbe
au Prilsldent
repr&entant
permanent
de Chypre (S/5,545) .,.........,..........*.........

. . . . . . . . .. .
du Consell

de s&urlt&

par Je

du Cons&l

de s&uritC

par Ie

du Consdl

de s&wit&

par le

Present: Tt
tJOTE

Relevant documents of the Security Council are publlehed in quarterly
supplements to the Offfofal Records.
Symbols
of Unfted
Natfons
combfned
wftb
ffgures.
Mentfon
a Clnfted Natfons document.

documenh
of such

are oomposrd
of
a symbol
fndfcates

Lee doouments pertlnents
euppl&mente

trlm9e~rlele

+

du Conseil de s8curlk3 eont publl6s dune de8

aux Documents

offfofelu.

Leu cores deu documents
de J’OrganfuaHon
deu Natfons Unfes se compouent
de Jettreu
majuuculeu
et de ohfffreu.
La ufmple
mentfon
d’une tote danu un
texte ufgnfffe
qu’fl a’agft d’un document
de I’Organfsetfon.

..

Northern Ire1

capftal
fetters
a reference
to

*
*

Bolivia,
Brae
Coast,
Moral
Republlos,
I.

Prov

1. Adoption o
a. Letter dar
rnanent R
the Preeld

(a) Letter
manenl
addree
counol

(b) Letter
manen
the Pr
The agenda
Latter
datrd
Roprerrnta
of the Secu~
(a_) Letter
da
Reprearn
to rho PI
(k) Lettrr
da
Roprrrrr
dent of tk

1. The PRIG
deolslon tnkc
reuent8tlver
t101patr In ou
At fbelol
ICuplw), N
2
B’hfc
2. k. FED
lies) (trnnsl
posItion
on tl
hns alreudy
delogntion’
s
19 F’obruary

Is lurown, c
Council shc
Bowreign
A
to md
nnd I
in the hter
Unltetl
Ntitio
3. ‘i’hct
Nntions

due
erg

ONE THOUSAND ONE HUNDRED AND SECOND MEETING
Held In New York, on Wednesday, 4 March 1964, at 10.30 a.m.
MiLLE CENT DEUXIbAE
SiANCE
Tenue b New York, IO mercrodl4
mars 1964, d 10 h 30.
---Pmsldenb Mr. LIU Chieh(China).
Prdsfdent: M. LIU Chloh(Chine).
Pnfuents: Lee reprbrentants den Etatr eulvantr:
Present: The representativesof thefollowIngBtatee:
BdiVia,
Bra&D,China,Czeohoslovakia,Franoe,Ivory
Bollvle, Br8011, Chine, C8te-d%otre, Erots-Unis
Coaet, Moroooo,
Norway, Union of Soviet Sooiuliat d’Am8rlque, Franoe, Maroo, Notige, Roynume-Unl
Bepublioe, United Kingdom of Qreat Britain and do Wanda-Bretagne et d’Irlande du Nerd, Toh6ooslooaquieet Unionder R(publiquearoolalirter rovl6NorthernIreland andUnitedStatesof Amerioa.
tiquer.
Provisional

ogondo

(S/A\ondo/llO2)

1. Adoptionof the agenda,
2. Letter dated 26 Deoember1963 from the Permanent Representattveof Cyprus addreseedto
the Presidentof the Seourlty Counoil(S/5488):
(5) Letter dated 16 February 1964from the PermanentRepresentativeof the UnitedKingdom
addressed to the Preeldent of the Seourity
c0un011(S/5543);
(h) Letter dated 16 February 1984from the PermanentRepresentativeof Cyprus addreseedto
the Presidentof the Seourity Counoil(S/5545).
Adoption

The agenda

Ordra

Lattrr
dotrd
26 Docrmbw
1963 from tha Permcnrnt
Roprarentativr
of Cyprus
addrrrrad
ta thr Prrridont
of the Sacurlty
Council
(S/5488):
(g) Lettrr
dated 15 February
1964from
thr Pormanont
Roprrrrntotivo
of thu Unltrd
Kingdom
addrrrrod
to the Prrridrnt
of thr Security
Council
(S/5543);
(b) Letter
dated I5 Fabruary
1964 from thr Permanent
Roprerrntatlvo
of Cyprur
addrrsrod
to thr Prrrldrnt of thr Srcurity
Council
(S/5545)

1. The PRESIDENT!In aooordanoe
with the previour
deolrion taken by the Council,I shall invite the repreaentatlver of Cyprur, Turkey end Oreem to partiolpte
ln our oonslderatlonof We question,
At the ffwitatfon
of tJm President, Mr. S. IWhnou

provlrolrr

(S,‘Agondo/ll02)

aJ Lettre, en date du 15 f6vrler 1964,adrem&
uu Pldaldent du Conrell de e&urltb par 1s
reprdrentant permanent du Royaume-Uni
(S/5548);
9) Lattre, on date du 16 fbvrier 1964,adrer&
au Prbrident du Cone811
de r8ourlti par 10
repldrentant permanentde Cbypre (S/5545).
Adoption

of thr ogando

wasadopted.

du jour

1. Adoptionde l’ordre du Jour.
2. Lettre, en date du 26dboembre1968,par lo reprbsentantpermanentde Chypre (S/5488):

do I’ordro

du Iour

Ltofdm

&I jxfr
est adopt&
Lottrr,
on dote du 26 dkrmbrr
1963, adrraa6e ou
Prbsidrnt
du Conroil
do r&curM
par la ropr&
srntant
Permonrnt
da Chypro
(S/5488):
Q) Lottrr,
on dato du 15 fhvrirr 1964, adrrrah au
PrMdrnt
du Conaoil
da r6curlt6
par IO rrprbrontant
prrmanrnt
du Royauma-Unl
(S/5543);
h) Lattrr,
on data du I5 f&vrirr
1964, adrrsr4a
ou Pr6ridrnt
du Conrail
do r(curlt4
par
la
ropr6rrntant
pwnonont
do Chyprr
(S/5545)

1. Lo PRESIDENT(tradutt de i~u@ir): Conform&
ment k la d&Won tij5 prim par 10Crmrell, f’iaviik
lee roplbwntantr de Chypre, de la Turquuieet de la
Orbe L pwtioipr 2 l%xamende la querttoa

(Cyprus), Mr, T. M6nemnofogfu
(Turkey) and Mr.
f&h& lMWs
(Oreeoe) tad plroer rt tJm Cowoft

SW ZVavH&xt
de Pfdeldent,
M S. KJlprlrnoa
), M. T. il!tanen?$nologfu (zkt
iha“p” M (CMoe) pmumnt pfaos1 ir ta
T a%?&%~

2. h;r. FEDORENKO(UnionofSovletS~tall6t Repub11~s)(translatedfrom Russian):The Soviet Union’s

2. M. FEDORENKO (Waleadrr R&ubllquer rooirlietee eovi&iquse) (traduit du ruereh Dane notre

posltlon on the matter under disoussion by the Counoil
has already been explained in detail in the Soviel
delegation’s
stntement to the Seourity Counoil on
19 February [1096th meeting], The Soviet Union, ns
te known, oonsiders It nooessary that the Seourlty
Council should take prompt aotlon to protect the
eoverelgn Republlo of Cyprus from aggression and
to end nnd forestflll any kind of foreign Interference
itI the Internal nffuiro of thls nmnll Metnber of the
Unltetl Nntions.
3. The duly of thu Seourity Council, as the IJnitod
Nntlons organ primnrRy rosponsiblo for the mnin-

Xervention
du 19 f6vrier
nu Conseil de s6curiM
[10968mo s&moe], nous avons ddjh expose en detail
la position de 1’Union sovi&iqud sur la questlon en
disoussion. LVJRSS, on lo sait, Juge indispeneable gue
le Conseil prenne sarisretard desmesurespour prot6ger la RBpub!ique souveraine de Chypre oontro
l’agression
et pour empkher et pr6venir toute Ing6rence Btrangore dans les affnires int6rieures de ce
petIt pays, Membre de IYWganlsatioti des Nations
Unies.
3. JLo Consell de s6curitb.
organe prlnoipal
des
Nations I’nles charge du maintlen
do la paix et de lu

64ouriU internatioaaloe,ale dmir degarmtir l’ind6psndancenationale, llint&rM terrltorirle et lQnit4
de Chypre, et d’aeourer le respeotde la rouverainetb
de Chypre oonformgmentaux prlnoiper de la Charte
denNation@Unier.
4, Le peuplede Chypre, 11frut 1srouligner, a ssul
le droit de rdgler eeeaffalree interleures; et lncontsrtabloment. 11eat parfaitemont oapableda le faire
en toute indbpendan&,commele douvernementda
Chypre l’a dbolarAAplurieuro reprinee,et d’apporter
aux problbmeequl se poeentAlui la solutionla plue
oonformeaux intArOt du paye.

taaaoe of peaoe and international seourity, ie to
eafeguard the naticmal indepmdenoe md the territorial
inviolability and integrity of Cypr ue and to ensure
ronpeot for the oountry’s eoversignty in aoaordanoe
with the purpoars of the United Nationr Charter,
4. It mtut be empbaei~ed that ordy’tbe people of
Cyprw hae the right to rsttle lte internal affairs;
and tbsre oan be no doubtthat the Cypriotr are fully
oapableof handlingtbtrir own domeatioieeuealndependently,ae the Qovernmentof Cyprusbaerepeatedly
eMed, and of finding the eolutlon to the problems
before them whioh 18 moot in aooordanoewith their
nationnllntererb.
S. That ir why the Soviet Union is in prinoiple not
in favour of sending any foreign troops, inoluding
UnitedNation@
trcapr, to Cyprus.
6. In the light of there remarks, theSovietdelegation
would like to make tho followlng oommentein oonnexion with the draft. reeolutlon[S/SS7l]u eubmitted
to the Seourity Counoil.
7. The Soviet Union prooeedefrom the positionthat
thie draft resolution, thoughlt doesnot meetall the
errential roqulrementr for aseourity CounoiIdeoirion
on suohan lmportant matter, Is neverthelessaimed
at preventing aggreeaion againrt the Republio of
Cyprmr and at proteotlng lte lawful rights and interestr.
8. At the sametime, we ooneider!t neoesaaryto
draw attention to thnee provisionsin the draft re~eolution-wo havo in mind, in partloular, paragraph4whioh oonoern the prooedure for settling matters
relating to the oomporition, sire and oommandof
the United Nationsforoe that it la proporedto rend
to Cyp~e. Althoughthe agreementof the Government
of Cyprur is required for theertablirhmentof a United
Nation8foroe in Cyprus andalthoughthe oomposltion
and the rize of that force are to be deoidedin oonrultation with the Qovernment of Cyprus and the
Governmentsof the ro-oalled guara&eing Powers
-namelY, the United Kingdom, QreeoeandTurkeythere ii no eroapingthe-faot &at this prooedurein
praotioebyparser the Seourity Council.
9. Moreover, the provirion in the draft rerolution to
the effeot that the commanderof the foroe will report
to the Seooretary-General,
whowill report periodi&lly
to the Seourity Counoil,in, of oouree,not adequate.
10. The Soviet deleption therefore requerts a rep
arate vote on operative paragraph4 of thedraft reoob&ion. The Soviet delegntion intend8to nbrtain on
t&r paragraph, In deoidingita final porition on t&e
draft neolution, t&oSoviet Governmentwill beguided
glsbt.and iomkMut by the porwn t&an by the aovt of Oyprur, which la the party moat roleotdd
6jr thfr dooumset.
11. Wo take into nccount the fnct that theGovernment

of Cyprus regards this resolution, evenwlth its shortcomings, fl8 useful. We also take acoount of the fact
that the resolution provides for the dispalch of United
Nations forces to Cyprus for three months-that
is,
for a strlotly llmitcd period-find
Imposesnoflnnncial
obligations
on Members of the Unitetl Nations who
contribute no contlngonts to those forces.

6. VoilA pourquoi 1’Unionrovi&ique ert oppooh en
prlnoipe Al’envoi AChypredotout oontingentmllitalre
stranger, et en partiouller de foroer dee Nationr
Unles.
8. Pour oea raironr, la d616gationsovi&ique tient A
faire la dbolaratlon suivante A propor du projet de
rdrolution roumioau Coneeil[S/6671U).
7. L’UnIon eovi&ique ostimequooe orolet de rholution, qui ne rbpoid pasA touieeleosexigenoes
dont
la dboirion du Connell de rdcuritd dolt Atre aerortie
cur une questionausri importante, eat malgrd tout
de&n& A faire obrtaole A l%grerrion oontre la
Rbpubliquede Chypre et A protdger lee 1ntbrAtset
lea droltr 18gItlmesde oe pays.
8. Cependant, 11 nouo paraft n&cesraire d’attlrer
l’attention du Conreil our oertalnr PaoeapBn
de ce
profet - nouo songeonosurtout au iaragraphe 4 relatifs A la manlbre de r6uler la questionde la
oompoeltion,den effeotifr et di la &u&we du oommandementde la force des Nations Uniesdont on
envllraga l’envoi A Chypre. La oonrtitutlon de la
foroe de8 Nation8 Unler A Chypredolt 8efaire aveo
l’asrentimsntdu Qouvernementohypriote, et ea oomporition et seaeffeotifr doiventAtro fix88 611oonrultation aveo le Qouvernementde Chypre et aveo ler
gouvernementrder Et&r ditr garantr - la OrAce,
le Royaume-Uniet la Turquie; or, onnepeut manquer
de oonrtater qu’eo fait oette mgthodeaboutitA tenir
le Con#eilde r6ouriU ANoart,
9, Nounertimonr bien entenduinruffisante la dieporltion prevoyant quele oommandant
dela foroe rendra
oompteau Seorkaire g4nAra1,lequel randra oompteA
ron tour p&riodiquementau Conreil de rburit6.
10. La dglguation de PUnton rovibticrue demande
dono un v&rgprrg
our le paragraphi 4 du profet
de rbnolution. Elle a 1Wention de s’abrbntr lorr du
WI&J@ur oe paragraphe,En adopt&d oetta position
de fagon dltlnitivo A l%gard du rojet do r(rolutio;r,
k Oouoemment da l~Unioaawf 4tiqw Mont ourtout
Wnpta de 1Aporitlon du Qartnmment de Chypre,
qui cat en 1~ooourrenoB
18premier int&wrb,
11. Nous notons que le Gouvernement chypriote Juge
OF: texts utile ma@6 se8 d6fauts. Nous relevons par
allleurs que le projet prkoit l’envoi de la force de8
N&ions Unfes h Chypre pour trois mois, c’esl-h-dire
pour une p6riode strtctement limtt$e, et qu’tl n’lmpot3e
aucune obligation financiere aux Membres de l*Orgunlsatlon de8 Nations Unies qui n’auront pas de contingents dans cette force.

19. Qiv

the wirl
Union ir
rsSOlUt
to rtrer
the rem
force8 1
ma&a,
011on th
13. The
requert
review c
to Cypr
thone fa
the aeou
of Cypr
with ihat
14. sin<
Soviet dl
during tl
to draw
arisen ir
16. The
17 April
tioipatior
9 the I
way lndi
of the I
belongIn
perron u
goeswiti
the PeoI
legal rep

16. The
I have th
madeby
being mi
of the cc
into any
of reprel
coun0i11
monthsa
the right
Nationr.
thir COU
not open
month I
the Sovie
oonridere
Counoil,
of oo-ofw

Oaunoil I

17. Mr,
the other
fully undc
on parag
the Sovle
reclolutior
moetlng],
negotiatlo
weeks nm
the Count
2J sue -Vffll
J”etnry
Meet

2

19. GIlwn the00 01HJumltan00ll, and in order to meet
the wirher of the aovornment of cyprw, Ml0soviet
Union 18 prepared not to oppose the adoption of this
reoolution, but to vote in favour of it. We should like
to Itress, however, that there oan be no extension of
the resolution ruoh an to enable tbo United Nations
foroos to remain in Cyprulr for more than three
months, without a mmvdeoieion by the Seourity Coun011on the eubjeot.
19. The lotiet Government re8ervea the right to
request a meeting of the Seourity Counoil for a
review of the deoirion to send United Nation8 forooe
to Cyprus, even before the three months expire. if
thord -foroar are wed, not for the strengtheningof
the aeourity and terrltarial inteurlty of the Republlo
of Cyprur,. but for rome other-p&pose oonfiioting
with ihat aim.
14. Sinoe this ir the fir& oooadon on whioh the
Soviet delegationhas spokenin the Seourity Counoll
during the present month, we oonrlder it neaeerary
to draw attention to the abeurd situation that has
arieen in oonnexionwith the Presidenclyof theCounoll.
16. The Soviet delenation stated a8 lontz aao a8
17 April 1963, at the-lO27tb meeting, that idpartlolpation in the work of the Council waedue solely
t? he lmportanoe o* l:~e matter in hand andin nb
way indioated its agreementto the illegal oaoupation
of the Preeidenoy of the Counoil, and of the plaoe
belongingto the People’s Republlo of China, by a
Demonwho. aa la well known. renreaentr no one. It
+I withoG saying that only ke repreeentativesOf
the People’sRepublioof China oan be, and nre the
legal repreeentativeeof China,

18. Danr oe# oonditionr, et pour rbpondreau d6rir
du Clouvernementdo Chyprs, 1’Unionrovibtiquo eat
dirpor6e A no panvoppoaor APadoptionda oe projat
de r&olution, et A voter en 8afaveur. Jo tionr AIOUl&nor
A co mwoe ~uQno reoonduoMo~doe effok
d la rbrolution~ jr ‘osuxdin, uno prolongationdu
rtationnementde la foroe de8Nation8UnionAC~YDHJ
au-de18der trois mole prAvus, no aaurait avoirViieu
ranr unenouvellod6oieiondu Coneeilde rbourit6.
13. Le Gouvernementde 1’UnioneoviibtiqueIIO rbeorve 1s droit, au oaa QQla force der NationsUnion
A Chypre aerait utilir8e non pae pour ddfendro la
sdcuritd et l’int6gritb territoriale do lVle, mair Ador
finr centrakes, de demander la oonvctoation
duConreil
de ebouriti, de maniArequela queetionde l’onvoi de
la foroe A Chypre soit rbexamlnbe,memeavantl’explration du d(lai,de troir moic aotuellomentpldvu,
14. Etant donn&quooette d&olarationeat 1apremiAre
intervention de la d&l&ration eovi&ique au Conreil
de r6ouritb oe mole-01;nouatenons‘a Bouligner la
rituatlon abrurde qu’a provoqubela questiondo la
prdaidencadu Conseil.
15. A la 1027Amee@anoedu Coneell, 1s 17 avril
1963, la d618gationsovibtique avait d8jA dbolar6quo
aa partiolpcdlonaux travaux du Conreil de rburit4
sVnrplrait uniquementde l’int.&At qu’elle portait au
problbmeet n’impliquait auounement
qu’alleaooeptait
lo fait quelo porte dePldsidentduConrail de r6ouritb
et la plaoeappartenantde droit Ala Rdpubliquepopulaire do Chine soient1llAgalementoooup& par quelqu’un qul, oomme ohaoun le salt, ne reprdrente
personne.11va aanadlrs que10sseulr reprdsentnntr
16gitlmesde la Chine no peuvent8tre et no eont quo
lea reprbrentantr de la R4publlquepopulaire de
Chine.
16. The PRESIDENT:As reprerentatlve of CHINA, 16. Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l@anglalr):En ma
I have the right of reply to the oonoludingremarb
qualit de repr6sontantde la CHINE,j’aurais le droit
madeby the representative of the Soviet Union.But do rdpondre aux observationr que lo ropr8rontant
being mindful of the urgent buainorr that 111%
ahead de 1VJnionsoviltique a faiter on tnrminant ron interof the Counoil, I have no intention of beingprovoked vention. Mais, oonroientde l~urgencm
der afflriresdont
into any wordy disouarionof the so-oalledquestion doit o%oouperlo Conseil, JonLcveux paa me lairrer
of rep6erentaiion.That quertion, aa membersof the ontrafnor dans une longuedirousslonaur la quo&ion
Counoil must have noted, WBIdisposedof only a few dite db la ‘%pr6rentationa. Cette quortion, OOmme
monthsa by the QonaralAerombiy,2/ whioh-upheld lee membror du Conaoille mavent,a 6% rAf@ voioi
the right$ul rtatur of my delegation in ihe United quelquormoir Mulemeat par 1’AsromblC gdn6ralo.V,
Nationr. My oapeoity aa representative of China in
qui a rdaffirm6 lea droitr l$gitlmer de ma d6l@atioa
thin Counoilunder the provieionr of the Charter tr
A l’organiration do6 Nation0 Unier. Ma qualit &
not opento question,and 81 preriding officer for thir
r#prbrontant do la Chino au Conroil, on oonformitb
month I would like to Bay to the representativeof
de8 dirpoaitionr de la Chart& ne prdta nullomontA
Be loviot Union that. even 8.1I extendto him every
dirouarion rt, on ma qualit de PrbriLnt pour 00
oonridotation that 10-duo to a repreeentativoon thii
molr-oi, je tiennrA dire au rapr(rontant de l’tlnion
Qounoil, I rhall expeot of him a rearonablomoaaura rovi&iaur
an lui rooordanttouti la oonrld6rrtion
of 00-y ration with the Chrir in the oonduotai the
uaun011
I burineur
&nor,
oomme
11convient.
17. Mr. BERNARDES (Brazil): I huve consulted with
the other co-sponsors of the draft resolution, and we
fully understand Wle spirit in which the sepnrnte vote
on parngraph 4 was requested by the delegntion of
the Soviet Union. ln spite of the fact tint the draft
reeolutlon IA the result, ae I stnted on Monday [ 1100th
meeting], of n number of consultfltlons and lengthy
negotiations which took plnce during the last few
weeks
nmong its oo-sponsors, the other members of
the Council nnd the interested pnrtles, nnd that each

17. M. BERNARDES (Brf%ll) [tradult de l’anglals]:
J’nl consult6 les autres auteurs du pt’ojet de r&solution et noun comprenons parfaitement ITesprit dane
loquol la d616gatlon de 1’Unlon sovl&lque a demand6
un vote &par6 sur le paragruphe 4 du cIlsposltif,
Blen que ce projet de r&olutlon,
comme je l’ni dlt
lundl [llOOBme &ance], r6sulte de consultatlone etdo
longues n6goclatione qul ont eu lieu tee dernibres
semnines
entre lee a~lteurs, les uutres membros du
Conseil et lee parties intbres&es,
et bion que chacun

de sea paragrapheealt 6th altentlvementpod, de
rorte quo nousooneld6ronele texte oommeEquitable
et Bqulllhrb, lee auteuredu profet aoceptentquel’on
moo&de au vote &par& demand6par le repr(lrentant
be FUrdonsovibtlqu& dansPespoliqueoela.prmettra
au Conrell deprendre une dbolrlon winlme 8ur Peneembledu projet.
18. Pmr 008ralsonset &ant donndqu’enprdsentant
le projet de r6dolutlon }‘al expllqu6 see prinolpeux
aapeote et lee motifs qul l%nt lnrplr6, je propose,
Monslsur le Prbsldent, que, 8’11n’y a pas d’objeotlon de la part d’autreemembreaduConaellet puleque
nouo reoonnalesonerous l’urgenoe de la queetlon,
nounpaeelonsau vote eprtk! avolr entendule Seorbtelre g6nbra1, qul, Je omis le savolr, ddalre faire
une d6olararlondevant le Conreil.
19. Le PRESIDENT(tredult de l’anglale): Le Seor&
talre gC6ral a une d6olaratlonBfatre avant quenova
passionsauvote.
20. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: Slnoe the draft
ao. Le SECRSTAIREGENERAL(tredult del%nglalr):
reeolutlon under oonslderationby thle Counoll,perPulrque le projel de rbsolutlon eoumleau Conroll
tioulerly in its operative paragraphs4, 6, 7 and8 tend II oharger le SeorOtalreg&&al de oertalner
would call upon‘the Seoretary-Generalto undertake responeeblllt4e, notamment en vertu de8 paraoertaln rosponelbllltl6e, I thought that it would be graphea 4, 6, 7 et 6 du dleposltlf, jle.1penedqu’ll
quite appropriate and no doubthelpful to the Counoll oonvenelt et qu’ll pourralt &re utile pour le Conreil
lf I rhould briefly lndloatemy ownthinking aboutthe quej’lndlqsebrihment
oommentJ’envleagela nature
nature endexeroieeof thesereeponelb~lltlsa,
de oeareaponsablllt6set la manlbredont je pourrelr
m’en eoqultter.
21. As I observed in my previousstatement(1097th 21. CommeJe l’el fait observer dnnr me d6olaretlon
meeting], the oreatlon of a United Nations peaoepr(o8dente (1091BmP
86anoe],la ordatlond’uneforce
keeping foroe for Cyprus could only oome aboutby
de8 Netlonr Unles oharg8edu malntien de la palx R
poaltlve eo#on of this Counoll. Thle aotlon. es the Chypre ne pourralt rbsulter quod’uned6olslonposldraft resolution epealflee,obviously muat be predltlve du Conrell. Cette d8olelon, a?nelquele prbvolt
oetecluponthe oonsentof the Qovernmentof Cyprus, le projet de r&rrolutlon, supposenboeeeairementle
on whoseterritory Lheforoe wouldbe deployed.The ooneentement
du aouvernementde Chypre, pay6 ohla
draft rerolutlon, in ita operative paragraph4, aaka force serelt etatlonnbe. Le paragraphe4 du dlrpw
the Secretary-Generel to ertabllsh the oonmorltlon sltlf du projst de rbsolution demandeeu Seor8telre
and elee of Uieforoe in oonsultatlonwith the doverng&&al de fixer la compositionet lleffeotlf de aette
ments of Cyprus, Greeoe, Turkey and the United tome en oonnultatlon eveo lea Qouvernementede
Kingdom c -thla- regard, it would be my intention, Chypre, de la QrBoe, du Royaume-Unlet de la Turln aooorctanoewith well-ertnbllshetl @raotloeoon- qule. A get Bgard, !e me proporereir, oonform6ment
oernlngprevloua UnlleclNetlonapeaoe-koeplngforoee, B la pratlque qul s’est dteblle k l~oooeslon
de la forto keep the Seourlty Council, whloh wouldauthorise metlon par lea NationsUnler deaRoroesde maintlen
lk eetabllahment,promptly endfully informedabout de la palx pr6o6dentee.de tanlr le Consellde e&uthe organlratlon andoperationof the foroe, lnoludlng rlt4, qul attorlsvralt la or6atlon de la form, blen
itr oompodtion, sire and oommand.0n the baa16of
inform6 A tow momentsau eujet de Porganloatlon
prellmlnery ooundinge that I have taken, without, of
et der aotlvlt4a de la foroe, notnmmenteli oequl
ofname. havingmadeany oommltmente,I may inform
oonoerne aa oomposltion,don effeotlf et uon oommandement.D’aprBr lea rondegespr6llmlnalres au+
the Co&oil tliat althou& the problemof oon&ltlon
in delloate anddlffloult beoaureof the lndloatedllmlquelr j%i proo(ld&, sane, birn entendu,avolr prlr
trtlonr on the rangeof oholoe,I very muohhopeth@t auounengagement,fe puir informer 16 Con~ellque,
a foroe ruoh aa lr envisagedb thlr draft resolution, bien o lr problbme de la oomporltion solt dUoat
andof adequateslaa, oanbe ao3;eved.
et d fr ioile I r4roudre du fait cl81 indtoationr limltant
Ilo &4x, jto8p&a hmrrmont quW eara porribla dr
i;,
iWeir une foror Qdmme oolie rnvirydr par 11 projet
de rbrolution, et d’un effeotff ad6qurt.
22. I might pclnt cut nlsc that in recruiting troops
22. Je puls nfcuter qu’endemundantdestroupespour

and every one of it8 paragraph0

was oarefully

oon-

atdared, and that the result le a dooumentthat we
believe to be fair andbelanoed,theoo-sponsors
agree
to the eeperatsvote askedby the representative of
the Soviet Union, in the hopethat this will enablethe
Council to reaoh a unanlmouodeolrlon on the draft
resolutionaa a whole.
16. Having in mindthe above Jnelderatlonaandthe
fact that ln lntroduolngthe draft resolutionI explained
lta maln feeturea and motivationa, I would suggeet,
Mr.
President, if there are no objeotioneon the part.
of the other membera of the Council, that after hearlng the Ssoretary-Qeneral, who, I understand,wants
to make a stateme& to the Counoll,we prooeedimmediately to the vote, as we all agreeon the urgenoy
of the matter.
19. The PRESIDENT:Before we prooeedto voting,
the Seoretary-Generalhas a statementto make.

for this force, I would cmphnslze on Lhu bnsls of
cperntlve pnragrnph 6 that the force, unlike the pencekeeplng forces in Gnzn and the Cocgc, wculcl hnve n
fixed nntl firm durutlon of three months. The force
thus could be extended beyond three months only by
n new nctlcn by this Council. I wculcl nlso drnw RLtentIon to the provIsIon In pnrngrnph 6 for meeting
the cost of the iurcc which is not to be chnrgotl ngnlnat
United Nutloos revcnuos. In this context I woultl I:artlcultLrly llkc to call iltlontlon to the Inet sentence
of opurntlvc paragraph 6 which .&tee thnt: “The
Secrelnry-Gencrnl
mny nlso nccept voluntrrry con-

la force je scullgnerala, &ant dcnn6 le parngmphe 6
du dlsposltlf, que In force, A la difference des forces
de mnlntlen de la pnlx de Gazn et clu Congo, soralt

ocnstltu6e pour une pbrlode blen nrr&Oe de trcls

mcls. La force ne pcurralt dcnc &re mnlntcnue en
existence pour plus de trols rnols que par une ncuvelle decision du Consell. Je sculignernls Bgalement
In ,dispositicn du paragraph0 6, selcn lnquelle le coot
de lu force ne seralt pas A la charge do 1VNU. A ce
prcpos, Je tlens A attirer l’attentlco aur In dernlbre
phrnse du purngrnphe
6 du dlspcsltlf,
qul tilt clue
le SecrBtnirP gBn6rnl “pcurrn uussi acceptcr des
4

trlbutlon~
the hope
will be f
someap
oontfnge
uponthe:
reeolutio

23. I an
Son Of tl

OR11
upo
Qoverm
aot qulo
parww
tion le ad
24. In :
Seoretar
are serla
experlen
them. I (
of the QC
ernment
wholehe
to the eff’
25. May

the moat
of Bollvlr

resolutlo
26. The
prooeedt’
by Bolivl
lS/66713

27. The
questeda
fore, eoo
AVOtal
&I faw

andNorth
A&VffM C
AfJhffli
Soolallrt 1

7% PIi
nond8&lfl
18. The
nrolution

A vote H
La favcu
France,
Soviet so<
Drltaln
t
Amorlca.
Against:
AIxitainf
The dra
29. The
represent;

a de

kitable
a8 l’on
u3ntant
nettrr
r l*en-

klais):
:onroll
‘tainer
pkira6 qu’il
:onseil
inature
Yrrals
,
wation
) force

paix B

I posi>revo1t
rent 10
I oh la
cliopo‘E%%
irte de
a Tur@merit
La iore::I)

-

9, blen

Loation
08 qul
i oom18auxIF PriB
(11qw
d8Uoat

ii%%i
p*aj*t
3 8 pour
wphe G

foroes
sernit
3 trois
nue 011
18

nou-

lement

le coat
J. Ace
‘:rnibre
lit qne
Br de9

trlbutlonc for that purpore~, and ctrOngly exprers
the hopethat substantialoont?lbutlonrof this nature
will be forthooming stnoe it la already apparsntthat
someappropriateStateb might more readily provide
oontlngentswere it not for the nxtra finauoialburden
uponthem oalledfor by the oostprovlclon of the draft
resolution.

oontributioor
volontsdrer a ccrtt~ fW, et a exprlmer
le llerme eepolr que d*lmportentesoontrlbutfone90lontalree seront ver&s, oar ll appsralt d&j& que
certalnr
Etats pourraient fournlr plur faoflement
des oontlngentesanela charge flnanalbre additlonnelle r6sultant de la dlsporttlon du profet de r4eolutlon relative au Rnanoemcnt.

23. I am, of oourae,also gWcq thoughtto the ques23. Blen entendu,Jeme pr6oooupeausrl de la question of the mediatorwhlohthe draft lesulution would
tion du mbdlateurque, d’aprbele projet derbso:utlon,
aall upon me to designatein agreementwith the four
Je serale oharg6 de dbglgner en aocord aver ler
Covernr,:ente,and I would expeot to be pkeparedto
quatre gouvernements;je oompterale pouvolr aglr
aot qulokly on thle, in aooordanoewith operative rapldementB oe eujet, oonform6mentau paragraphe7
paragraph7 of the draft resolution,onoethe resolu- du dlsposltlf, une fois le projet de rdsolutlorladopt&
tlon la adopted
24. In sum, although the responsibllltles for the 24. En un mot, blen que le projet de r6rolutlon
Seoretary-General faresen by the draft reeolutlon oharge le SeorBtal.reg6ndral de lourdes responsaare serious,they do not differ substantiallyfrom pnstI blllt6a, oee responsablllt6une dlffkent paegrandasxperlenoeand I have no hesitation In undertaking ment de cellee qui lul ont btb oonfl(lespnr le pass&
them. I oould heavily, of oourae,on ‘fe oo-operation et Je n’al auouneh6sltatlonBles aooepter.Je oompte
of the Governmentof Cyprus and G. the other Cov- beauooup,blen entendu,sur la ooop&ationduQouverernmentsmentlanedin the draft reeolutlon,for their
nementde Chypre et deeautres gouvernumentsmenwholeheartedcc-operation and aeeietanoeare vltnl
ttonnh
dam le projet
de r&olution, oar leur 00op0to the effeotive implementationof the resolution.
ration et leur assistanceplelnes et cntl&es eont
indispensablespour la bonneex6outlsn de la rSsolutlon.
26. May I alto plaoe on reoord my gratifloatlon at
25, G&e l’on me permette de f6llolter lee reprbthe most skilful mannerIn whlohthe representativea eentantsde la Bollvle, du BrBrll, de la C&e-d’Ivo!re,
of Bolivia, Brazil, Ivory Coast,Moroooo andNorway du Maroo et dela Norvbgepaurl’habilet8aveo lr\puelle
oonduoteddiscussionswlth a view to arriving at a
lle ont men6les entretlenr pour 1WaboratlonWne
resolutionon the matter beforethla Counoll.
r6solutlonsur la questionsoumiseau Consell.
28. The PRESIDENT:I think the Counollshouldnav
26. Le PRESIDENT(tradult de l’anglals): Sepenes
prooeedto ,voteon tlld joint draft reeolutlonsubmitted que le Coneellpeut maintenantpasserau vote sur le
by Bolivia, Brazil, Ivory Coast,Moroooo andNorway projet de rdsolutlonoommun prbsentbpar la Bollvle,
IW66711.
le BrWl, la C&e-d’lvolre, le Maroo et la Nnrvbge
W66711.
27. The representative of the Soviet Union hasre27. Le reprdsentantde 1Wnionaovl&ique a demand6
queateda separatevote on paragraph4. I shallthereun vote &par8 sur le paragraphe4 du dlrpoeltlf. En
fore, aooordingly,put that paragraphto the votefirst.
OOna6quenoB,
Je demandeau Conrell de seprononoer
d’abord sur oe paragraphe.
A vote wa8 taken by show of hands.
II uSt pruodd4
au vote ii mafn Ievde.
In favour:
Bolivia, Dracll, China, Ivory Coa&,
Votent
pauc Bollvie, BrErll, Chine,C&e-d’Ivolre,
Moroooo, Norway, United Kingdom of Grsat Britain
Et&e-Unls dVAtr.6rique,MaroO, NorvBpe, RoyaumeandNorthern Ireknd, UnitedStatesof Amerloa.
Uni de arande-Bretagneet d’lrlande du Nord.
Apfnet:
None.
Votent oontre: N8nnt.
A&t&in&
Caeohorlovakia,Franoe, Unionof Soviet
Sabatiennent:
FranOB, ToMoorlovaqule, Unionder
SOOlallrtRepubllor.
Rdpubllquerrooialfrter sovi8tlquer.
Par 8 trolx ooatre r&m, eve0 3 akhntfons,
10 peraltba pareprnph
wae adopted
by 8 votes in favour,
none

agafnrt, with 3 aQtentionr.

graph3

28. The PRERIDENTIWe shall nawvote on the draft
Naolution81 a wbotr.

ert

adopt&

18. IA PRESIDENT (tradult de l%ngltir)c Nourrllonr
maintanant prrrrr au vota &. fWWMbl@ du projet

d6 s!wwio&

A vote was taken

by show

of hands.

ll est proc4d-5

au vote

$ mafn

fevt?e.

fin,favour;
Bolivia, Brnzll, Chlnn, Czeohoslovnltin,
Votent pour: Bollvle,
Br6611, Chine, COWd’lvoire,
Vrance, Ivory Coast, Morocco, Norwny. IJnion of
Etats-Unis
d’AmbrIque,
I’ranoe, Maroo, Norvbge,

Soviet. Soclnlist

Ikq~ublics,

Unlted I<lngdom of Greul

Hoyaume-Uni
de Grancle-Bretagne
et dWande
du
Nerd, ‘TohBcoslovaquie, Union des HBpuubllques soclnlistes sovl6tiyues.
Vote& centre:
Nbant.
S’abstienncnt:
N6ant.

BrltRin and Northern Ireland, United Stntes of
Amorloa.
Against: None.
Alu’tainfng* None.
The

draft

resolution

was &opted

A I’unanfmftt?,

unrmimously.

29. The YIXESII)ENT: I now give the floor to the
relwesentntive

le projrt

de r&olufion

est adopt&

Le PIlESIDISNT (traduit
de l’anglois): Je donlIe
maintenant lu pnrole uu rq&t;entcint
de lu I*‘rance.
29.

of Frnnco.
5

30. Mr. SEMOUX (Franoo) (translated from Frenoh):
After the voting on the draft resolution submitted by
Bolivia, Braril, Ivory Coast, Moroooo and Norway,
my first words will be to express the hope that the
r&m of peaoe ~111 not be long delayed. That hope
la oommbnrurate with the importanoe my country
attaoheeto the Cyprus problem.
31. For the time being, the ohief reeponeibilityfor
the restoration of order and peaoelies with the interested parties, as defined in the ngreementsin
foroe. However, to help the parties, it hasbeenoonridered neoessaryto give them the aesistanoeof a
foroc to ba set up under the aegis of the Seourlty
CourJ’! In vlow of the unanimousagreementof the
parties conoornedon this point, France haso,‘fered
no opposition, despite Its reservations about the
prinolple of United Nations intervention tctk’ng a
military form, partioularly if that were to lend to
operationsinvolving the useof foroe.

80. M. REYDOUX(Frame): Aprb8 Padoptiondu prolet de r&iolutlon pr$sente par la Bollvie, IS Br6ell.

viotionpresent
kept in
of the I
tegrlty
We adn
oount, I
that if
we shor
that OR
be any
any 0th
stanoee
is euoh
neverth
foroe ia
of the C

foroe.

39. cm:
oolleagr
eral’s I
the oau
havese1
fers to
under t
oiusivel
we abstl

ia C&e-d’Ivoire, ie Maroo-et la Norvbge, me8pr&
mlers mote eerontpour exprimer l’espoir quel’apalsement ne tardera pas B venlr. Cet espoir set iI la
mesurede l%itbr& quemonpaysportc RUproblbme
de Chypre.
31. Pour lu moment, olest auxparties int6ress@er,
telles qu’elles sont d&finies dansles aooordsen vigueur, qu’appartientla responsabllit( essentielledu
r&ablissement a& l’ordre et de la pa~ifioation.Mhis
on a estim6 n6oesasire,pour aider lee parties en
oause,de leur fournir l’assietanced’uneforoeoonstitu6e sousl%gidedu Conseiide s6ouritt3.Etant dorm6
l’aocord unanime des parties int6ressees sur ce
point, la France ne sty eat pas oppos6e,malgr6la
reserve quelul inspire le prtnoiped’uneintervention
des Notions Unies sousuneforme militalre, notamment sl oelle-oi devait conduireBdesop6rationsde

32. Our reservatlons, moreover, are made even
greater by the diffioulties 3f implementationbecause
of whioh, as is apparbnt
from. the text of the reaolution. oartloularlv heavy rer~pcnsibilitiesnre lalcl
on the beoretary&eneril. The !;eourity Counoil is
thus divesting lteelf of respons~bllitieswhiohbelong
to it hut whio6wouldolearly be dlffioult to disohargr‘.
Thie oan only oonfirm our reservationsof prinoiple.
While, of oourse, not questioningIn the slightestthe
Seoretc?ry-Qeneral’ewisdom and prudenoein these
mattere, the Frenoh delegationoonsiderathat this
is really goingvery far in the direotion of delegating
powers to one man, We wish in any event to streae
that this deoisionmustnot beregardedasa preoedent.

32. Notre reserve est a’ailleurs nooruepar lesdiffloult6s de misc en cauvre qui oonduisent& dormerau
Secr&alre g&&al, oomme11reesort du texte de la
rt3solution,desaitributione partiouliarementlourdee.
Le Conseilde s6ourit4 seddohargeainsi dec responsabilit6s qui sont les siennes,mais qu’il lui seralt
manifestementdlffiolle d’exeroer. Cela ne peut quo
oonfirmer nos r&serves de prinoipe. Saris,bien entendu, oonoevoirle moindre doutesur la sagaolt6et
la prudenoedu SeorQtairegdn6ralen oe domaine,la
d616gation
franqaiseoonsid&requeo’estvraiment aller
tree loin dans la vole des d&l@gations
de pouvoirs
oonsentiesit uneseulepersonnalit6,Elle tient en tout
oas B marquerque oetted6oisionnedevra polnt Btre
consid6rt3e
oommeun prbobdent.
33. The immediateobjeotlve is, of oourae,to endthe 33. L’objeotif
imm6diat eat, blen entendu,la fin du
armedoonfliot betweenthe two oommunitiee.But that
oonflit arm6 qul opposeles deux oommunaut60.
Mnis
will not resolve the fundamentalproblemswhiohthe
oela ne r4eoudrapasles probl&mesde fond auxquels
fait face aotuellementla Rdpubliquede Chypre et qui
Republicof Cyprus is faoing today andwhiohresult
preoisely from the ooexistenoeof theseoommunitiee r4sultent pr6ois6mentde la ooexistenoede ces oom-the Greeks, who are the majority, and the Turks,
munautis, dont l’une, oelle qui eet majoritoire, ost le
who are the minority. It will be a long andhard task peuple greo, et ltautre, oelle qui est minorltaire, est
to find the neoeasarysolutions, whioh must beboth le peuple two. Ce sera uneQ)uvrede longuehaleine
just and senrible, requiring of oourae, ohsngerin
sue de trouver 19saolution8nboesrairer, CM doivent
the ryrtem nowin foroe.
itre des solutions(quitabler et pe bonaeio, n&ssitant, blen entendu,le ohangemec\t
du rysMme prbsentementen vigueur.
34. The appointmentof a mediatormay faoilltats the
34. La dbslgnationdu m(ldiateur peut faolliter ler
firrt rteps in that direotion, The likelihoodir that a premiers pasdanr une klle dlreotion, I1 eet probable
drawn-out prooers
will be inevitnble whloh will be quQn long prooerarr 6era fnhitable, dont le terms
bra t to a olore only 8fter the neoeeseryunder- dovra n6aerralrsment6tre pr&&i( d’uneententeentr6
rtan‘t%”
lng lr rraohd betweenQreeoeandTurkey.
la Ctrha et la Turqule,
@, There are the f8w oonuiderationswhlohmydelo80, ,Toller rant Irr quolqueaoonrid4rationr quoma
@tlon WiUhed to put before you to a&in our vot6 131 t&ion totuit k rxpowr pour oxpll uer k3 v&
at tho eonolurlonof the dobato.
I&Or le viol dc4mettro on oonoluriondu d4bbrt.
36. The PRESIDENT:I nowoallonthe representative 36. L8ePRESIDENT(traduit de l’anglals): Je donne
of Czecboulovnltln.
mnintennnt 10. pnrole nu reprbsentant de In TchBcoslovnquie.
37. M. HAJILX (l’ch6coslovnq~~le):
Aynnt pris pnrt
aux dchnngos de vu08 offlcieux qui ont pr6c6d6 la
r6dnctIon de In r6solutIon qui vlont d’btre aclo@e,
la dbl0gution tchdcoslovnque n’s jnrnnis cnch6 88
position ni les rnisons qui ne lui ont pa9 permie de
8’assocler pleinement nux autourn du projet pour In
r6dnction de ce dernler.
30. D(ljh au tours clu tl6but au seln tlu Consoil, nous
nvions oxprim
l~oplnion -- et oeln rente notre pro-

37. Mr, HAJIX (Czeohoslovnkin)
(trnnslntetl from
French): As n pnrticlpnnt in the informnl exohnnges
of viowv which preceded the drnfling of the resolution
just adouted. the Czechoslovnk delegntlon hns never
concenleti itY nttitude or the rensons~whlch provented
it from nssoclntln~ Itself fully with tho spons~re of
thnt resolution in ti;e drnftlng bf their text.
38. Enrlior
In the dobnte bore 111the Council, we
exprcswtl lhc view-nntl It remnlns our profm\nd con6

40. In
which w

delegati
the Cyp:
and in t
oreate c
ernment
oountry’
shown-1
the juet
terrltori
defence
of the Ct
41. Befl
like on I
the abet
Republio
China, t
c0lm011
the Ceec
with regl

%h:“c”
adopted,
eorlng I
c0un011
llc of Cy
nren.
43. Mny
dl to th
represen
tlcIpnll0~
the

COUlll

In du proLe BrWl,
~mee prelue l’apair set A la
,problAme

brese6er,
rde en vimtietlle du
don. M&is
bartiee en
oe oonsti-

;ant donnd
8 aur 08
,malgr6 la
;ervention
0, notamrations de
; 10sdiffidonner au
(exte de la
t lourdes.
Lx%
1 P-t we
, bien enagaoit6 et
bmaine,la
ment aller
pouvoirs
,nt en tout
ipoint Btre
la fin du
:tt3s. Mzin
I auxquelr
pre et qui
)oes oom-

ire, eat le

est
ue halelne
hi doiwnt
is, n8oasbeme pr&

ltaire,

>lliter les

t probable
; le &me
pa8 entre

: Je donne

n Tch6cW

viotion-thst in order to reoolve the problem8of the
preesentrituailqn the main obfeotive mustalway be
kept in mind, namely the reaffirmation and defenoe
of the sovereignty, indspendenoe
and territorial integrity of Cyprua in aooordanoewith the Charter.
We admit that the resolution has takenthie into aoaount, at least to someextent. There can beno doubt
that If that objeotlve had been stated more direotly
we ehouldnow be muohaloes to a final solution:in
that ease, a8 we said before, there wouldno longer
be any need to providu for an internationalforce or
any other measure.Of oc*\r8e, in present oiroumstanoes,where the Cyprue Governmentthinkslthere
Is suoh n need, we take this into aooount,but we
neverthelessnote that the Idea of an international
foroe is not altogether in nooordwith the provisions
of the Charter.

fonde oonviotion - que pour r6eoudre ler probl&mar

39. our delegation fully agrees with those of our
oolleagueewho have emphaeieed
the Seoretary-Qeneral’~ ability, talent and merit and his devotion to
the oause of peaoeand the United Nntione. But we

39. Notre d616gationest pleinsmentd’aooord awo
ceux de nos oollbgues~1 ont soulign6lea oapaoiflr,
le talent et les merites du SeorOtalregbneral, ainal
que Bon d6vouementA la oauae de la p&ix et des
Nation6 Uniea, Mais noueavons dee douteeearieux
en oe qui oonoernela diepositionqui transfbre au
Seordtaire gdn6ral une responeabilit8qul, t;n vertu
de la etrlote applicationde la Charte, n’appartient
qurau Conseilde s8ouritb lui-mame. Cleat pourquoi
no118
nouaBommeeabstenurrdana18 vote our le paragraphe4.

have serious doubt8 regarding

40. In spite of the weaknessesof the reeolutlon,
whiohwe had oooahionto oritioize in the oouraeof
oonveraationswith its sponaora,the Czeohoslovak
delegationvoted for it out of reepeotfor the faot (hat
the Cyprus delegationooneidersit to be aooeptable
and in the hopethat ite implementationwill speedily
oreate conditions that will facilitate the Cyprus Qovernment’s effort@ to maintain and etrengthen the
oountry’sindependence
andunity, By 80doing,wehave
ehown-as we ehall never fail to do-our ruuuort for
the just oau@eof the independenoe,
eovereibty and
territorial integrity of the Republioof Cyprur and the
defenosand ooneiatentapplioationof the prinoiplee
of the Charter.
41. Before ooncludlngmy explanationof vote,I rhould
like on behalf of my delegation,to note with regret
the abeenoeof the reprerentative of the Peonlet
Republioof China, the only lawful reprsre&ti?e of
China, to whomfall8 the offioe of President of the
Counoil during thir monthof Maroh, and to rrrffirm
the CaeohoolovakQovrrnmentts well-known porition
with regard to thlr faot anditr oauae~,

40. Malgrb lea faibleeeeede la r6rolution, quenaa
avonn ou l’oooaelonde oritiquer au oourade oonverratione aveo 6ee auteuro, respeotantle fait que la
ddldgation ohypriote oonridbre oe texte oommeaooeptableet erp6rant que @onapplioationne tardera
pne Aorder der oondltionaqui faolliteront len effort6
du Qouvernementohypriote pour mainknir ot renforoer l’ind6pendanoe
et 1’unitJdu payr, la dbldgatlon
tch6oorlovaque a votb paur le projet. En agirrant
atnri. elle n’a baa oera6. et ne oaaaerapaa. do donner
ron itppul A le Jurte oaure de l~indbpbndjmoe,
de la
souverainet.4 et de lW&rritO terrltorlale de la R~uu-

41, The PREEllDENT; 1 am sure that allthomombers
of the Ceunoil for1 gratiflod that thr Maolutlon Jurt
adopted, whloh redounds to the oredit ofthrflve rpon-

4_R La PREfHDENT (tradutt b lW@tr I Je ruir
s!& q;tr tour I&r membros du Oon@oii18 0 ii @litcatBs
*air qu3 18 r4aolutton qui viot dWre a&@& Iaquoll8
fait honnlur aw oinqpufssanoerqui l’ont pr(lrentee,

soring Powere, had the unanimouesupport of the

llOUS
pro-

blique de Chypre, ainsi-qu% la d6fense et B Yap&

oatlon oonrtantede8prinolper de la Char&

41. Avant de oonolura mon sxplioation de vote, je
tienm, au nom de ma dWgation, b noter avoo regret
l’abrenoe du reptisentant de la R6publiqur populain
de China, reul repr$rentant 16gal de la Chine, auquel
appartient la prWdenoa du Conrell pcur 06 molr ds

mar@, et A r6afflrmer la porition bion ooanuedu
Qouvernement toh(ooslovarque A Mgard do 01 fait et
de 8eaoaum.

Counoil. This nugurs well for the future of the RepubIlc of Cyprus nntl for the stnblllty of the Motlltorruncnn
nron.

n b6ttbficiti de ltappui de tous 10s tnernbresdu Conseil.
C’est ln uu bou nuguropour l’nvenlr de la 103publiquc
de Chypre et pour lo atnbllltd dms lu rdgiou tnbditerrant3otlno.

43. Mny I tnkc Ihitt opportuully on behalf of the Councll to thnuk the I~oroip;n Minleto~* of Cyprue nntl the
representnllvctr of Greece nntl Turkey for tholr pnrtlcIptttlotl
rtnd
co-cylutYttioll
in
tt1o
dulIlmtYIllontl
of

4% Je no voudrais pm lnisaer paoeer cetto oocnelon
aune remeroier,
nu nom du Coneeil, lo Minielre dee
nffuiros btrungh~~
de Chypre et lee re~m(faontants
do In Grbce et de In ‘Ibrquie tl’nvolr pnrtici$
et
npportb leur ooncoure ltux dBlIbBrntlona du Conaell.

ttw

lfmil,
notre

the olauee whioh trane-

fere to the Seoretary-Generala responsibility that,
under the striot letter of the Charter, belong6 exelusively to the Seourity Council itself. That ie why
we nbetainedIn the vote on operative paragraph4.

que poeela situation aotuelle il fallait d’en tenir A
l’objeotif primordial, o’eet-A-dire la r&fflrmation
et la d6feneede la FpouveralnetA,
de ltind6pendanoe
et de lW&ritb
territoriale de Chypre, en aooord
aveo !a Charte. Nouereoonnaiesone
quela r6eolution
a tenu oomptede oette poritioa, au mains danr und
oertaine meaure. I1 Vest pee douteux qua ai oet
objeotif avalt Bt6 exprim6 plue direotement nou8
eeriona plur prooheed*unesolution definitive; danr
08 oae, oommenoua l’avone dit, 11no serait plur
nt3wmzairede pr6voir une foroe internationale ou
toule aztre mesure. Bien entendu, dans lea oiroonetanoe>p&entea, alore que lo Qouvernement
de Chypre =&time qu’une telle nboersitb edate,
noun tenonsoomptede an position,male nounnotons
tout de m&mequele oonoeptdelaforoe internationale
ne a’aooordepastout Afail aveoleediepositlonede la
Charte.

c0ut1c11.

46. Mr. KYPFUANOU (c;ypru~): I wouldllke,onbahalf
of my Qovernment, to express to the Counoilour
appreoiationfor the understanding rhown by all the
membersand for their oinoeredeoire to helpin rrolvlng the problemsof Cyprus.Thankyou,Mr. Preeident.
48. The PRESIDENT: Sin08 there is no further
business, the meetingatandeadjourned.
Themeetingrose at 11.40a.m.

46. hi. KYPRIANOU (Chypn) [traduit do IWglair~
Au nomde men gouvernement, je d6sire rendre hom-

rnageau Connellpour la oompr6henrlondont toul HI
membrer ont fatt prsuw et pour leur d6rlr elnobre
d’rtder II r6eoudre 10sproblbmeede Chypre. Meroi,
Moneiour le Prbsidoat.
46. Le PRESIDENT(tradult de l%nglale): L’ordredu
jour 6tant 6pule6,la sdanoeert lev6e.
La dame srt levde 1 II h 40.

WHERE
TO BUY
UNITED
NATIONS
PUBLICATIOFiS
ADRESSES 00 LES .PUBLICATIONS
DE L’ONU SONT EN VENTE

VNi

Sl
OI

11

ImuANo,IIum,
,,1,1ONl””O,,lCl,OuWm.

CI
H

DQ

Prooil
Adoptl

OCCANlA/OCtANiC

LCJtttU
WPl
Lett
CY

OrdrO

Adeptit
L&e
de et
L&l
El&

(34 P. )
