United Nations

A/RES/62/122

General Assembly

Distr.: General
8 February 2008

Sixty-second session
Agenda item 119

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 17 December 2007
[without reference to a Main Committee (A/62/L.32 and Add.1)]

62/122. Permanent memorial to and remembrance of the victims
of slavery and the transatlantic slave trade
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 61/19 of 28 November 2006, entitled
“Commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of the abolition of the
transatlantic slave trade”,
Recalling also the designation of 25 March 2007 as the International Day for
the Commemoration of the Two-hundredth Anniversary of the Abolition of the
Transatlantic Slave Trade,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General, 1 which focuses on
initiatives undertaken by States to implement paragraphs 101 and 102 of the Durban
Declaration of the World Conference against Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance aimed at countering the legacy of slavery and
contributing to the restoration of the dignity of the victims of slavery and the slave
trade, 2
0F

1F

Recognizing how little is known about the four-hundred-year-long transatlantic
slave trade and its lasting consequences, felt throughout the world, and welcoming
the increased attention that the General Assembly commemoration brought to the
issue, including the raising of its profile in many States,
Recalling in particular paragraph 101 of the Durban Declaration which. inter
alia, invited the international community and its members to honour the memory of
the victims,
Welcomes the initiative of the States members of the Caribbean
1.
Community to erect in the halls of the United Nations a permanent memorial in
acknowledgement of the tragedy and in consideration of the legacy of slavery and
the transatlantic slave trade;

_______________
1
2

07-47109

A/62/270.
See A/CONF.189/12 and Corr.1, chap. I.

A/RES/62/122

2.
Notes the establishment of a voluntary fund for the erection of a
permanent memorial, expresses sincere appreciation to those Member States that
have already made contributions to the fund, and invites other interested parties to
do likewise;
Decides to designate 25 March as an annual International Day of
3.
Remembrance of the Victims of Slavery and the Transatlantic Slave Trade,
beginning in 2008, as a complement to the existing International Day for the
Remembrance of the Slave Trade and its Abolition of the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
Requests the Secretary-General, in collaboration with and building upon
4.
the work undertaken by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization, including its Slave Route Project, to establish a programme of
educational outreach to mobilize, inter alia, educational institutions and civil society
on the subject of remembering the transatlantic slave trade and slavery, in order to
inculcate future generations with the causes, consequences and lessons of the
transatlantic slave trade and to communicate the dangers of racism and prejudice;
Also requests the Secretary-General to report to the General Assembly at
5.
its sixty-third session on the establishment and implementation of the programme;
6.
Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its sixty-third session an
item entitled “Follow-up to the commemoration of the two-hundredth anniversary of
the abolition of the transatlantic slave trade”.
75th plenary meeting
17 December 2007

2
