VIII.

37/130.

Impact of inflation and monetary instability on
the regular budget of the United Nations

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 36/230 of 18 December 1981,
Deeply concerned at the increased cost of the goods and
services associated with the operation of the United Nations
and the United Nations system as a whole as a result of the
persistence of inflation and monetary instability in those
developed countries in which the United Nations makes its
expenditures,
Convinced that many Member States are not responsible
for the losses that the budget of the United Nations experiences as a result of the monetary phenomena referred to
in the preceding paragraph,
Stressing that, in order to cover the substantial losses
caused by inflation and monetary instability, there is a need
for a continuing review of procedures that could help meet
the above-mentioned budget costs in the most appropriate
way,
Having considered the study prepared by the SecretaryGeneral on the impact of inflation and monetary instability
on the regular budget of the United Nations, contained in
his report on the subject, 48
Convinced of the need to analyse more thoroughly all
aspects of the increased costs of the goods and services
associated with the operation of the United Nations,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
the impact of inflation and monetary instability on the regular budget of the United Nations; 48
2. Requests the Secretary-General to prepare a more
penetrating, extensive and detailed study on the impact of
inflation and monetary instability on the regular budget of
the United Nations, taking duly into consideration the content of the preambular paragraphs of General Assembly
resolution 36/230 and the present resolution, together with
the opinions of the Member States concerned, and to submit
it to the General Assembly at its thirty-ninth session.
109th plenary meeting
17 December 1982

37/131.

247

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

Report of the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board 49

The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Board to the General Assembly and to the
member organizations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund for 1982, 50 chapter III of the report of the International Civil Service Commission51 and the related report
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 52
Noting, in particular, the unanimous proposals made by
the Board53 in response to the request of the General Assembly to undertake a comprehensive analysis of all possible
measures to improve the actuarial balance of the Fund,
bearing in mind the views expressed in the Fifth Committee,

"' A/C.5/37/39.
•• See also sect. X.B.7, decision 37/429.
""Official Records of the GeMral Assemblv, Thirtv-seventh Se.uion,
Supplement No. 9 (A/37/9 and Corr.1-4).
·
·
" Ibid., Supplement No. 30 (A/37/30)
52 A/37 /674.
"See Official Records of the General Assemblv. Thirtv-seventh Session.
Supplement No. 9 (A/37/9 and Corr.1-4). ,eel ill.A ·

Noting further that a co-operative effort by member organizations, participants and beneficiaries-sharing equitably the burdens such measures may impose on them-is
required if the actuarial imbalance is to be reduced
significantly,

MEASURES TO IMPROVE THE ACTUARIAL BALANCE OF
THE UNITED NATIONS JotNT STAFF PENSION FUND

I. Approves the measures designed to improve the actuarial balance of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund which are contained in section III.A of the report of
the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board;~0
2. Requests the International Civil Service Commission, in co-operation with the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Board, to undertake the study of the age of separation and of retirement in all member organizations, bearing
in mind all the relevant resolutions of the General Assembly
together with the views expressed in the Fifth Committee.
and to submit proposals based thereon to the General
Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
3. Amends, with effect from I January 1983, the Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund.
without retroactive effect, as set forth in annex XII of the
report of the Board, and the pension adjustment system in
accordance with annexes IX and X thereof;

II
ADMISSION TO MEMBERSHIP IN THE UNITED NATIONS JOINT
STAFF PENSION FUND OF THE EUROPEAN AND MEDITERRANEAN PLANT PROTECTION ORGANIZA TI0N

Decides to admit the European and Mediterranean Plant
Protection Organization to membership in the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund, in accordance with article 3 of
the Regulations of the Fund, with effect from I January
1983;

III
EMERGENCY FUND

Authorizes the United Nations Joint Staff Pension Board
to supplement the voluntary contributions to the Emergency
Fund, for a further period of one year, by an amount not
exceeding $100,000;
IV
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES

Approves expenses, chargeable directly to the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund, totalling $5,955,300 (net)
for 1983 and reductions of $205,400 (net) for 1982 for the
administration of the Fund;
V
FINANCIAL OBLIGATIONS OF PENSIONERS TO THEIR
SPOUSES OR FORMER SPOUSES

I. Takes note of section 111.F of the report of the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Board concerning the absence
of effective measures for dealing with the financial obligations of a pensioner to his or her spouse or fonner spouse
which, in some cases, might give rise to serious hardship;
2. Requests the Board to pursue the search for such
measures along the lines indicated in paragraph 84 of its
report or by any other methods and to report thereon to the
General Assembly at its thirty-eighth session;
