UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/46
25 September 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3819th meeting of the Security Council, held on 25 September 1997,
in connection with the Council's consideration of the item entitled "The
situation in Africa", the President of the Security Council made the following
statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council met on 25 September 1997, at the level of
Foreign Ministers, to consider the need for a concerted international
effort to promote peace and security in Africa.
"The Security Council reaffirms its commitment to Africa in keeping
with the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. The
Council also reaffirms the principles of political independence,
sovereignty, and territorial integrity of all Member States.
"The Security Council notes that African States have made significant
strides towards democratization, economic reform, and respect for and
protection of human rights in order to achieve political stability, peace,
and sustainable economic and social development.
"Despite these positive developments, the Security Council remains
gravely concerned by the number and intensity of armed conflicts on the
continent. Such conflicts threaten regional peace, cause massive human
dislocation and suffering, perpetuate instability and divert resources from
long-term development.
"The Security Council reaffirms the responsibility of all Member
States to settle their international disputes by peaceful means and its own
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and
security in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations.
"The Security Council welcomes the important contributions of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), including through its Mechanism for
Conflict Prevention, Management, and Resolution, as well as those of
subregional arrangements, in preventing and resolving conflicts in Africa,
and looks forward to a stronger partnership between the United Nations and
the OAU, as well as subregional arrangements, in conformity with
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations. The Council supports
97-25359 (E)

250997

/...

S/PRST/1997/46
English
Page 2

enhancement of the capacity of African States to contribute to peacekeeping
operations, including in Africa, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations. The Council highlights the important contribution of the
African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty to international peace and
security.
"The Security Council fully supports the engagement of the United
Nations in Africa through its diplomatic, peacekeeping, humanitarian,
economic development and other activities, which are often undertaken in
cooperation with regional and subregional organizations. The United
Nations makes an important contribution to the efforts of Africa to
construct a future of peace, democracy, justice, and prosperity. The
Council underlines the importance of the commitment of the United Nations
through the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and other
humanitarian organizations to assist the efforts of African States to
address humanitarian and refugee crises in accordance with international
humanitarian law.
"The Security Council considers that the challenges in Africa demand a
more comprehensive response. To this end, the Council requests the
Secretary-General to submit a report containing concrete recommendations to
the Council by February 1998 regarding the sources of conflict in Africa,
ways to prevent and address these conflicts, and how to lay the foundation
for durable peace and economic growth following their resolution. Because
the scope of this report may extend beyond the purview of the Security
Council, the Council invites the Secretary-General to submit his report to
the General Assembly and other relevant bodies of the United Nations for
action as they deem appropriate, in accordance with the Charter of the
United Nations.
"The Security Council affirms its intention to review promptly the
recommendations of the Secretary-General with a view to taking steps
consistent with its responsibilities under the Charter of the United
Nations."

-----
