A /76/PV.98

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Seventy-sixth session

98th plenary meeting

Friday, 2 September 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Shahid  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Maldives)

The meeting was called to order at 10.25 a.m.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and Social
The President: Since no candidate obtained the
required two-thirds majority in the previous ballot,
there remains one seat to be filled from among the
Eastern European States.
We shall therefore proceed to the seventh
unrestricted ballot. In accordance with rule 94 of the
rules of procedure, this seventeenth round of balloting
shall be unrestricted.
May I remind the Assembly that any Member State
from among the Eastern European States may be a
candidate except those who will remain members of
the Economic and Social Council as of 1 January 2023,
as well as those who were already elected for a term
beginning on 1 January 2023. The following members
can therefore not be voted for in the present balloting:
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czechia, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed and the voting has begun.

Members are requested to check the box next to the
name printed on the ballot paper or to write the name
of another eligible State on the blank line. If the box
next to the name of a State is checked, the name of
that State does not have to be repeated on the blank
line. There should not be more than one checked box
or handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled.
Accordingly, members can only check one box or write
one name of an eligible State from among the Eastern
European States in the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that will remain a member of the Economic and
Social Council as of 1 January 2023 or that was already
elected for a term beginning on 1 January 2023, the
ballot paper will be declared invalid.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Hungary, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Mozambique
and New Zealand acted as tellers.
The President: In the interest of time, the General
Assembly will now proceed to consider the other items
announced in The Journal of the United Nations while
the ballots are being counted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches
delivered in other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-57949 (E)

*2257949*

A/76/PV.98

Agenda items 32, 66 and 113 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/76/678)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/668 and
A/76/688/Corr.1)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/687)
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Egypt, former Chair of the
Peacebuilding Commission, to introduce the report of
the Peacebuilding Commission.
Mr. Mahmoud (Egypt): I am pleased to brief
the General Assembly on the annual report of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) (A/76/678). The
report covers the fifteenth session of the PBC, under
the chairmanship of Egypt. Egypt assumed the PBC
chairmanship in the wake of the successful conclusion
of the third comprehensive review of the United Nations
peacebuilding architecture.
Throughout 2021 and in line with the mandates
contained in the twin resolutions of the General
Assembly (resolution 75/201) and Security Council (2558
(2020)), the Commission led efforts to operationalize
the review outcome as contained in those resolutions.
Those efforts included the exploration of avenues to
strengthen the PBC’s advisory, bridging and convening
roles. Particular emphasis was placed on enhancing the
impact of peacebuilding at the field level.
In that connection, it gives me great pleasure
to report to the Assembly that the Peacebuilding
Commission achieved considerable progress across the
following six areas in 2021.
The first area concerns the expansions of the scope
of its geographic and substantive focus. In 2021, the
Commission engaged in the support of 13 countryand region-specific settings, including the holding of
meetings for the first time on the Gulf of Guinea and
the transition in Chad, which brought the number of the
Commission’s engagements to a total of 23 countries
and regions, the highest number since its inception,
reflecting the overall trend in the Commission’s
increasing engagement.
2/27

02/09/2022

The Commission’s thematic engagements, which
made up 40 per cent of its meetings, considered new
themes, including interlinkages among peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration, security sector reform, the SecretaryGeneral’s Our Common Agenda (A/75/982) and mental
health and psychosocial support. The Commission also
produced a total of 66 outcome documents, including
statements delivered at non-United Nations forums
such as the Aswan Forum and the Stockholm Forum on
Peace and Development, the number of which increased
from zero in 2020 to nine in 2021.
The second area concerns the strengthening of the
PBC’s advisory and bridging roles. The Commission
further expanded and strengthened its relations with
the General Assembly, the Security Council and the
Economic and Social Council through the designation
of informal coordinators for the Commission’s relations
with those organs and better alignment with their
programmes of work. In 2021, in addition to providing
advice nine times to the Security Council and four times
to the General Assembly and making three submissions
to the Economic and Social Council, for the first time
the Commission advised the Security Council on the
Great Lakes region (see S/PV.8884) and the General
Assembly on causes of conflict and the promotion of
durable peace and sustainable development in Africa
(see A/75/PV.104). The Commission also briefed the
Economic and Social Council during its High-Level
Political Forum. Moreover, throughout its engagement,
the Commission continued to convene all relevant
stakeholders with a view to improving coordination and
avoiding fragmentation and duplication of effort.
The third area concerns the fostering of effective
partnerships in peacebuilding. The Commission
solidified the trend of its increased engagement with
partners outside the United Nations. Non-United
Nations briefers comprised 67 per cent of all briefers at
its meetings, including national and local Government
officials; representatives of regional and subregional
organizations; representatives of civil society
organizations, in particular of international financial
institutions, private sector companies, academia and
think tanks; and independent experts. Moreover, the
Commission engaged for the first time with the World
Trade Organization (WTO) and joined its Trade for
Peace Network, which aims to facilitate the accession
of conflict-affected countries to the WTO. The
Commission also held its fourth informal consultative
meeting with the Peace and Security Council of
22-57949

02/09/2022

A/76/PV.98

the African Union, which called for more frequent
exchanges between the two intergovernmental bodies
and a strategic alignment of their programmes of work.

support and attention towards building the capacity
of those human institutions most needed, in line with
nationally identified peacebuilding priorities.

The fourth area concerns advancing the discussion
on financing for peacebuilding. Recognizing
peacebuilding financing as a critical challenge, the
Commission advanced the discussion on financing with
a view to assessing the status of options introduced
by the Secretary-General since 2018, while also
exploring other possible options. The Commission’s
work throughout the year culminated in its annual
session and the submission of its letter to the General
Assembly, which encouraged the Assembly to consider
all financing options, including voluntary assessed
and innovative sources of funding. We look forward
to the successful conclusion of the recently launched
intergovernmental negotiations to translate Member
State commitments into concrete actions.

Mr. Gastorn, Vice-President (United Republic of
Tanzania) took the Chair.

The fifth area concerns advancing the
implementation of the women and peace and security
and the youth, peace and security agendas. The
Commission adopted action plans on both agendas
and continued to take concrete actions to enhance
the important role of women and young people in
peacebuilding and sustaining peace.
I would like to share some statistics drawn from
a stocktaking exercise conducted last year, which
revealed that a concerted effort was made during 2021.
Indeed, 91 per cent of the Commission’s outcome
documents promoted the importance of women’s full,
equal and meaningful participation in peacebuilding,
while there was a significant increase in the percentage
of its meetings that included briefings by women
peacebuilders — from 22 per cent in 2019 to 74 per
cent in 2021.
The exercise also showed that the Commission
continued to amplify the voices of women and brought
their recommendations to the attention of the Security
Council. Similarly, the Commission recorded a
significant increase in the percentage of its meetings
that included briefings by young peacebuilders — from
5.4 per cent in 2020 to 44.4 per cent in 2021.
The sixth area concerns promoting recovery from
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic in
2021. Through its national and regional engagement,
the Commission continued to consider the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic on national peacebuilding
objectives, in addition to mobilizing international

In conclusion, as an intergovernmental advisory
body that supports peacebuilding efforts, the
Peacebuilding Commission continued to play a
critical role in enhancing effective multilateralism by
positioning itself as a platform for global solidarity and
coordination, in response to the growing demand for
peacebuilding support.
Mr. Rae (Canada): I am pleased to deliver this
statement on behalf of Canada, Australia and New
Zealand (CANZ).
First, let me congratulate Egypt and its very
capable representative for that country’s excellent
work as Chair of the Commission in 2021, as well as
Bangladesh for the leadership it has shown so well in
2022. I would also like to pay tribute to the hard work
and dedication of Assistant Secretary-General Spehar
and her predecessor, as well as the entire team at the
Peacebuilding Support Office.
Both the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and
the Peacebuilding Fund were in fact created to fill
what Kofi Annan famously called a “gaping hole” in
the institutional architecture of the United Nations in
order to help ensure sustained international attention,
political support and advocacy for countries managing
the risks of violent conflict.
We have to say, however, that despite the
considerable successes of the past decades those
challenges are even greater today than they were in
2005. Countries at risk of conflict must now grapple
with the devastating impacts of the coronavirus disease
pandemic, the climate crisis and the worsening food
insecurity and economic shocks triggered by Russia’s
illegal war against Ukraine.
(spoke in French)
Peacebuilding and conflict prevention are not just
the right things to do, they are the smart — and indeed
the necessary — things to do. The earlier we act, the
more tools we have at our disposal and the more we
can save human lives and financial resources. We
welcome the progress this year in strengthening the
PBC’s advisory role, in particular in offering advice
to the General Assembly and the Security Council,

22-579493/27

A/76/PV.98

as well as in expanding its engagement to non-United
Nations bodies.
We also welcome the efforts made in recent years
to expand the PBC’s engagement beyond Africa, in
particular its recent engagement with peacebuilding
challenges in the Pacific islands. We hope to build
on those discussions and deepen the PBC’s overall
consideration of the peacebuilding challenges posed by
climate change as the single-biggest security threat in
the Pacific.
However, we regret that the PBC has not been
able to fully exercise its mandated bridging role and
was prevented from accepting an invitation to brief the
Human Rights Council last year. We were pleased to
see the invitation renewed for 2022, and we encourage
the Chair to accept it.
(spoke in English)
We believe that the PBC is at its best when it puts
inclusivity at the heart of United Nations peacebuilding
work. We welcome the progress we have made in past
years — and this year, as the representative from Egypt
said — to strengthen efforts to include civil-society
briefers and to deepen and expand our engagement
with women and young peacebuilders. In adopting
action plans on gender and youth and committing to
monitoring and reporting on their implementation, the
PBC is setting an example that we hope other bodies
will follow.
As we have learned, building and sustaining peace
require time, patience and above all a willingness to
listen. They also require resources. The Assembly will
have heard me say before from this rostrum that strategy
without resources is better called hallucination. If we do
not have the resources, we cannot do the job. We have
to recognize that United Nations conflict-prevention
and peacebuilding work, which actually involves many
different agencies of the United Nations, as well as
the Secretariat, is in fact fragmented and underfunded
and relies too often on a small pool of donors for
extrabudgetary support and voluntary funding.
CANZ firmly believes that United Nations
peacebuilding and conflict prevention work must be
adequately, predictably and sustainably financed. We
are very pleased to be among the top donors to the
Peacebuilding Fund, and we all remain committed
to providing voluntary contributions to it. We call on
all Member States to consider making and increasing
voluntary contributions to the Fund. However, we
4/27

02/09/2022

recognize that no single funding model will meet all
peacebuilding and conflict-prevention needs. We
therefore support the call from the Secretary-General
to consider assessed contributions for the Fund, with
modalities to be determined by the Fifth Committee,
maximizing the Fund’s value as a predeployed and
catalytic resource for funding critical peacebuilding
activities before, during and after conflict.
CANZ welcomes the ongoing intergovernmental
negotiations led by Kenya and Sweden on financing for
peacebuilding, which are still under way. We remain
committed to ensuring a concrete, action-oriented
outcome that will put the important conflict prevention
and peacebuilding work of the United Nations on a
more sustainable footing.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank the President
for convening today’s meeting. I would like to express
our appreciation to Mr. Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek
Mahmoud, Permanent Representative of Egypt to
the United Nations, for presenting the annual report
(A/76/678) of the fifteenth session of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC), in his capacity as Chair of the
Commission in 2021. I also want to thank the SecretaryGeneral for his report on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (A/76/668 and A/76/688/Corr.1).
This year peacebuilding needs have grown in
many dimensions and in various regions. Conflicts,
the devastating effects of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic and accelerating global
challenges such as food insecurity, the energy crisis
and the financial crunch all pose serious risks to the
peacebuilding gains that the Commission has been
supporting for years through the implementation of its
mandate. To ensure that our work results in tangible
support to national and regional peacebuilding priorities,
this year the Commission strongly emphasized results
and expanding the Commission’s work to more
settings, based on requests. The Commission’s annual
work plan, which guides its forward-looking agenda,
considered the relevant recommendations contained in
the Secretary-General’s report Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982) as they pertain to the requests of specific
countries and regions. I would like to share some
highlights of the PBC’s work in the past six months.
First, founded on a demand-driven approach, the
Commission has emphasized delivery, particularly
by responding to requests from Member States in a
timely manner. According to its annual work plan, the
Commission was prepared to engage with 12 different
22-57949

02/09/2022

countries and five different regions in addition to its
ongoing thematic priorities. To date, the Commission
has convened 13 ambassadorial-level meetings and a
field visit by the Chair of the Liberia configuration.
It has held country-specific meetings at the request
of Colombia, the Central African Republic, GuineaBissau, Liberia and Burkina Faso, and region-specific
meetings on the Sahel, the Lake Chad basin and the
Pacific islands. At each meeting, the Commission
discussed peacebuilding challenges and priorities
identified by and specific to those countries and regions.
On the thematic front, a meeting on youth, peace and
security was convened and preparation is under way
for other thematic meetings, including on women and
peace and security and peacekeeping.
Secondly, the Commission has continued to
prioritize national ownership and inclusivity in all
its interactions. In that regard, before organizing
meetings, the Commission has engaged with an array
of relevant national and regional stakeholders to ensure
that the PBC responds to the real needs on the ground.
For instance, ahead of the meeting on the Sahel, the
PBC, with support from the Department of Political
and Peacebuilding Affairs, held extensive consultations
with representatives of the Sahel and its international
partners. Building on the cross-border initiative on
transhumance in the Sahel region of the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the
International Organization for Migration, which has
been implemented with support from the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF) under the auspices of the United Nations
Integrated Strategy for the Sahel, the meeting created
an opportunity to generate additional political,
technical and financial support to address the specific
peacebuilding challenges in that region. Similarly,
the meeting held at the request of the Pacific Islands
Forum witnessed participation by the Pacific countries
and other relevant stakeholders from the region.
The Commission heard their unique peacebuilding
challenges, including those accelerated by the negative
impact of climate change and the inadequacy of the
financial support afforded developing countries in
addressing them.
The Commission continues to promote inclusive
approaches to peacebuilding, including by engaging
with a larger number of local actors, particularly women
and youth briefers. The percentage of national and local
actors who briefed at PBC meetings is 43 per cent. The
participation rate of women briefers in PBC meetings
so far has been 80 per cent, while the participation

A/76/PV.98

rate of young peacebuilders is 60 per cent, and we are
committed to maintaining the trend throughout the year.
Thirdly, greater attention to United Nations
coherence, as well as accountability, has remained
a priority for the Commission this year. So far, the
Commission has given due attention to promoting
integrated, strategic and coherent approaches to
peacebuilding and has placed emphasis on synergies
with the PBF. In June, the Commission held a meeting
with the Chairs of the country-specific configurations
on the progress achieved and upcoming activities. The
Commission also received updates on PBF activities
from the Peacebuilding Support Office. As agreed in
its programme of work, the Commission will continue
to bring all relevant parts of the United Nations system
together, including agencies, funds and programmes,
with a focus on its representatives in the field, who are
leading United Nations efforts in supporting national
peacebuilding priorities, addressing conflict risks and
enhancing the capacity of national institutions. An
ambassadorial-level meeting in that regard is currently
being planned.
Fourthly, the Commission has been pursuing
effective partnerships with regional and subregional
organizations and with international and regional
financial institutions. So far this year, a wide variety
of partners have participated in the meetings of the
PBC, including the African Union, the European
Union, the African Development Bank, the Economic
Community of West African States, the Lake Chad
Basin Commission, the Group of Five for the Sahel,
the Pacific Islands Forum and the Pacific Community.
The annual informal consultative meeting between the
PBC and the Peace and Security Council of the African
Union is expected to take place later this year, during
the African Union’s Post-Conflict Reconstruction and
Development Awareness Week. The Commission is
also working to enhance South-South and triangular
cooperation in support of peacebuilding and sustaining
peace, and is exploring opportunities to further
strengthen its relationships with international and
regional financial institutions.
Fifthly, peacebuilding financing continued to
remain in focus this year. In the lead-up to the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly on peacebuilding
financing held from 27 to 29 April, the Commission
held an interactive dialogue with the Secretary-General.
In that context, the Commission also provided input
to the President of the General Assembly, seeking an

22-579495/27

A/76/PV.98

action-oriented outcome and encouraging the Assembly
to consider all options for enhanced peacebuilding
financing, including voluntary, assessed and innovative
financing, at its high-level meeting. The Commission
will continue its advocacy for ensuring adequate,
predictable and sustained financing for peacebuilding,
including by exploring ways to encourage flexible
funding for local peacebuilding organizations and
developing approaches to foster innovative financing
for peacebuilding.
Sixthly, the Commission has continued its efforts
to enhance its advisory, bridging and convening role
and has particularly emphasized improving the quality
and timeliness of its submissions and briefings to other
intergovernmental bodies and peacebuilding forums,
including the General Assembly, the Security Council
and the Economic and Social Council. So far during
the sixteenth session of the PBC, the Commission has
sent eight advisories and delivered 10 statements at
various meetings. The Commission’s submissions to
the Security Council include advisories on Burkina
Faso, Central Africa, the Great Lakes, women and
peace and security and the impact of the COVID-19
pandemic on peacebuilding. The Commission has also
briefed the Security Council this year on the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and the
PBC’s workplan and capacity-building in Africa (see
S/PV.9106). Apart from its submission to the General
Assembly on peacebuilding financing, the Commission
delivered a statement at a joint event of the General
Assembly and the Economic and Social Council on
financing for the Sustainable Development Goals in
Africa. The Commission also made contributions to
the Economic and Social Council during its high-level
political forum, humanitarian affairs segment and
meeting on the Kimberley Process.
Before I conclude, I would like to add a few words
on how to improve the PBC’s advisory role vis-à-vis
the General Assembly. Building on the encouraging
results of the Commission’s advisory role to the
Security Council, there is scope for further deepening
its advisory role for the General Assembly, particularly
in the context of the current efforts to revitalize the
work of the General Assembly and its expanding
role in addressing the root causes of conflicts. The
Commission acknowledges the need to better align
the programmes of work of the General Assembly and
the Peacebuilding Commission, especially in areas
where the mandate of the Commission complements
that of the General Assembly. This year, for the first
6/27

02/09/2022

time, the Commission formally shared its programme
of work with the General Assembly immediately after
its adoption in March. That is a major step towards
institutionalizing the advisory relations between the
PBC and the General Assembly. The Commission’s
programme of work could potentially be an effective
tool for exploring complementarities between the
agendas of the Assembly and the Commission. As
such, the PBC Chair this year has participated in the
high-level dialogue on the theme “The Africa We Want:
Reconfirming the Development of Africa as a Priority
for the United Nations System”, convened by the
Presidents of the General Assembly and the Economic
and Social Council.
The Commission also appointed South Africa as
its informal coordinator for the General Assembly, as
a new practice established only last year. In addition
to the informal coordinator, the members of the
Peacebuilding Commission who are elected from the
General Assembly, as well as the countries that have
engaged with the PBC, can play a significant role in
advancing the PBC’s advisory role to the Assembly and
increasing the PBC’s visibility and impact among the
broader United Nations membership.
Finally, more regular dialogues between the General
Assembly and the Peacebuilding Commission, both in
a formal and informal setup, would go a long way to
strengthening the relations between the Assembly and
the Commission. Those meetings could also possibly be
included in the annual agenda of the Commission and
the Assembly’s work.
Mr. Ke (Cambodia): It is my honour to address
the General Assembly on behalf of the Association of
Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) during the joint
debate on the report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/76/678), peacebuilding and sustaining peace, and the
report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding
Fund (A/76/687).
In the past few decades, the international community
has witnessed a significant rise in the number of
peacekeeping operations. Moreover, the nature of
armed conflicts has become increasingly unpredictable
and is posing severe threats to peacekeeping operations.
Within that context, civil wars, low-intensity conflicts,
terrorism and other transnational crimes have emerged
as critical challenges to international peace and security.
Peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding have
been indispensable tools in the United Nations system
for preventing the outbreak, escalation, recurrence and
22-57949

02/09/2022

continuation of conflicts. That said, more multilateral
efforts are required to resolve those issues in a
comprehensive and integrated approach and manner.
Against that backdrop, ASEAN has endorsed
numerous frameworks in support of peacebuilding and
sustaining peace efforts. That includes the ASEAN
Defence Ministers Meeting, where we comprehensively
discuss regional security issues, mitigation efforts and
initiatives promoting harmonious partnerships for
peace and stability in the region. In the broader security
context, the ASEAN Defence Ministers Meeting
Plus and the ASEAN Regional Forum are regional
frameworks established to yield cooperation through
preventive diplomacy mechanisms and ensure that
any disputes and differences are addressed peacefully
and constructively. Indeed, ASEAN continues to
offer long-standing and strong support to peace and
stability in pursuing sustained economic growth and
sustainable development.
In view of supporting women’s full, equal and
meaningful participation at every level of peace
processes and security efforts, ASEAN is committed to
advancing the women and peace and security agenda as
a regional priority. ASEAN’s female military and lawenforcement officers have also continued to make a
positive impact globally through their active participation
in United Nations peacekeeping operations. That also
includes their role as early peacebuilders in line with
their mandates and host countries’ peacebuilding and
national development priorities. In that regard, we
encourage Member States’ efforts to further translate
the women and peace and security agenda into practice
and work to build capacities and increase opportunities
for women at the local, national, regional and global
levels. The Gender and Youth Promotion Initiative is
a fundamental factor in sustaining global and regional
peace. Its aim is also to promote the inclusive and
meaningful participation of women and young people
in local peacebuilding.
The peacebuilding financing gap remains a critical
challenge. We support the Secretary-General’s call for
adequate, predictable and sustained financing, and
we note the important role of the Peacebuilding Fund
in contributing to the achievement of peacebuilding
efforts. Every Member State should advance
potential solutions and make commitments aimed at
addressing the financing gap for conflict prevention
and peacebuilding. We encourage Member States
to contribute to peacebuilding efforts in order to

A/76/PV.98

sustain peace and create an environment conducive to
development. The ASEAN Member States have played
their parts individually and collectively in working for
that goal.
In conclusion, ASEAN reaffirms its steadfast
commitment to ensuring the inclusivity of United
Nations peacekeeping operations and peacebuilding
efforts, as well as to promoting cooperation with all
parties concerned with a view to contributing to the
peace process around the world.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the European Union, in its capacity
as observer.
Ms. Tolstoi (European Union): I have the honour to
speak on behalf of the European Union (EU).
I would first like to thank the President for convening
today’s debate on the annual report (A/76/678) of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) and the report of
the Secretary-General (A/76/687) on the Peacebuilding
Fund (PBF).
With the new agenda for peace, the SecretaryGeneral has set a new, ambitious goal for preventive
diplomacy, conflict prevention and peacebuilding,
affirming that the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture is a cornerstone of the Organization’s
contribution to global peace and security. The EU and
its member States have been reliable supporters of the
Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding Fund
since their establishment, and we offer our continued
political and substantial support to strengthen the
readiness of the United Nations to respond to global
challenges to peace and stability.
We welcome the fact that this year the Peacebuilding
Fund delivered its highest level of investment and its
second-highest level of donor contributions, continuing
its vital catalytic role in peacebuilding. We commend
its leadership in promoting women and young people’s
meaningful contribution to peacebuilding, focusing
on peaceful elections and climate and security. We
also recognize the importance of the investments in
monitoring and evaluation that have helped the Fund to
more than double its evaluation coverage. At the same
time, we fully support all the recommendations in the
annual report for further strengthening and streamlining
the work of the PBC. The EU and its member States
are primary investors in the Peacebuilding Fund,
and we will continue our close cooperation on
peacebuilding on the ground with the Fund and the

22-579497/27

A/76/PV.98

wider United Nations system. The EU’s engagement in
peacebuilding and stabilization has been strengthened
with the enlargement of its contribution to the PBF
and its adoption of the new Global Europe programme
on Peace, Stability and Conflict Prevention, which
has a budget of €900 million and will build capacities
for conflict prevention and peacebuilding in fragile
countries and marginalized communities.
In our engagement, we also recognize the
importance of ensuring better coordination among
peacebuilding actors. The United Nations agencies
need to improve cooperation, just as we as donors need
to work towards better information-sharing. While
better coordination and a more efficient use of funds
will go a long way to covering the financial needs,
there is no doubt that new ways of funding United
Nations peacebuilding have to be explored to ensure
adequate, stable and predictable funding. We recognize
that voluntary contributions have not been sufficient
to meet the growing peacebuilding needs and that
assessed contributions will be crucial to adequate and
predictable financing for peacebuilding. On that basis,
the EU is actively and constructively engaged in the
ongoing negotiations in the General Assembly on a draft
resolution on peacebuilding financing. We would like
to take this opportunity to thank Kenya and Sweden,
the co-facilitators of the draft resolution, and we hope
the negotiations will reach a consensus conclusion.
The Peacebuilding Commission has proved its
potential as a convening power for promoting peaceful
solutions to conflicts and the prevention of violence and
as an adviser to the Security Council, the Economic and
Social Council and the General Assembly. In the past
year, those functions have been strengthened. We need
to continue to enhance the PBC’s role as a promoter of
the system-wide coherence of the United Nations and
to foster partnerships, just as we must further explore
possible synergies between the PBC and the PBF.
I would like to conclude by expressing our deep
appreciation to the Chair of the PBC, Ambassador
Muhammad Abdul Muhith, and his splendid team,
whom we would like to thank for their commitment and
excellent work.
Mr. Massari (Italy): Italy aligns itself with the
statement just delivered on behalf of the European
Union (EU).
For a second time we will limit ourselves to a few
additional comments in our national capacity. All the
8/27

02/09/2022

reports we are considering today share an overarching
message, which is that the costs of responding to crises
have become increasingly unsustainable. Preventing
conflicts is one of the priorities of our time. In line
with the Secretary-General’s commitment, it is time to
change the paradigm from crisis management to conflict
prevention and sustaining peace. We should not have to
choose between peacekeeping and peacebuilding. That
is a false dilemma and a dangerous one, suggesting that
our efforts can go only one way. Both peacekeeping
and peacebuilding are part of the same essential
mission of the United Nations and of our collective
commitment, and they must both rely on appropriate
funding. Italy fully endorses the Secretary-General’s
call for ensuring adequate, stable and predictable
funding for United Nations peacebuilding. As we
speak, Italy, along with its EU partners, is supporting
the adoption of an ambitious General Assembly draft
resolution on peacebuilding financing, including the
allocation of significant assessed contributions for that
purpose. We must maximize the effectiveness of the
United Nations peacebuilding architecture. Together,
the Peacebuilding Commission and the Peacebuilding
Fund have significantly contributed to ensuring the
consistency of prevention and response systems by
advocating for the synergy of multidisciplinary and
multistakeholder solutions.
Italy will be back in the Peacebuilding Commission
as of January 2023. We intend to actively contribute
to the further centring of this increasingly important
body. We also look forward to a more ambitious and
structured collaboration between the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Security Council, as the
Commission is ideally placed to raise the Council’s
awareness on regional efforts, the understanding and
expertise of local communities and the cross-border
dimension of conflict.
Mrs. Kamboj (India): I am pleased to be
participating in today’s joint debate in the General
Assembly on peacebuilding. I would like to congratulate
Bangladesh warmly on its chairing of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) since February and thank Egypt for
its contribution to the PBC’s initiatives.
The world today has begun to better grasp the
complex and interlinked facets of peacebuilding.
The global perspective on addressing conflicts has
undergone a paradigmatic shift from resolution,
reconciliation and recovery to prevention and
reconstruction, thereby making peacebuilding a critical
22-57949

02/09/2022

pillar in our collective response to conflict situations.
As one of the leading troop- and police-contributing
countries to United Nations peacekeeping missions,
India has been an active member of the PBC since
its inception. As we speak, we have more than 5,500
personnel deployed across nine missions. Serving
under the blue flag, 177 gallant Indian soldiers have
made the supreme sacrifice, the largest number among
the troop- and police-contributing countries.
We believe that the PBC and the Peacebuilding
Fund need enhanced support and increased focus from
Member States in fulfilling their mandate. In that
context, I would like to submit the following. First, we
continue to underscore the importance of the cardinal
principle of inclusivity in order to advance national
peacebuilding objectives. An exclusively donor-driven
approach to peacebuilding is therefore not the most
prudent path to follow.
Secondly, the ongoing discourse on enhanced
financial support for peacebuilding activities through
sources other than voluntary contributions merits an
in-depth and careful study of the potential ramifications
for the United Nations ecosystem. Any decision to that
effect must be consensus-based. Furthermore, the PBC
should exercise its convening role more effectively.
Thirdly, it is important to set clear benchmarks
and criteria for an exit strategy for the countries under
consideration, and the PBC’s peacebuilding advocacy
should draw down when such criteria are met.
India has always played a constructive and
significant role in the context of peacebuilding through
its extensive development partnership with countries
of the global South. We continue to assist countries
through bilateral and multilateral forums in postconflict situations by providing substantial grants
and soft loans. Even during the coronavirus disease
pandemic, India has stood in solidarity with the global
South by further strengthening existing development
partnerships. Guided by the Kampala Principles, which
Prime Minister Modi enunciated in July 2018 in his
address to the Ugandan Parliament, a total of 204 lines
of credit, to the tune of more than $12 billion, have been
extended by India to 42 African countries. I would also
like to take this opportunity to touch on the IndiaUnited Nations Development Partnership Fund, which
was established in 2017. In the short span of five years,
the Fund has developed a portfolio of 66 development
projects in partnership with 51 developing countries, 17

A/76/PV.98

of them in Africa, focusing on South-owned, South-led
and demand-driven sustainable development projects.
Since the beginning of the Ukraine conflict, in
order to mitigate the adverse effects of the disruptions
to the food and commodity supply chains, India has
also been providing financial and food assistance to
countries in need. In the past three months alone, India
has exported more than 1.8 million tons of wheat to
countries such as Afghanistan, Myanmar, the Sudan
and Yemen. In our immediate neighbourhood, we have
continued to help our good friend and neighbour Sri
Lanka to ensure its food security by providing nearly
$4 billion in food and financial assistance over the past
few months. As Prime Minister Modi has said at the
United Nations in the past,
“let us pledge to reform the global multilateral
system to enhance its relevance, to improve its
effectiveness, to make it the basis for a new type of
human-centric globalization”. (High-level segment
of the Economic and Social Council, 17 July 2020)
Going forward, India will continue to be a force
multiplier for all peacebuilding efforts driven by that
very human-centric approach.
Mrs. Hanlumyuang (Thailand): My delegation
aligns itself with the statement just made by the
representative of Cambodia on behalf of the Association
of Southeast Asian Nations.
Thailand would like to thank Ambassador
Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud of Egypt
for his excellent chairmanship of the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) last year. The comprehensive
report of the Commission’s work in 2021 (A/76/678)
and its record number of outcome documents are a
testament to the concrete contributions of the PBC
towards our common goal of sustaining peace. We also
want to express our sincere appreciation to Bangladesh
for its active chairmanship of the PBC this year and
to thank the Secretary-General for his contributions to
peacebuilding and sustaining peace, including through
the Peacebuilding Fund, which continues to have an
impact on the ground. At this timely General Assembly
debate, Thailand would like to share the following
three points.
First, peace is not an island entirely of itself. For
sustainable peace to take root and thrive, it needs an
enabling environment that mutually reinforces security
and sustainable development, while contributing to
human security for all people. As a long-standing

22-579499/27

A/76/PV.98

contributor of United Nations peacekeepers and a
current member of the Economic and Social Council and
the PBC, Thailand will continue to prioritize ensuring
sustainability across the three pillars of the United
Nations. In particular, we support the development of a
new agenda for peace to include an integrated and holistic
approach to working for peace and security across the
peace continuum. We also support the continued efforts
to put the Sustainable Development Goals back on track
with a view to achieving a sustainable future for all. We
will also continue to support that holistic approach in
the work of the PBC.
Secondly, in taking forward our common goal of
sustaining peace, Thailand supports the collaborative
efforts to promote South-South and triangular
cooperation modalities in order to share best practices
and lessons learned. That could include the role and
contributions of regional and subregional organizations
in supporting national peacebuilding efforts and
their partnerships with the United Nations and other
stakeholders. For its part, Thailand stands ready to share
its home-grown approaches to sustainable development
in support of national and regional efforts to build and
sustain peace. In particular, our peacebuilders have been
sharing Thailand’s bio-circular-green economic model
and sufficiency-economy philosophy, as well as our
best practices in areas such as sustainable agriculture
and water management with local communities. That
is in line with our long-standing belief that with the
consent of host Governments, peacekeepers can
help to contribute to early peacebuilding efforts in
line with host countries’ socioeconomic and human
development priorities.
In addition, later this month Thailand will be
hosting the Global South-South Development Expo,
which will not only showcase best practices from
various countries and regions but will also facilitate
discussions on South-South and triangular cooperation
modalities that could support efforts to address various
development challenges in the global South, including
in conflict-affected settings.
Thirdly and finally, Thailand supports the ongoing
efforts to ensure adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding. We welcome the valuable
contributions made at the high-level meeting on
financing for peacebuilding and in the constructive
negotiations on a General Assembly draft resolution,
with a view to taking forward this important issue.
To that end, Thailand is pleased to have supported the
10/27

02/09/2022

Peacebuilding Fund through its voluntary contribution.
We also believe that those financial resources should
be accompanied by strengthened human resources,
especially on the ground, in order to ensure lasting
impact and resilience. We would therefore welcome
greater coordination and strategic alignments across
the United Nations system to identify and address
funding and capacity gaps in order to effectively and
comprehensively support peacebuilding and sustaining
peace in the countries and regions concerned.
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): Let me begin by
thanking the President for convening this joint debate
on peacebuilding and sustaining peace. I also want
to express our appreciation to Ambassador Osama
Mahmoud
Abdelkhalek
Mahmoud,
Permanent
Representative of Egypt to the United Nations, for
presenting the annual report of the fifteenth session
of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/76/678) in his
capacity as Chair of the Commission in 2021. South
Africa also fully aligns itself with the statement
delivered by Bangladesh in its capacity as the current
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission. I also want
to thank the Secretary-General for his report on
peacebuilding and sustaining peace (A/76/668 and
A/76/688/Corr.1).
I would like to make a number of points. First,
let me reiterate South Africa’s commitment to the
Commission’s work. I want to stress that South Africa
will continue to advocate for an effective peacebuilding
approach that enhances the prevention of new, emerging
and protracted conflicts with a view to safeguarding the
attainment of the global 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and regional development objectives
as well. We remain concerned, however, about the
possibility that the coronavirus disease pandemic, the
global economic downturn and violent extremism, as
well as the marginalization of women, girls and other
vulnerable groups, will continue to exacerbate poverty
and deepen inequalities, thereby threatening and
undermining hard-won peacebuilding gains.
Secondly, we commend the delegations of Kenya
and Sweden for their leadership as co-facilitators of
the ongoing intergovernmental negotiations on the
draft resolution on financing for peacebuilding. They
are advancing, exploring and considering options
that will ensure adequate, predictable and sustained
financing for peacebuilding and that are currently
being negotiated by our experts. In the context of the
Organization’s twin resolutions on peacebuilding,
22-57949

02/09/2022

Security Council resolution 2558 (2020) and General
Assembly resolution 75/201, let us remain committed
to the principles and purposes of the text and ensure
a concrete and action-oriented outcome addressing the
peacebuilding financing gap in support of nationally
owned and regional peacebuilding processes in all
settings, which the Commission supports.
Thirdly, South Africa agrees with the SecretaryGeneral’s assessment that the prevention of violent
conflict, peacebuilding and sustaining peace are
central to the work of the Organization as derived
from the Charter of the United Nations, with financing
as one of its most important enablers. However, the
demand for peacebuilding far outpaces the available
resources, creating a financing gap. In that regard, it
is our considered view that the provision of new and
more sustainable funding sources, including voluntary
and assessed contributions for the Peacebuilding
Fund, will strengthen the Fund’s catalytic role.
That will enhance transparency, accountability
and effectiveness, thereby ensuring and supporting
national ownership of peacebuilding initiatives in the
delivery of mandates across the United Nations system.
Strengthening predictability in order to address the
financing gap will also require innovative solutions,
including support from the private sector, and that
includes greater coherence with the international and
regional financial institutions that play a critical role in
the implementation of national plans and programmes.
Fourthly, South Africa will continue to engage
with the proposals on the new agenda for peace in
the report of the Secretary-General on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), which underscores the importance
of investing in prevention and preparedness as a costeffective means for peacebuilding with respect to
both human and financial resources. Further to that,
and as outlined in the Common African Position on
the 2020 review of the United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, South Africa believes that regional
organizations remain uniquely positioned and
experienced in that regard, as we have seen with the
African Union and its strong cooperation with the
United Nations in conflict prevention in Africa. Both
organizations must strengthen and undertake joint
conflict analyses, assessments and action in preventive
diplomacy, conflict resolution and mediation.
To come to my fifth and final point, South
Africa remains committed and continues to intensify
interventions geared to supporting and enhancing the

A/76/PV.98

role of women in peacebuilding processes, including in
political leadership, mediation and negotiations. As a
champion of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative,
which underscores the importance of enhancing the
women and peace and security agenda in peacekeeping
operations, we believe that United Nations peace
operation mandates can also be strengthened to reflect
more gender-responsive disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration processes, which also require the
identification of barriers that prevent the inclusive
participation of women. The space for the participation
of young people in peacebuilding must also be
broadened, and their engagement with the Commission
has made that more evident. In Africa, youth makes up
more than half of the population. Their contributions
as change makers are therefore critical to finding longterm peacebuilding solutions, as many of them will be
affected by those solutions in the future.
Let me conclude by highlighting that as the current
informal coordinator of the PBC and the General
Assembly with the support of all Member States in
bringing together the PBC and the Assembly, and as
a candidate for re-election to the Commission for the
2023-2024 term, we believe that the Commission’s role
within the United Nations in addressing a multitude of
challenges before, during and after conflict remains
indispensable as an advisory body with a unique
convening and bridge-building role that is critical
to supporting the core mandate of the Charter and
its principles.
The Acting President: As the counting of the
ballots has been completed for the election of members
of the Economic and Social Council, I will now briefly
suspend the Assembly’s consideration of these items.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The Acting President: The General Assembly will
resume its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item
115, entitled “Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council”.
The result of the voting is as follows:
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:

174
0
174
4

22-5794911/27

A/76/PV.98

Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation:
North Macedonia:

02/09/2022

170
114

other items announced in The Journal of the United
Nations while the ballots are being counted.

90
80

The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.

Since no candidate obtained the required two-thirds
majority in the previous ballot, there still remains one
seat to be filled from among the Eastern European
States. We shall therefore proceed to the eighth
unrestricted ballot. In accordance with rule 94 of the
rules of procedure, this eighth round of balloting shall
be unrestricted. I would like to remind the Assembly
that any Member State from among the Eastern
European States may be a candidate except those that
remain members of the Economic and Social Council
as of 1 January 2023, as well as those that have already
been elected for a term beginning on 1 January 2023.
The following members therefore cannot be voted for
in the present balloting: Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech
Republic, Slovakia and Slovenia. Before we begin the
voting process, I should like to remind members that
pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of the procedure of the
General Assembly, no representative shall interrupt the
voting except on a point of order on the actual conduct
of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot papers
will now be distributed. The voting has thus begun.
Members are requested to put an X in the box next
to the name printed on the ballot paper. There should
not be more than one checked box or handwritten name
for the vacant seat to be filled. Accordingly, members
can check only one box or write one name of an eligible
State from among the Eastern European States in the
space provided. If the ballot paper contains a vote
for a Member State that will remain a member of the
Economic and Social Council as of 1 January 2023 or
that has already been elected for a term beginning on
1 January 2023, the ballot paper will be declared invalid.
Finally, if a ballot paper contains any notation other
than a vote in favour of an eligible Member State, those
notations will be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Hungary, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Mozambique
and New Zealand acted as tellers.
A vote was taken by secret ballot.
The Acting President: In the interest of time, the
General Assembly will now proceed to consider the
12/27

Agenda items 32, 66 and 113 (continued)
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
Report of the Peacebuilding Commission
(A/76/678)
Peacebuilding and sustaining peace
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/668 and
A/76/688/Corr.1)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
Peacebuilding Fund
Report of the Secretary-General (A/76/687)
The Acting President: We now resume the
joint debate.
Mr. Ishikane (Japan): I thank the President for
convening this meeting. I would also like to express
my appreciation to the Chair and Vice-Chairs of
the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), and the
Peacebuilding Support Office, for guiding and
facilitating our discussion on the peacebuilding agenda.
At the outset, I would like to emphasize the
importance of mobilizing our efforts for peacebuilding
and sustaining peace with respect to all three pillars of
the United Nations — peace and security, human rights
and development. The United Nations peacebuilding
architecture, with the PBC at its core, should facilitate
those efforts. With that in mind, I would like to share
Japan’s view on how to direct future efforts regarding
the PBC and the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF).
I would like to begin by discussing a few points
about the PBC. First, the PBC is a hub bridging all the
relevant United Nations bodies to ensure system-wide
coherence at the United Nations and the triple nexus for
achieving the peacebuilding objectives. In that regard,
the PBC’s thematic meetings should be utilized to share
knowledge and best practices among a wide range of
stakeholders within and outside the United Nations
system. Japan welcomed the increase of thematic
meetings at the PBC to 40 per cent last year. We believe
that the key to sustaining peace is to build trustworthy
22-57949

02/09/2022

institutions in areas related to the basic functions of
the State.
Secondly, we should strengthen the PBC’s advisory
role for the Security Council, General Assembly, and
other United Nations organs. We welcome the recent
momentum for actively submitting written advice
from the PBC to the Security Council. When Japan
becomes an elected member of the Security Council
as of January next year, we will further contribute to
strengthening the PBC’s advisory role as a member of
both the Council and the PBC.
Thirdly, we should enhance the role of the PBC as
a platform for strengthening partnerships with various
peacebuilding actors outside the United Nations
system. We are encouraged by the steady increase in
the number of non-United Nations briefers at the PBC
since 2018. While the United Nations should continue
to play a central role, we should also acknowledge the
limits on what the United Nations can achieve alone.
Turning to the PBF, its comparative advantage
vis-à-vis other funds lies in its ability to respond
quickly and flexibly to peacebuilding needs on the
ground, an indispensable feature in supporting crossregional and transitional programmes. We welcome the
increase of the Fund’s allocation to those programmes.
Looking ahead, what can be done to strengthen the
PBF, including its financing, while preserving its
comparative advantages? First, it will be important to
monitor and evaluate the results of PBF programmes,
make them visible and publicize them within and
beyond the United Nations system, including to the
international financial institutions, the Member States
and the general public. The efforts by the Secretariat
to date, including the submission of evaluation reports
and the launch of dashboards, have greatly contributed
to bringing in around $180 million in voluntary
contributions in 2021. For its part, Japan has been
steadily implementing its commitment of $10 million
to the PBF for the period from 2020 to 2024.
Secondly, we should strengthen the link between
the work of the PBF and the discussion in the PBC.
Currently, the sole oversight body of the PBF is the
PBF Advisory Group, which reports to the SecretaryGeneral. While some might argue that there is a lack of
inclusivity and transparency, the Advisory Group format
has been accepted on the basis that the PBF is funded by
voluntary contributions. If we introduce a more formal
process of reporting to and consulting with the Member
States, for example through the General Assembly,

A/76/PV.98

there is a high risk that the agility and flexibility of
the PBF would be lost. In Japan’s view, the PBC has
an important role to play in that regard. By increasing
opportunities to share success stories and lessons
learned from PBF-funded programmes in the PBC, we
should be able to increase the PBF’s transparency and
still maintain its comparative advantages. The PBC
would also benefit from such exercises.
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm Japan’s full
commitment to supporting the United Nations agenda
for building and sustaining peace.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes the three annual reports under
consideration today (A/76/678, A/76/668 and A/76/688/
Corr.1, and A/76/687). We thank the speakers for their
important work for peace. The reports cover what
has been a challenging period, characterized by the
continued consequences of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic. Added to that is the overall
impact of the war in Ukraine on food security, energy
supplies and the economy. We must intensify our efforts
to address those challenges in a sustainable manner. We
commend the Peacebuilding Commission, under the
successive chairmanships of Egypt and Bangladesh, for
continuing to adapt and innovate in its work.
Although the political and security environment
has deteriorated, the Peacebuilding Fund has set
records on the majority of the benchmarks in its current
strategic plan. It is particularly encouraging that the
Fund has approved 47 per cent of its total investments
in support of gender-sensitive peacebuilding. Yet as the
Secretary-General has pointed out, the current funding
is still inadequate.
Switzerland welcomes the way forward presented
in the reports and would like to emphasize three points.
First, there is evidence that redirecting investment to
conflict prevention saves lives and resources. Conflict
prevention also protects development gains. But we
all need to do better. COVID-19 and the increase in
climate-related risks have highlighted the importance
of moving from crisis response to conflict prevention
and the need for better anticipation. We need to further
strengthen the synergies and coherence between
the three pillars of the United Nations — peace and
security, human rights and development.
Secondly, predictable and sufficient funding for
all these efforts remains paramount. Accordingly,
Switzerland has increased its annual contribution to

22-5794913/27

A/76/PV.98

the Fund for its 2020-2024 strategy. It is encouraging
that the Fund has had its strongest year of investment
in peacebuilding and its second-highest year of donor
contributions. But as the Secretary-General pointed
out, that is simply not enough. In order to meet the
increased needs of peacebuilding and prevention efforts,
new options for adequate, predictable and sustainable
funding — including assessed contributions to the
Fund — are needed. A decision in favour of such assessed
contributions would represent the shared commitment
of Member States to peacebuilding and peacekeeping.
Switzerland strongly supports the ongoing discussions
in the General Assembly, co-facilitated by Kenya and
Sweden, on financing peacebuilding. We call on all
Member States involved in the negotiations to commit
to finding sustainable solutions.
Thirdly, the Commission has been successful
in convening, building bridges and advising. Its
engagement and interaction with entities outside the
United Nations, such as the World Trade Organization
and the private sector, are essential contributions to the
mobilization of all peacebuilding efforts and should be
intensified. In addition, we welcome the work of the
Commission in establishing links with other entities
and bodies of the United Nations system, including
through the efforts of the informal coordinators with the
General Assembly and the Security Council. Enhanced
interaction with the Council is particularly important.
We welcomed the efforts made in that regard during the
Brazilian presidency of the Council in July, including
the Commission’s dedicated briefing (see S/PV.9101).
The earlier the Commission can advise the Council,
the easier it will be for the Council to integrate these
contributions into its own work and results. It is the
responsibility of the States members of the Commission
to ensure that the results of their deliberations are
properly reflected in the communications transmitted.
We therefore hope that the Chair of the Commission will
be able to accept the invitation to brief the Human Rights
Council on the Commission’s peacebuilding activities.
We need to enhance the impact on the ground
through dialogue and partnership. The Commission and
the Fund play a key role in our efforts to prevent conflict
and build back better after the pandemic. We support the
proposal to develop a new agenda for peace, as outlined
in the Secretary-General’s report on Our Common
Agenda (A/75/982), with more investment in prevention
and peacebuilding, and we encourage the Commission’s
strong engagement in that process. Switzerland will
continue its commitment to peacebuilding as a member
14/27

02/09/2022

of the PBC Organizational Committee, as Chair of the
country-specific configuration for Burundi, as a donor
to the Fund and as a future member of the Security
Council.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): I would like to start by
thanking my colleague Ambassador Osama Mahmoud
Abdelkhalek Mahmoud for the comprehensive
overview of the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) in 2021. We are grateful to him and to Egypt
for the insight and leadership they gave us last year. I
also want to express my warm thanks to Ambassador
Rabab Fatima for her support and leadership in the
Peacebuilding Commission in the first half of 2022, as
well as for her contribution to putting the collaboration
between the PBC and the General Assembly at the top
of our agenda. I wish Ambassador Muhith a happy and
productive term as Chair of the Commission. He can
count on my delegation’s continued cooperation.
The presentation of the annual report of the
Commission for 2021 (A/76/678) has provided several
examples of significant contributions that the PBC can
make by playing its advisory, bridging and convening
roles. The PBC is well suited to work as a platform for
promoting greater coordination among the relevant
partners of specific countries at risk of lapsing or
relapsing into conflict. Additionally, it can mobilize
regional organizations and international financial
institutions and foster South-South and triangular
cooperation arrangements in support of national
peacebuilding activities. The Commission can also
support the implementation of peacebuilding activities
by peacekeeping operations and help mobilize political
support for the promotion of reconciliation, the women
and peace and security agenda, institution-building
and other nationally defined peacebuilding priorities.
However, there is more that the PBC could do.
As Brazil and others have pointed out a number of
times, the Commission is but a teenager within the United
Nations family. The Commission’s relationships with
the Security Council, the Economic and Social Council
and the General Assembly remain to be fully explored.
That matter is a priority for most PBC members, and
that is why the relationship between the PBC with other
bodies was included in its 2020 programme of work. In
that regard, I want to raise the issue of communication
and take advantage of this opportunity to reach out
to the broader United Nations membership. Today’s
debate provides a good opportunity to once again
present the suggestion that a seminar should take place
22-57949

02/09/2022

in which current or former countries supported by the
PBC or the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) could share their
experiences with potential new partners, as a longoverdue measure of clarification for countries that
may still be hesitant to seek PBC support for lack of
understanding of the Commission’s role. The General
Assembly is by far the best venue to address the issue
of stigmatization that still hinders the outreach of the
PBC. I hope that the Commission and countries under
its consideration can offer valuable input on this topic.
Since today’s debate also encompasses the work
of the Peacebuilding Fund, I would like to bring
to the Assembly’s attention the following points
on issues of financing for peacebuilding. First, the
PBF is conceptually geared as a seed resource, not a
replacement for traditional development cooperation.
Secondly, in evaluating the PBF’s functioning, we have
to balance the objectives of agility and accountability,
which very often work at cross-purposes. And thirdly,
the PBF should not be seen as a means to make up for
the significant reduction of development cooperation
that we are witnessing today.
Before I conclude, I would like to thank our
co-facilitators, Kenya and Sweden, for leading our
discussions to finalize a draft resolution on this topic. So
far, many of the questions we raised have been addressed
to some extent, including on the concern regarding the
reopening of policy mandates conferred on the PBC by
the 2020 twin resolutions (Security Council resolution
2558 (2020) and General Assembly resolution 75/201)
and on concerns about accountability and oversight.
Nonetheless, we still think that no final decision on the
adoption of assessed contributions to the PBF should be
taken at this stage. The Fifth Committee must complete
its work to properly assess the effects of such a proposal
on Member States as well as on the Organization as a
whole, given its financial and procedural impact. Only
when that process is completed successfully should the
Fifth Committee decide on the issue.
Ms. Ávila Becerril (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish):
Preventing violent conflict and building and sustaining
peace are fundamental aspects of the work of the
United Nations. They are derived from the Charter of
the United Nations and highlighted in the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (A/76/668 and A/76/688/Corr.1), which we
welcome. It is in the full conviction of the importance
of those tasks that Costa Rica has held a position on the
Peacebuilding Commission since January 2021. We also

A/76/PV.98

appreciated the presentation of the report of the fifteenth
session of the Peacebuilding Commission (A/76/678) by
Ambassador Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud,
Permanent Representative of Egypt, in his capacity as
Chair of the Commission in 2021.
We have discussed at length the benefits of
the implementation of peace mechanisms focused
on prevention, and we have concluded that their
implementation not only brings stability, costefficiency and effectiveness, it also creates the
necessary conditions for sustainable peace. Despite
that, we continue to witness disproportionate increases
in military spending and the weaponized approach that
many nations adopt when managing crisis situations.
So far there has been no coherent position taken
regarding excessive military spending, and neither has
due attention been paid to the repercussions of such
actions for the development of a peacebuilding agenda
based on prevention and consolidation. While the issue
of financing for conflict prevention is a major concern
for all of us, excessive military spending should be
an issue that benefits from the same momentum and
priority in any debate that seeks to promote an inclusive
and sustained world peace.
Costa Rica therefore calls for coherence. It is
time to dismantle primitive and ineffective methods
of action based on coercive security paradigms
where force prevails, in order to make way for the
full implementation of action plans that involve a
comprehensive approach based on dialogue, inclusion
and human security. We must abandon our dependence
on weapons and invest our resources in projects that
respect life.
If prevention and peacebuilding are to succeed, they
also require long-term intergenerational approaches
that recognize and support the role of women, girls and
young people. That includes adequate and sustainable
funding for networks and organizations led by them.
Costa Rica recognizes that dealing with prevention
and peacebuilding also requires properly addressing
the impact of climate change, since this has visible
and tangible social effects, one example of which is
the reported increase in the flow of local migrations
due to food insecurity caused by abrupt changes in
temperature. We cannot ignore the fact that a large
percentage of the people displaced by conflict are in
countries that are also vulnerable to climate change. It is
therefore important that as peacebuilders we recognize
the nexus between gender, climate and security,

22-5794915/27

A/76/PV.98

because it is crucial to provide a proactive, receptive,
inclusive and sustainable response to the unpredictable
effects of climate change and avoid increasing people’s
vulnerability to conflict as much as possible.
Considering that, Costa Rica reiterates its
determination to undertake concrete and essential
measures to strengthen the capacity of the Peacebuilding
Commission and the Organization as a whole to address
the challenges faced by the international community.
Let us do it together, united by our confidence in the
Commission and in the prospects for sustainable peace.
Ms. Baptista Grade Zacarias (Portugal): Portugal
aligns itself with the statement delivered on behalf of
the European Union and would like to add the following
remarks in its national capacity.
We welcome the report (A/76/678) of the
Peacebuilding Commission (PBC), the report of the
Secretary-General on peacebuilding and sustaining
peace (A/76/668 and A/76/668 Corr.), as well as the
report of the Secretary-General on the Peacebuilding
Fund (A/76/687).
As a staunch defender of peace and security,
Portugal has been a long-time supporter of the
Peacebuilding Commission and a consistent contributor
to the Peacebuilding Fund. We are well aware of
the important role that the PBC plays in conflict
prevention, and especially in avoiding its recurrence
by consolidating peace. The past year has shown us
how crucial and urgent it is to invest in prevention and
peacebuilding, and to address the root causes of conflict.
It is unquestionably much more efficient and much less
costly than having to respond to the consequences
of crises and conflicts. As the Secretary-General
highlighted in his report on Our Common Agenda
(A/75/982), we need to shift our focus from a reactive
perspective to a preventive one. His recommendations
for strengthening the Peacebuilding Fund, expanding
the role of the Peacebuilding Commission and putting
women and girls at the heart of security policies, in
particular, raised widespread interest and support.
The key role of the PBC in convening and
coordinating a broad common effort that involves the
whole United Nations system, as well as international,
regional and subregional organizations, international
financial institutions, civil society and the private
sector, must continue to be further strengthened. We
also need to strengthen the PBC’s advisory role with
the Security Council and the General Assembly. In that
16/27

02/09/2022

context, I would like to join others in acknowledging
and praising the efforts of the successive chairmanships
of the PBC, as well as the Chairs of its country-specific
configurations, in furthering the Commission’s
advisory, bridging and convening roles.
We all know that successful peacebuilding and
sustaining peace processes must be nationally owned
and inclusive, ensuring that the needs of all sectors of
society are taken into account. Furthermore, we know it
is crucial to ensure that peacekeeping and peacebuilding
efforts, including transitions, are properly funded. We
have been saying that for a long time. It is now time
to take the necessary steps to achieve concrete results
in finding ways to ensure adequate, predictable and
sustainable financing for peacebuilding, making use of
all the options on the table. The ongoing negotiations
on the draft resolution on financing for peacebuilding
must be a token of our commitment. We thank Kenya
and Sweden for their work as co-facilitators and hope
that the Assembly will adopt the draft resolution at its
current session. We owe that to future generations.
Mr. Gala López (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish): We
welcome the convening of this meeting as well as
the presentation of the report of the Peacebuilding
Commission (A/76/678). We also welcome the reports
of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding and
sustaining peace (A/76/668 and A/76/668 Corr.) and on
the Peacebuilding Fund (A/76/687).
Our delegation continues to believe that we need
a conducive international environment in order to
achieve sustained and lasting peace, one based on
respect for multilateralism, international law, the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations and amicable and cooperative relations among
countries. Sustained peace demands the eradication of
the root causes of conflicts, especially the social and
economic development problems affecting our nations
as a consequence of the current unjust international
order, and particularly the countries of the global
South. The full implementation of the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, the creation of capacities in
developing countries and their access to technologies
under equal conditions and without discrimination, as
well as the fulfilment of official development assistance
commitments, without preconditions, would help to
address those issues.
From the early beginnings of peacekeeping
operations, our country has traditionally supported
peacebuilding activities designed to help countries
22-57949

02/09/2022

emerging from conflict develop and strengthen their
national strategies for sustainable development.
National Governments have the primary responsibility
for implementing strategies for building and sustaining
peace. The role of the United Nations is to assist them in
those efforts, as requested and within the framework of
the functions and mandates given to the various bodies
of the United Nations. As with preventive diplomacy,
early warning and mediation, and the good offices of
the Organization, such assistance must be given in
accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and
in full respect for international law. The consent of
the host State and respect for ownership and national
priorities are also essential, along with total respect for
the sovereign equality of States, the peaceful solution
of international disputes, the political independence of
countries, the principle of non-interference in internal
affairs and the rejection of the threat or use of force.
That is the only way we can objectively and impartially
support peacebuilding and sustain peace.
We join the call for increased funding for United
Nations peacebuilding and sustaining peace activities.
Decisions are required to ensure adequate, predictable
and continued funding for those activities. At the same
time, those activities should not divert or affect the
resources allocated to development. Our country, which
is a faithful defender of peace and proud to belong to
the Latin American and Caribbean region, proclaimed a
zone of peace, will continue to honour its commitments
by virtue of that transcendental declaration.
Ms. Jacobs (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom is grateful for the work of Egypt and
Bangladesh in driving the Peacebuilding Commission
(PBC) these past 18 months. Sustaining peace is the
shared responsibility of all pillars of the United Nations,
but the Commission is the only dedicated global forum
for supporting countries with their peacebuilding
processes. Under Egypt’s stewardship, the Commission
continued to expand its geographic reach and increased
its engagement with women peacebuilders. Under
the leadership of Bangladesh, we have an ambitious
workplan and a renewed focus on impact. The United
Kingdom sees the potential of the Peacebuilding
Commission. Through activist Chairs, including Egypt
and Bangladesh, this youngest body of the United
Nations system has matured. We think it has still
greater potential. By continuing to deepen its followup on the countries with which it engages and rallying
collective responses to peacebuilding challenges, the
PBC will continue to grow in value.

A/76/PV.98

With emerging new threats to peace and security, it
is more important than ever that we take a comprehensive
approach to addressing global challenges. The world
can no longer afford the cost of conflict. We must focus
on prevention. Peaceful, just and inclusive societies
are critical to achieving sustainable development and
resilience. We encourage all national and international
actors to put peacebuilding and sustaining peace
at the centre of their policies and approaches. That
means finding more integrated, inclusive and strategic
policy approaches, working on smarter financing and
casting the net of cooperation and partnerships more
widely. The Peacebuilding Commission, through its
convening role and increasingly in and of its own right,
is a critical part of that equation. And the SecretaryGeneral’s Peacebuilding Fund is the foremost financing
instrument of the United Nations for strengthening the
Organization’s peacebuilding work on the ground in
partnership with host countries and Governments. As a
historic top donor to the Fund and co-Chair with Sweden
of the Group of Friends of the Peacebuilding Fund, the
United Kingdom has consistently championed it, and
we welcome all efforts to ensure that it is properly
resourced and equipped.
I would like to conclude by recognizing the tireless
work of the Peacebuilding Support Office. The United
Kingdom is deeply grateful to Assistant SecretaryGeneral Spehar and her team.
Mr. Hilale (Morocco) (spoke in French): At the
outset, I would like to warmly thank the Peacebuilding
Commission (PBC) and its former Chair, my brother
Ambassador Osama Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud,
for his comprehensive briefing as well as his relevant
comments on the report of the fifteenth session of
the PBC (A/76/678) in 2021. I also want to take this
opportunity to congratulate my sister Ambassador
of Bangladesh, Ms. Rabab Fatima, for her successful
conduct of the work of our Commission. I wish her
every success in her new United Nations functions.
In 2021, our Commission spared no effort in
implementing the relevant recommendations contained
in the peacebuilding and sustaining peace resolutions
and the priorities identified in the report of the PBC
during its previous session (A/75/747). They included
expanding its geographical and substantive focus,
strengthening its advisory, bridging and convening
roles, promoting effective partnerships in the area
of peacebuilding, fostering the implementation of
the women and peace and security and youth, peace

22-5794917/27

A/76/PV.98

and security agendas and aiding recovery after the
coronavirus disease pandemic. The sense of urgency
and the fundamental role of peacebuilding grow
every year, given the extent of the existing threats
and the newer multidimensional challenges that have
emerged. In addition, it is vital to move from response
to prevention, which is cost-efficient, and to employ
creative methods when it comes financing, taking into
account current challenges and their evolving nature.
The needs in terms of peacebuilding and financing
continue to increase. Bearing that in mind, the Kingdom
of Morocco is of the view that a general stocktaking
and geo-specific mapping of current threats could
be crucial in guiding peacebuilding, financing and
efforts in pressing areas, all while continuing to
respect national ownership. We are also of the view
that the establishment of winning partnerships and
cooperation are critical to peacebuilding. Morocco
will therefore continue its dynamic, multifaceted and
supportive cooperation, which is aimed at promoting
sustained peace at the regional and international levels,
particularly on the African continent.
It goes without saying that the lack of tangible
progress in financing for peacebuilding continues to
be a major obstacle to future progress. To that end,
we believe it is important first to establish the issue
of financing as a priority for the general peacebuilding
landscape and sustaining peace at the United Nations.
In that regard, we reiterate our support for predictable
and adequate funding for peacebuilding, including
the possibility of regular contributions amounting to
$100 million for financing for peacebuilding. Secondly,
we should emphasize the importance of adequate
funding for the prevention of conflicts and resolution
of disputes. Thirdly, it will be important to increase the
number of successful, solid and organized partnerships
with international financial institutions, regional
organizations, the private sector and civil society
in order to ensure intensified action on the ground,
particularly in terms of innovation.
In line with the priorities of King Mohammed VI,
Morocco has always sought to help to uphold peace
and security at the regional and international levels
by taking advantage of every means of cooperation,
whether bilateral, trilateral, South-South, multilateral or
international, in combating challenges that undermine
the peace, stability and security of States. That
especially includes our brother African countries that are
courageously confronting a series of multidimensional
18/27

02/09/2022

threats. In that regard, Morocco has productive
partnerships with friendly African countries on the
political, security, social, environmental, humanitarian,
educational, health and, of course, military fronts.
Here I should point out that the Kingdom of Morocco
has more than 1,000 partnership agreements with
African countries aimed at strengthening security and
socioeconomic development on our continent. Morocco
will work to further consolidate that cooperation, which
is a fundamental lever of its foreign policy.
The Kingdom of Morocco will continue to actively
participate in the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
and will spare no effort in its capacity as Chair of
the Central African Republic country configuration.
Together with all our regional and international
partners, we have continued to work tirelessly to ensure
peace and stability in cooperation with our brother
country of the Central African Republic, with the full
ownership of its authorities and in conformity with the
country’s national priorities.
I should not conclude without expressing our full
support for the efforts of the Permanent Representatives
of Sweden and Kenya, the co-facilitators of the draft
resolution on financing for peacebuilding. I thank them
for their efforts to arrive at a balanced and inclusive
text that meets all of our aspirations and expectations.
We wish them every success in their efforts.
Mrs. González López (El Salvador) (spoke in
Spanish): My delegation appreciates the inclusion
of these agenda items in this plenary session of the
General Assembly, items that are also the subject of
the reports of the Secretary-General on peacebuilding
and sustaining peace (A/76/668 and A/76/688/Corr.1),
in the context of which we would like to focus on the
Peacebuilding Fund (PBF).
Our own experience has confirmed that
peacebuilding is a continuing and long-term process
in which catalytic and cross-cutting interventions
are essential in responding to the special needs of
vulnerable groups, as is a work ethic that creates
effective coordination and has a genuine impact
on the population. In that context, the PBF has been
crucial in enabling us to make greater progress
towards peace and sustainable development. It has
thus become an important instrument through which
multiple interventions have been organized based on
our national priorities. Between 2018 and now, a total
of more than $17 million has been invested in key
areas such as the reintegration of returned migrants,
22-57949

02/09/2022

the meaningful and effective participation of young
people in decision-making for peace, the elimination
of violence against women, violence prevention,
transitional justice and the fight against corruption, as
well as humane and dignified movement.
The Fund also makes it possible to address
immediate needs in emergency situations, as we saw
at the beginning of the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Its multidimensional, flexible and catalytic nature has
resulted in significant, concrete results that benefit
Salvadorans. We also recognize the proactive and
coordinated work being done by national institutions
and organs of the United Nations system, which has been
essential to ensuring that results are action-oriented.
Based on its experience, El Salvador is of the
view that international support for peace efforts must
be long-term. Initiatives such as the PBF are well on
their way in that regard. El Salvador is grateful to the
donor countries whose voluntary contributions make it
possible to implement these actions through the PBF.
However, we share the concerns about the peacebuilding
funding gap. That is why we commend the SecretaryGeneral’s proposal in his report to invest in prevention
and peacebuilding. He encourages the promotion of
action aimed at ensuring adequate, predictable and
sustained financing for the Fund. Member States are
already discussing that issue in the negotiations on
a draft resolution on financing for peacebuilding,
co-facilitated by the Permanent Representatives of
Sweden and Kenya. Once adopted, it will serve as the
frame of reference for subsequent decisions made in the
Fifth Committee at the end of this year.
El Salvador has participated in this process
since its inception and will continue to contribute
effectively to it. Reaching concrete and conclusive
decisions on the matter will also enable us to better
meet objectives outlined in other initiatives such as
Our Common Agenda (A/75/982). Accordingly, my
country affirms its full willingness and commitment
to lending continuity to the activities and programmes
carried out with the support of the Fund, as well as
to providing recommendations and above all, sharing
useful experience with a view to the improvement of
future project delivery.
In conclusion, El Salvador recognizes the
fundamental role of the Peacebuilding Commission
as an intergovernmental advisory body in this field. I
should point out that we are also founding members.
We recognize the work conducted by the previous

A/76/PV.98

Permanent Representative of Bangladesh and the
Permanent Representative of Egypt at the head of
the Commission. In our determination to continue
this important work we have presented our national
candidacy in this forum for the period from 2023 to
2024, confirming our commitment and support to
ensuring that multilateralism can help to build peace.
Mr. Chukwu (Nigeria): At the outset, I would like
to thank the President for convening this important
meeting today. My delegation would like to commend
the able stewardship of the Permanent Representative of
Egypt to the United Nations, His Excellency Mr. Osama
Mahmoud Abdelkhalek Mahmoud, in his capacity as
Chair of the Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) during
its fifteenth session in 2021. We appreciate his efforts
as well as those of his delegation and the Peacebuilding
Support Office in presenting the Commission’s report
(A/76/678).
In the wake of escalating conflicts and growing
humanitarian situations across the world today, the
need for an urgent shift towards prevention and
peacebuilding cannot be overemphasized. Likewise,
utilizing the PBC’s unique advisory, bridging and
convening mandate effectively is now more critical
than ever to enhancing global peacebuilding efforts.
We note with satisfaction that the fifteenth session of
the Commission made laudable progress in advancing
the peacebuilding agenda and witnessed an expansion
of its thematic and geographic focus. The Commission
also strengthened the call for adequate, sustainable
and predictable financing for peacebuilding during its
annual meeting in November 2021 on the subject. In
the same vein, the Peacebuilding Fund (PBF) recorded
its highest year of investment in peacebuilding and
its second-highest year of donor contributions despite
the adverse effects of the coronavirus disease, which
created tremendous financial burdens and diverted
large parts of budgets in many States.
The current sixteenth session of the PBC, guided
by the 2022 programme of work, continues to offer
productive engagement and opportunities for the
Commission to enhance its mandate. However, while
we welcome the progress that the Commission and its
members have made in the past few years, it is important
to recognize that a shift to a greater focus on conflict
prevention and peacebuilding, as recommended by
the Secretary-General, will require immense and
concerted efforts. In that regard, I would like to
highlight a few points that we believe should be at the

22-5794919/27

A/76/PV.98

forefront of the work of the PBC and peacebuilding
efforts in general.
First, achieving nationally outlined peacebuilding
priorities should be seen as a collective effort requiring
the involvement of a wide range of actors. It is therefore
vital to set realistically achievable targets that can
enhance national ownership. It is also important to
enhance cross-pillar collaboration, especially between
peace and development actors, as well as South-South
cooperation and peacebuilding.
Secondly, in view of the nexus between peacekeeping
and peacebuilding, especially in the context of
transitions, we need greater synergy and collaboration
between the PBC and the Security Council. The PBC’s
advice to the Council, especially during important
mandate renewals and drawdowns of peacekeeping
missions, should be complementary and provide clearer
insights into the implications for nationally determined
peacebuilding priorities. Likewise, the Commission’s
engagement with the Economic and Social Council is
critical, considering that the ability to sustain economic
growth and development remains vital to peacebuilding.
Thirdly, promoting the women and peace and
security and youth, peace and security agendas is
critical to ensuring inclusive and sustainable peace.
Women must play a key role in the peace process, and
the PBC’s advisory and convening roles are important
in highlighting issues related to women and peace
and security, especially in country-specific contexts.
Adequate commitment to the effective implementation
of the Commission’s strategic action plan on youth and
peacebuilding is also essential.
Lastly, at a time when demand is greatly
overstretching peacekeeping’s capacity, the General
Assembly has a unique and important role to play in
providing concrete solutions to addressing the critical
need for adequate, predictable and sustainable financing
for peacebuilding. We encourage the delegations
currently negotiating the draft resolution on financing
for peacebuilding to maintain flexibility with a view to
opening every avenue that can increase both voluntary
and assessed contributions as well as exploring
innovative solutions for financing peacebuilding.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate Nigeria’s
commitment as a member of the PBC to continuing
to support efforts by the United Nations that enhance
conflict prevention and peacebuilding, which are far
less costly than responding to conflicts.
20/27

02/09/2022

Mr. Pieris (Sri Lanka): I thought that I would leave
the Assembly with some thoughts on peacebuilding
drawn from our own experiences of a conflict that
lasted more than 30 years. At the end of that conflict,
we had 12,000 security detainees, 594 child soldiers,
a programme of restorative justice and a Lessons
Learned and Reconciliation Commission, from which
we drew very rich experiences. For the purposes of our
own learning, I believe it is possible to identify three
aspects of post-conflict peacebuilding — creating
stability, restoring State institutions and addressing the
socioeconomic dimensions of the conflict.
At an international level, in keeping with the norms
and standards required by the United Nations. I should
recall in passing that we have had our own share of
experiences in international peacekeeping. Sri Lanka
has been blessed with armed forces from colonial times
and made a substantial contribution to maintaining
law and order at a domestic level and more recently in
Mozambique in 1994, where a contingent of 11 police
officers formed part of a successful United Nations
mission. That was followed by contingents deployed to
Timor-Leste, Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire, the Sudan,
Liberia, Haiti, South Sudan and Darfur. Their services
were highly commended.
To return to the main topic, the first aspect of
post-conflict peacekeeping, and an important one,
is the desire to reinforce stability and discourage
combatants from returning to war. In every respect,
peacebuilding continues to be an important function
of peacekeeping, encompassing efforts to maintain a
ceasefire, uphold stability and monitor the combatants.
In our experience, however, peacebuilding goes beyond
that feature of peacekeeping in a number of ways.
Peacebuilding activities directly attempt to reduce the
means and incentives to return to conflict. That requires
disarmament, demobilization and reintegration,
security-sector reform and arms control for light and
heavy weapon systems. There is a saying that if peace is
to prevail, the toys must be removed from the boys. But
it is not enough to try to reduce the material means for
going to war. The reintegration of former combatants
requires alternative avenues for pursuing livelihoods
and social recognition. As I said, at the end of our
conflict, we had just over 12,000 security detainees and
594 child soldiers. Of the 12,000 security detainees,
almost 11,900 were returned to their previous pursuits
after rehabilitation. All of the child soldiers were
returned to their parents. So peacebuilding activities
22-57949

02/09/2022

directly attempt to reduce the means available and the
incentives for non-State actors to potentially return
to conflict.
The second dimension is helping to build or
restore key State functions that have the capacity to
generate basic public goods and that have a semblance
of legitimacy. In our experience, a basic function of
the State is the production of public goods. But many
States, especially those emerging from conflict — and
we have experienced that ourselves — find it difficult
to deliver those goods. As a result, peacebuilders either
replace the State or partner with the State to rebuild
basic facilities, public administration, the rule of law,
transportation, communication networks and utilities
and to create education and health infrastructure.
The third dimension is an attempt to build
the ability not only of the State but of the society
to manage conflict peacefully and develop the
socioeconomic infrastructure needed to underpin
economic development. To that end, peacebuilders are
involved in trauma counselling, transitional justice
and reconciliation, community dialogue and the
strengthening of civil-society organizations, among
other things. Although there is a tremendous debate on
the basic functions of the State beyond the provision
of security, and about the minimal degree and kind
of State that is required to underpin peace, several
elements in this process may be controversial. To
begin with, actors must have an incentive to preserve
the State and its institutions. What matters, then, is
the utility of the State to provide reasonable security
guarantees and that powerful actors believe that they
benefit from a State that can enforce the essential rules.
In that respect, I say the test for the emergence of the
State is the appearance of a political unit persisting
in time and fixed in space and the development of
permanent, impersonal institutions; agreement on the
need for an authority that can give final judgments; and
the acceptance of the idea that such authority should
receive the basic loyalty of its subjects. I do not think
there is anything short of that formula.
In the final analysis, led most prominently by, and
with the help of, developed States, there is a growing
interest in making sure that States, especially those
emerging from conflicts, such as ourselves, have the
capacity to maintain stability and counter transnational
threats, which is another aspect of it.

A/76/PV.98

The degree of the State, then, matters, not only
because it provides a useful function for domestic
society, but also for international society. Yet the desire
to make sure that the post-conflict State is strong
enough to contend with uncivil forces might easily
undermine the desire to build a liberal State, one that
is accountable to society and fastened by nothing less
than the rule of law. If so, then peacebuilding, in my
respectful view, might prove to be successful to the
extent that States do not return to war five years or a
short while after peace agreements and a failure to the
extent that it leaves in place an authoritarian structure.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the joint debate on these items.
May I take it that is the wish of the General
Assembly to conclude its consideration of agenda items
32 and 113?
It was so decided.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 66.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European and other States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
Number of invalid ballots:
Number of valid ballots:
Abstentions:
Number of members present and voting:
Required two-thirds majority:
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation
North Macedonia

178
1
177
3
174
116
95
79

Since no candidate obtained the required the
required two-thirds majority, there still remains one
seat to be filled from among the Eastern European
States. We shall therefore proceed to the ninth
unrestricted ballot.

22-5794921/27

A/76/PV.98

In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of
the procedure, this ninth round of balloting shall
be unrestricted.
I remind the Assembly that any Member State from
among the Eastern European States may be a candidate,
except those that remain members of the Economic and
Social Council as of 1 January 2023, as well as those
that were already elected for a term beginning on
1 January 2023. The following members can therefore
not be voted for in the present balloting: Bulgaria,
Croatia, Czechia, Slovakia and Slovenia.
Before we begin the voting process, I should like to
remind members that, pursuant to rule 88 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly, no representative
shall interrupt the voting except on a point of order on
the actual conduct of the voting.
We shall now begin the voting process. Ballot
papers will now be distributed. The voting has begun.
Members are requested to write an “X” in the box
next to the name on the ballot paper or to write the name
of another eligible State on the blank line. If the box
next to the name of a State is checked, the name of that
State does not have to be repeated on the blank line.
There should not be more than one checked box
or handwritten name for the vacant seat to be filled.
Accordingly, members can only check the box or write
one name of an eligible Member State from among the
Eastern European States in the space provided.
If the ballot paper contains a vote for a Member
State that will remain a member of the Economic
and Social Council as of 1 January 2023, or that was
already elected for a term beginning on 1 January 2023,
the ballot paper will be declared invalid. Finally, if a
ballot paper contains any notation other than a vote in
favour of an eligible Member State, those notations will
be disregarded.
At the invitation of the President, the representatives
of Hungary, Japan, Mexico, Monaco, Mozambique
and New Zealand acted as tellers.
The Acting President: In the interest of time, the
General Assembly will now proceed to consider the
other items announced in the United Nations journal
while the ballots are being counted.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda
item 115.
22/27

02/09/2022

Agenda item 129
Global Health and Foreign Policy
Draft resolutions (A/76/L.76 and A/76/L.77)
The Acting President: I now give the floor to
the representative of South Africa to introduce draft
resolution A/76/L.76
Ms. Joyini (South Africa): On behalf of the core
group of the Foreign Policy and Global Health Initiative,
I wish to introduce draft resolution A/76/L.76, on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response,
which calls for a high-level meeting on this very
important topic.
The
core
group
members
and
main
sponsors — Australia, Bangladesh, Canada, Costa Rica,
Ghana, Indonesia, Jamaica, New Zealand, Rwanda,
South Africa, Sweden and Viet Nam — worked to present
a draft resolution that is procedural and to request the
General Assembly to call for a high-level meeting in
New York where Heads of State and Government would
adopt a succinct political declaration on pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response no later than the
end of the last day of the general debate of the General
Assembly at its seventy-eighth session.
With the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic now in its third year, the need to develop an
inclusive and durable solution for pandemic, prevention,
preparedness and response remains as important as
ever. It is our belief that a continuous demonstration
of political will is vital to ensure that whole-of-society
approaches to pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response are adopted and operationalized.
The COVID-19 pandemic has also highlighted the
need for concerted political action at the global level and
an increase in international financing for preparedness
focused on addressing the gaps.
The COVID-19 pandemic has served to refute
several previously held truths about pandemics and
reveal significant shortcomings in current national and
global capacity to prepare for, detect and respond to
them. Consequently, a high-level political moment is
needed to refocus attention on persistent challenges
in COVID-19 and other pandemic responses, as well
as opportunities for new and ambitious multilateral
solutions for pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response moving forward.
22-57949

02/09/2022

It is our view that the high-level meeting being
proposed will facilitate a political decision for the
global community to support pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response processes that are currently
being discussed in Geneva. Similarly, we are confident
that the high-level meeting would be mutually
reinforcing with the other high-level meetings on public
health that are also scheduled for the seventy-eighth
session of the General Assembly.
It is imperative that we cooperate and coordinate
such that we can prevent epidemics from spreading and
becoming pandemics. That will require coordination at
the international level through political will.
The Acting President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.77.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish): Before
introducing the draft resolution, I would like to mention
an event that is now public knowledge. Last night, an
attempt was made on the life of the Vice-President of
the Republic of Argentina, Mrs. Cristina Fernández
de Kirchner, from which, fortunately, she emerged
unscathed. We would like to express our solidarity
with the Vice-President, our firm condemnation of the
incident and our commitment to life, peace, democracy
and human rights.
I am pleased to introduce draft resolution
A/76/L.77, on the International Day for Interventional
Cardiology, to be commemorated on 16 September to
raise awareness about an area of medicine that improves
public health and increases life expectancy. We believe
that the adoption of the draft resolution would enable
greater recognition of interventional cardiology as a
very powerful diagnostic and therapeutic tool, thanks
to technological progress and human resources training.
The date chosen, 16 September, coincides with the
first percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty
performed by Dr. Andreas Grüntzig on a patient, on
16 September 1977 in Zurich.
We believe that this International Day will serve
to commemorate and reaffirm the commitment
to interventional cardiology, alongside various
stakeholders, such as civil society, academia and the
private sector, as stipulated in the draft resolution.
In that context, we believe that the role of the World
Health Organization will be crucial in implementing
the text, as it is the agency that specializes in that area.

A/76/PV.98

Moreover, marking this International Day is
an opportunity to share experiences and potential
forms of cooperation in that area of medicine. We
thank all delegations for their contributions and their
constructive involvement on the text. Furthermore, we
warmly thank all those delegations that co-sponsored
the text, which, according to the number we have,
stands at 33 countries.
Allow me to conclude with the words of the wellknown Argentine cardiac surgeon René Favaloro:
“medical and bioengineering progress can be
considered true achievements for humankind when
everyone has access to their benefits, and they are
no longer a privilege for the few”.
The Acting President: The Assembly will
now take a decision on draft resolution A/76/L.76,
entitled “High-level meeting on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly and
Conference Management): The present oral statement,
which will be distributed to Member States, is made in
the context of rule 153 of the rules of procedure of the
General Assembly.
Under the terms of paragraph 1 of the draft
resolution, the General Assembly would decide to hold
a one-day high-level meeting, by no later than the last
day of the general debate of the General Assembly at
its seventy-eighth session, to adopt a succinct political
declaration aimed at, inter alia, mobilizing political
will at the national, regional and international levels for
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
With regard to that paragraph, in the absence
of modalities for the high-level meeting, it is not
possible at the present time to estimate the potential
cost implications of the requirements of the highlevel meeting. Upon a decision on the modalities of
the meeting, the Secretary-General would assess
the budgetary implications and advise the General
Assembly in accordance with rule 153 of the rules of
procedure of the General Assembly.
Furthermore, in accordance with established
practice, the date of the high-level meeting would be
determined in consultation with the Department for
General Assembly and Conference Management. In that

22-5794923/27

A/76/PV.98

02/09/2022

regard, references made to paragraph 11 of resolution
69/250 and subsequent resolutions, the most recent
of which is resolution 76/237, in which the Assembly
invited Member States to include in new legislative
mandates adequate information on modalities for the
organization of conferences and meetings.
The statement I just made will be made available
in The Journal of the United Nations and under the
e-statements link for the meeting.
The Acting President: We will now take action on
draft resolution A/76/L.76.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have become sponsors draft
resolution A/76/L.76: Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Bahrain, Barbados,
Belgium, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Botswana, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cabo
Verde, Cambodia, the Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, Colombia, Comoros, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czechia, Denmark, Djibouti, the
Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial
Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, the Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritius,
Monaco,
Montenegro,
Morocco,
Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, the Netherlands, Norway, Palau,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
the Republic of Moldova, Romania, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Sudan, Spain,
the Sudan, Suriname Tajikistan, Timor-Leste, Togo,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Türkiye, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, the United Arab Emirates, the United
Kingdom, the United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Zambia
and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.76?
24/27

Draft resolution
(resolution 76/301).

A/76/L.76

was

adopted

The Acting President: We shall now turn to draft
resolution A/76/L.77, entitled “International Day for
Interventional Cardiology”.
I give the
the Secretariat.

floor

to

the

representative

of

Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in the document,
the following countries have also become sponsors of
draft resolution A/76/L.77: Algeria, Armenia, Belarus,
Botswana, Burkina Faso, the Central African Republic,
Costa Rica, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Guyana,
India, Japan, Kenya, Kyrgyzstan, Malaysia, Morocco,
Paraguay, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Serbia, South
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Tajikistan, Thailand,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkmenistan, Vanuatu, the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Zimbabwe.
The Acting President: May I take it that the
Assembly decides to adopt draft resolution A/76/L.77?
Draft resolution A/76/L.77
(resolution 76/302).

was

adopted

The Acting President: Before giving the floor for
explanations of position on the resolutions just adopted,
may I remind delegations that explanations are limited
to 10 minutes and should be delivered by delegations
from their seats.
Ms. Soares Leite (Brazil): Our statement concerns
resolution 76/301.
The coronavirus disease has taught the international
community that we urgently need to redouble our
collective efforts to detect new health emergencies and
respond to them in a timely, efficient and coordinated
manner. Brazil welcomes the initiative to convene
a high-level meeting of the General Assembly on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. We
thank the core group for proposing it.
The high-level meeting will achieve its purpose
only if it is consistent with the ongoing negotiation
processes in Geneva. Brazil believes that the proposal
should have moved the date of the meeting to a time
after the conclusion of both sets of negotiations on an
instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response — within the intergovernmental negotiating
22-57949

02/09/2022

body and via the process of the reform of the
International Health Regulations.
In the same vein, we believe that the resolution
should have included fundamental elements that are
an integral part of the negotiations in Geneva. In the
preamble, for instance, there is no reference made to
equitable access to medical counter-measures, which
is part of the decision of the World Health Assembly
special session SSA 2 (5) of 1 December 2021. There
is no reference either to research and development or
to the production of vaccines in health technologies,
which is also a central issue in the existing debate. And
there is no mention of recovery as an important element
in comprehensively addressing the subject.
For the next phases concerning the modalities of
the meeting and the succinct political declaration to be
adopted as an outcome, it is crucial that negotiations be
conducted in a way that allows for a transparent, open
and inclusive process, with sufficient time for broad
consultations and consensus-building.
In reaffirming its commitment to joining collective
efforts to better address health challenges, Brazil looks
forward to working with other delegations so that
the modalities of the meeting, as well as the succinct
political declaration, give adequate political impetus to
the issue, while ensuring that the ongoing processes in
Geneva can fully run their dual course.
Mrs. Birrer (Switzerland) (spoke in French):
Switzerland welcomes resolution 76/301, entitled “Highlevel meeting on pandemic prevention, preparedness
and response”.
As underscored in the resolution, leadership,
multilateral cooperation and ongoing engagement
are necessary in order to prevent future global health
emergencies such as the coronavirus disease pandemic.
We believe that the World Health Organization (WHO)
should play a central and leading role in those efforts.
We therefore welcome the recognition of its leadership
role on global health issues in the text of the resolution
and its involvement in preparations for the high-level
meeting in question.
Our shared commitment to strengthening pandemic
preparedness and response must contribute to coherent
global health governance and, at the core, a strong
and effective WHO. It is therefore crucial to ensure
complementarity and coherence between the highlevel meeting and the work under way in Geneva in

A/76/PV.98

the intergovernmental negotiating body to draft and
negotiate a World Health Organization convention,
agreement or other international instrument on
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
At this stage, we would have preferred that our
work be focused on the discussions under way in the
intergovernmental negotiating body and at the WHO,
and then return to the General Assembly with the
format of a high-level meeting once the first draft of a
new international instrument had been presented to the
World Health Assembly in May 2024.
Lastly, we would like to stress that preparations for
the high-level meeting must be guided by the principles
of transparency and inclusiveness to enable all Member
States to participate actively.
Mr. Fogarty (United States of America): The United
States would like to express support for the intention of
resolution 76/301 to maintain and strengthen political
attention on pandemic preparedness and response. That
is a shared global priority and a major focus for the
United States. The special session proposed as part of
the resolution has the ability to support those goals in
New York, while reinforcing the critical work taking
place in Geneva, Washington, D.C., and capitals around
the world.
The timing of the special session must be planned
and scoped accordingly, with a solid appreciation
for the complementary processes, negotiations and
efforts taking place in other forums, including ongoing
discussions on pandemic-related issues occurring at
the World Health Organization on International Health
Regulations amendments and in the intergovernmental
negotiating body to draft and negotiate a World
Health Organization convention, agreement or other
international instrument on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. It will be critical that a
future special session be informed by, and help to
support, those concurrent efforts while being respectful
of their distinct processes.
While we support the goals of the resolution, to
increase commitment across the United Nations system
on this important issue, we would like to register
concerns with the process on this short procedural text.
The text was not properly negotiated or placed under
the silence procedure. Many delegations across regions
expressed concerns about the process and timing of
the special session during the only two brief informal

22-5794925/27

A/76/PV.98

meetings that were held. Those concerns were not
addressed in any subsequent drafts of this text.
As we approach the General Assembly high-level
week in 2023, we want to ensure that any additional
events on global health priorities provide a strong value
and add to the packed agenda. We look forward to the
high-level meetings on universal health coverage, the
outcome of which would also add to the pandemicpreparedness architecture that we are all seeking to
strengthen and solidify.
The United States will engage constructively and
proactively in the upcoming modalities negotiations for
the special session in order to ensure that the timing
and scope of that session amplifies, complements
and does not duplicate existing processes. Pandemic
preparedness and response requires ongoing political
attention and mobilization, as well as commitment
across the United Nations system and sectors in order
to help reinforce the work taking place in Geneva and
elsewhere. We welcome the opportunity to reflect on
this special session as we look ahead to next steps.
Mr. Shin (Republic of Korea): At the outset, my
delegation would like to express our appreciation to
South Africa and the core group of the Foreign Policy
and Global Health Initiative for drafting this important
resolution (resolution 76/301).
The Republic of Korea shares the view that the
coronavirus disease pandemic has clarified the critical
importance of preventing, preparing and responding to
pandemics and global health emergencies, as well as
of the need to maintain a high-level of momentum. In
that regard, allow me to share a few reflections on the
resolution and the process to follow.
First, we must ensure that the high-level meeting
enhances synergy with the other health-related agendas,
such as universal health coverage and tuberculosis,
already scheduled to be discussed in the General
Assembly during its seventy-eighth session.
Secondly, the initiative should serve to complement
the work under way in Geneva. The General Assembly
can best do that by mobilizing political will among all
Member States, while focusing our common efforts and
leveraging what can be done here in New York to help
prevent unnecessary duplication and overlap with the
ongoing discussion in Geneva.
Thirdly, considering the topic at hand, we must
better engage with multiple stakeholders, namely,
26/27

02/09/2022

the private sector, civil society and the World Health
Organization, in a transparent and inclusive manner.
To that end, the Republic of Korea will play its part to
constructively and proactively contribute to ensuring
those processes, such as by discussing the modality
for the high-level meeting. Bearing that in mind, we
must work towards establishing practical, concrete
and action-oriented results in convening the highlevel meeting.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in explanation of vote after the voting.
We will now hear statements after the adoption of
the resolution.
I give the floor to the representative of the European
Union, in its capacity as observer.
Mr. De la Maisonneuve (European Union): I
deliver this statement on behalf of the European Union
(EU) and its member States. The candidate countries
Türkiye, North Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia,
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova; the country of
the Stabilization and Association Process and potential
candidate Bosnia and Herzegovina; as well as Georgia,
Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, align themselves
with this statement.
The EU and its member States welcome the
adoption of the enabling resolution (resolution 76/301)
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
As a sign of our strong support, all 27 EU member
States co-sponsored it. We would like to thank South
Africa, as well as Australia, Bangladesh, Canada,
Costa Rica, Ghana, Indonesia, Jamaica, New Zealand,
Rwanda, Sweden and Viet Nam, for their leadership in
garnering political support for pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response.
The lessons learned from the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic have clearly underlined that
we need to improve global health security and prevent
and prepare better for future pandemics in a joint and
global effort. The importance of that issue cannot
be overstated. Team Europe, the EU and its member
States, have been at the global forefront of showing
multilateral solidarity and responding to the COVID-19
pandemic — whether it be in supporting countries in
need with essential health supplies, providing vaccines
to low- and middle-income countries or providing
support to vaccine-manufacturing capacities in
developing countries.
22-57949

02/09/2022

The EU strongly supports multilateral action.
In the forward-looking perspective, the EU and its
member States will be the first to support initiatives
that aim to strengthen the political support of the
global community for measures to prevent and respond
to future pandemics. We expect that initiative in
the General Assembly to be fully aligned with, and
complementary to, the negotiations mandated by the
World Health Assembly, as well as the reforms of the
International Health Regulations, the establishment
of the new financial intermediary fund for pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response at the World
Bank and the Foreign Policy and Global Health
Initiative in the General Assembly.
We also trust that the preparatory process
will be open, transparent and inclusive, reflecting
contributions from all relevant stakeholders. We
must ensure full inclusion of the World Health
Organization in every step of this process in order for
it to provide technical guidance and leadership and
help ensure complementarity between New York and
Geneva processes.
Lastly, we would like to stress that the timing of
this initiative should remain flexible in order to ensure
that it provides the best possible timing and support to
ongoing negotiations.
The EU would also like to avail itself of this
opportunity to inform the United Nations membership
of the forthcoming renewed EU Global Health Strategy
and invites stakeholders to partake in the ongoing
public consultations in preparation for the strategy.
The Acting President: May I take it that it is
the wish of the General Assembly to conclude its
consideration of agenda item 129?

A/76/PV.98

It was so decided.
Agenda item 115 (continued)
Elections to fill vacancies in principal organs
(b) Election of members of the Economic and
Social Council
The Acting President: The result of the voting is
as follows:
Eastern European States (1 seat)
Number of ballot papers:
178
Number of invalid ballots:
0
Number of valid ballots:
178
Abstentions:
3
Number of members present and voting:
175
Required two-thirds majority:
117
Number of votes obtained:
Russian Federation:
97
North Macedonia:
78
The unrestricted ballot has again been inconclusive.
One seat remains to be filled from among the Eastern
European States.
In accordance with rule 94 of the rules of procedure,
we should continue with a series of balloting. In view
of the lateness of the hour, further balloting will take
place on a date to be determined, during the seventyseventh session.
May I take it that the General Assembly concludes
its consideration of sub-item (b) of agenda item 115?
It was so decided.
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m.

22-5794927/27
