61

General Auembly-Twenty-fifth Senion

For this purpose, he should have authority, in consultation
with the Secretary-General, to frame such staff rules, consistent with the relevant principles laid down by the General
Assembly, as he considers necessary to meet the special
problems which arise in the service of the Programme.
62. With respect to the organization of the Programme at
the country level, the resident representative will be redesignated resident director of the Programme. His appointment
by the Administrator will be subject to the prior approval
of the Government concerned.
63. There should be the maximum possible delegation
of authority to the resident director. His role therefore needs
to be greatly strengthened. In this context, his relations with
the representatives of other United Nations organizations in
the field are of crucial importance. The resident director
should be recognized as having full over-all responsibility for
the programme in the country concerned and his role in
relation to the representatives of the other United Nations
organizations, where they are posted with the prior approval
of the Government concerned, should be that of the leader
of the team, taking into account the professional competence
of these United Nations organizations and their relations with
appropriate organs of the Government. This role of leadership and over-all responsibility should extend to all contacts
with the governmental authorities concerned in connexion
with the programme, in regard to which he will be the
principal channel of communication between the Programme
and the Government. The resident director should have ultimate authority on behalf of the Administrator for all aspects
of the programme at the country level and should, subject
to the agreement of the organizations concerned, be the
central co-ordinating authority on their behalf for the other
development assistance programmes of the United Nations
system. In this connexion, the organizations in the United
Nations system are requested to ensure that the resident
directors of the Programme are consulted on the planning
and formulation of development projects with which those
organizations are concerned and that they are supplied with
reports on the execution of those projects, as requested by
the Economic and Social Council in resolution 1453 (XLVII)
of 8 August 1969.
64. The creation of new field offices or the enlargement
of the existing ones should depend on the volume of Programme operations in the particular country and should be
undertaken with due regard to the need for economy. In
the strengthening of field offices, priority should be given to
effective redeployment of existing staff.
65. The Inter-Agency Consultative Board should continue
to be the forum for interagency consultation and coordination relating to the Programme. However, the Board
should undertake a thorough review of its basic functions
and methods of work and its relations with the Governing
Council in the light of the new system of country programming
of Programme assistance and the need for the efficient implementation of the country programmes.

2689 (XXV), Reports of the Governing Council
of the United Nations Development Programme
The General Assembly
Takes note with appreciation of the reports of the
Governing Council of the United Nations Development
Programme on its ninth46 and tenth47 sessions.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2690 (XXV), United Nations Capital Development
Fund

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 2186 (XXI) of 13 December 1966 and 2321 (XXII) of 15 December 1967,
46 Ibid.,

Forty-ninth Session, Supplement No. 6 (E/4782).
6A (E/4884/Rev.1).

41 Ibid., Supplement No.

Recalling further its resolution 2525 (XXIV) of
5 December 1969, in which it decided, inter alia, to
continue the provisional arrangements for the operation of the United Nations Capital Development Fund,
Noting that it has not been possible for the Governing
Coun.::il of the United Nations Development Programme to undertake the exploratory study requested
by the General Assembly in resolution 2525 (XXIV),
Taking note of the statement by the SecretaryGeneral at the 1970 United Nations Pledging Conference on the United Nations Capital Development Fund
in which he called on the General Assembly to carry
out a searching review of the whole question, 48
1. Reaffirms its resolution 2525 (XXIV) and requests Member States to offer suggestions, within the
framework of the exploratory study, so as to expedite
the beginning of the effective operation of the United
Nations Capital Development Fund;
2. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme to consider, within
the framework of the study mentioned above and
taking into account the observations made by Member
States during the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly, all possibilities for reaching the objectives
of the United Nations Capital Development Fund, including the desirability and feasibility of providing
follow-up investment projects of the Fund in country
programmes;
3. Decides to preserve the original functions of the
United Nations Capital Development Fund until 31 December 1971, in accordance with the measures set
forth in paragraph 1 of General Assembly resolution
2321 (XXII);
4. Requests the Secretary-General to invite Member States to contribute separately, at the same pledging
conference, to the United Nations Development Programme and to the United Nations Capital Development Fund;
5. Appeals to Member States, and in particular to
developed countries, to provide substantial contributions to the United Nations Capital Development Fund
so as to make the Fund operational and effective.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.
2691 (XXV). International university

The General Assembly,
Recalling paragraphs 196 and 197 of the introduction to the report of the Secretary-General on the work
of the Organization submitted to the General Assembly
at its twenty-fourth session, 49
Recalling its resolution 2573 (XXIV) of 13 December 1969,
Recalling also Economic and Social Council resolution 1542 (XLIX) of 30 July 1970,
Believing that the establishment of an international
university, truly international in character, could contribute to the achievement of the objectives of the
Charter of the United Nations,
Believing further that the studies on the establishment of an international university must be undertaken
48 See A/CONF.51/SR.1.
4 9 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Session, Supplement No. JA (A/7601/Add.1).

Reaolutlon1 adopted on the reporh of the Seeond Committee

in closest co-operation among the United Nations
organizations concerned,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
on the question of the establishment of an international
university,110 as well as the report of the DirectorGeneral of the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization presented to the General
Conference at its sixteenth session and General Conference resolution 1.242, and the report of the Board
of Trustees of the United Nations Institute for Training and Research;111
2. Invites the United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organj.zation to undertake, in co-operation
with the United Nations organizations concerned and
the university community throughout the world, studies
of the educational, financial and organizational aspects
of an international university, as recommended in
General Conference resolution 1.242;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his
consultations and studies, in close co-operation with the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the United Nations Institute for
Training and Research, relating to the problems which
are primarily of concern to the United Nations in the
context of the establishment of an international university, taking into account:
(a) The studies carried out by the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization;
( b) The comments and observations, including suggested optional models of an international university,
made at the twenty-fifth session of the General
Assembly;
( c) The preliminary views and proposals of Governments to be submitted under paragraph 4 below;
4. Invites Governments of Member States to submit to the Secretary-General, by the end of May 1971,
their preliminary views and proposals on an international university, including their possible contribution to
such a university, should it be established;
S. Authorizes the Secretary-General to set up in
due course a Panel of Experts on the Establishment of
an International University, for the purpose of assisting
him in his further consultations and studies on this
question, consisting of:
(a) Ten experts nominated by the Governments of
Member States to be designated by the President of
the General Assembly;112
(b) Five experts to be designated by the SecretaryGeneral in consultation with the Director-General of
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization and the Executive Director of the United
Nations Institute for Training and Research;
6. Takes note of the fact that the Secretary-General
of the United Nations and the Director-General of the
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization are arranging to conduct the relevant
studies in such a manner as to be complementary to
each other;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the
General Assembly at its twenty-sixth session, through
IIO Ibid., Twenty-fifth Session, Annexes, agenda item 44,
document A/8182.
111 Ibid., annexes II, IV and V.
112 The President of the General Assembly designated the
following Member States: Argentina, Austria, Costa Rica,
Prance, India, Japan, Senegal, Sierra Leone, United Arab Republic and United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland.

61

the Economic and Social Council, a report on the studies undertaken in pursuance of the present resolution,
together with any recommendations, so that the Assembly may take decisions on the question of the establishment of an international university at the earliest
possible date.
1925th plenary meeting,
11 December 1970.

2692 (XXV). Permanent sovereignty over natu•
ral resources of developing countries and
expansion of domestic sources of accumula■
tion for economic development
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 626 (VII) of 21 December
1952, 1803 (XVII) of 14 December 1962, 2158
(XXI) of 25 November 1966 and 2386 (XXIII) of
19 November 1968 concerning permanent sovereignty
over natural resources,
Recalling the pertinent provisions of the International Development Strategy for the Second United
Nations Development Decade, 58
Reaffirming the necessity for the General Assembly
to examine this problem further,
Noting with appreciation the efforts of the developing countries in mobilizing and effectively utilizing
their domestic resources,
Taking into account that the financing of the development plans of the developing countries depends, to
a considerable degree, upon the conditions under which
their natural resources are exploited and, in a number
of developing countries, upon their share in the profits
of foreign investments undertaken in their countries,
Recognizing in this connexion the importance of the
positive experience gained by the developing countries
in the exercise of their sovereignty over their natural
resources for the purpose of increased mobilization of
domestic resources for development and of drawing up
and implementing their national development plans, and
recognizing also that such experience would be conducive to revitalizing the efforts being undertaken at
the national level for the economic development of the
developing countries,
Recognizing also the necessity for all countries to
exercise fully their rights so as to secure the optimal
utilization of their natural resources, both land and
marine, for the benefit and welfare of their peoples and
for the protection of their environment,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General
entitled "Permanent sovereignty over natural resources" ;Iii
2. Reaffirms the right of peoples and nations to
permanent sovereignty over their natural wealth and
resources, which must be exercised in the interest of
their national development a'ld of the well-being of
the people of the State concerned;
3. Recognizes that the exercise of permanent sovereignty over their natural resources by developing countries is inuLpe!lsa~le in <;>rder that they may, inter alia,
accelerate their mdustnal development, and in this
connexion stresses the important role of the appropriate
organizations of the United Nations system in the pro11s Resolution 2626 (XXV).

54 A/8058.
