United Nations

S/PV.5749

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-second year

5749th meeting
Tuesday, 25 September 2007, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Sarkozy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Belgium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Indonesia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Italy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Panama . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Qatar . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Verhofstadt
Mr. Yan Jiechi
Mr. Nguesso
Mr. Kufuor
Mr. Yudhoyono
Mr. Prodi
Mr. Torrijos
Mr. García Belaunde
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani
Mr. Lavrov
Mr. Gašparovič
Mr. Mbeki
Mr. Howells
Mr. Bush

Agenda
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 19 September 2007 from the Permanent Representative of France
to the United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2007/552)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

07-51572 (E)

*0751572*

S/PV.5749

and peoples of Africa must be commended for their
determined efforts to address the challenges. But
African peacemakers alone cannot tackle the
continent’s conflicts.

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.

(spoke in English)
Peace and security in Africa
Letter dated 19 September 2007 from the
Permanent Representative of France to the
United Nations addressed to the SecretaryGeneral (S/2007/552)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council has agreed to extend an invitation under rule
39 of its provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Alpha
Oumar Konaré, Chairperson of the African Union, to
whom I extend a very warm welcome. I am pleased to
see him here.
I am also pleased to welcome heads of State or
Government, ministers and other representatives
participating in this summit meeting of the Security
Council, together with the Secretary-General of the
United Nations, whom I welcome and whom I thank.
Following those of 1992, 2000 and 2005, this
summit meeting is the fourth of its kind to be held
since the establishment of the United Nations in 1945.
This demonstrates the great importance the Security
Council attaches to the African continent. Clearly, the
priority that the United Nations accords to Africa is
shared by France.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I now invite the Secretary-General,
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, to take the floor.

His

The Secretary-General (spoke in French): I
thank you, Mr. President, for organizing this important
discussion. Ensuring peace and security for the people
of Africa is not only at the very core of the United
Nations agenda; it is also a top priority for me
personally. I wish to act with a strong sense of urgency.
I want to emphasize the importance of results, action
and delivery.
Many African countries are confronted with
daunting peace and security challenges. But
encouraging signs are emerging. Progress has been
achieved on several fronts. The successful conduct of
elections in Sierra Leone is the most recent
manifestation of the positive trends. The Governments

2

That is why the United Nations is working to
strengthen its partnerships with regional organizations,
such as the African Union (AU). The goal is to enhance
the capacities to address conflicts. Together we must
respond in a more timely and complementary manner
to the crises in Africa.
The hybrid operation for Darfur represents an
unprecedented partnership between the United Nations
and the African Union. It is an expression of our
collective commitment to end the tragedy of Darfur.
More broadly, the Department of Peacekeeping
Operations is working with the AU to develop an
African standby force to help maintain durable peace
on the continent as a whole.
But we must invest more in prevention and
mediation so that disagreements do not develop into
violence. Efforts to prevent conflict require much
fewer resources than do peacekeeping operations. Next
month, I intend to propose to the General Assembly a
significant strengthening of the Department of Political
Affairs to make more effective use of my good offices.
I count on the Council’s support.
I also seek its continued assistance in our efforts
to consolidate peace in fragile post-conflict countries
in order to help prevent a relapse into violence. The
Peacebuilding Commission has so far helped bring
increased international attention to recovery efforts in
Burundi and Sierra Leone. We anticipate more
referrals, including of African countries, for the
Commission’s consideration.
Climate change brings additional challenges to
Africa, including in peace and security. As underscored
at the high-level meeting I convened yesterday,
decisive international action to address global warming
is crucial. It is particularly important for Africa, as the
impact of climate change will fall disproportionately
on some of its poorest countries.
Equally pressing is the need to make
development work in Africa. Fighting extreme poverty
is key to preventing conflict. That is why I recently
launched the Millennium Development Goals Africa
Steering Group, together with the African Union, the

07-51572

S/PV.5749

World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the
European Commission and other partners. The aim is
to galvanize international action to reach the goals on
the continent by 2015.
(spoke in French)
Along the continuum from conflict prevention to
peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding in
Africa, I am committed to ensuring that the United
Nations plays its role to the fullest extent possible.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I invite the President of the Republic of Ghana,
His Excellency Mr. John Agyekum Kufuor, who is also
the current Chairperson of the African Union, to take
the floor.
President Kufuor: I am greatly honoured to
participate in today’s meeting, not only because
Ghana’s tenure in the Security Council coincides with
its chairmanship of the African Union, but also because
we are anxious to see a speedy reversal of those
negative trends that have made our continent host to
more than two thirds of all United Nations
peacekeeping operations, not to mention the numerous
relief agencies that are contributing to the protection of
millions of people displaced by conflict.

Democratic Republic of the Congo and even in the
Sudan, that is evident.
No one can deny, however, that formidable
challenges still remain in areas such as the illicit trade
and proliferation of small arms and light weapons,
drugs and human trafficking. The restoration of peace
and normalcy on the continent, especially in places of
conflict like Somalia and the Eritrea-Ethiopia border, is
urgent. Reconstruction and the consolidation of peace
in nations emerging from conflict must also continue to
attract significant support from the international
community to prevent a relapse.
Emergent threats, such as terrorism, climate
change and the illegal exploitation of natural resources,
equally demand vigilance and decisive action. The
good news is that the African Union and its member
nations are resolved to take the initiative in tackling
these problems and are in fact making progress. That is
all the more reason for the international community to
continue to complement Africa’s endeavours.
I am proud of the contribution of the African
Union Mission in the Sudan (AMIS). It has had a great
impact in Darfur, of course with the support of the
international community, in spite of the exceptionally
difficult circumstances in which it has been operating,
including inadequate logistical and financial assistance.

The impressive number of participants in today’s
debate on peace and security in Africa and previous
ones relating to the subject reflects growing deep and
abiding interest in the well-being of Africa. That is
most reassuring and encouraging. In particular, we
welcome
Secretary-General
Ban
Ki-moon’s
unwavering commitment and determined efforts to live
up to his pledge at the beginning of his term that Africa
generally and the crisis in Darfur in particular are at
the top of his agenda.

The sustained presence of AMIS in Darfur is
proof enough of the African Union’s determination to
assume its primary responsibility for peace and
stability on the continent. It is also largely the joint
effort of the African Union and the Security Council,
especially through the appointment of special envoys,
Mr. Jan Eliasson and Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, that
there has been the re-launch of political dialogue
between most of the Darfur rebels and the Government
of National Unity of the Sudan.

While we acknowledge with appreciation the
invaluable support that Africa continues to receive
from the international community, it is Ghana’s vision
that a new order of peace, unity, democracy and
prosperity will soon prevail throughout the continent,
in place of its current image as a disaster zone always
in need of support. As highlighted in the concept paper
prepared by the French delegation (S/2007/552,
annex), for which France must be commended, many
positive developments are taking place in Africa. In
Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea-Bissau, Burundi, the

In this regard, we should acknowledge other
ongoing initiatives to bring normalcy to the Sudan.
These include the following: first, the joint efforts of
Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and the Libyan leader,
Brother Muammar Al-Qadhafi, to bring the remaining
factional leaders to participate in the dialogue, to
achieve full-scale negotiations; secondly, the resolution
on deploying forces to control the common borders of
the Sudan, the Central African Republic and Chad, to
protect refugees, internally displaced persons and
humanitarian relief workers, which we welcome; and
thirdly, various contributions made by regional

07-51572

3

S/PV.5749

organizations, such as the European Union and the
League of Arab States, several countries, notably
China, the United Kingdom and the United States, and
a host of non-governmental organizations, which are to
be appreciated.
I am confident that the forthcoming peace talks in
Tripoli have good prospects for success, and I therefore
urge all factions to agree to participate.
In the light of those initiatives, let me urge all
concerned to endeavour to resolve whatever
outstanding issues there are in the path of the
deployment of the hybrid forces to secure a ceasefire
and unimpeded humanitarian access in the region.
I cannot conclude my statement without
appealing fervently to the Council to show
commitment to the protracted conflict in Somalia equal
to that it is showing with respect to Darfur. In spite of
the initiative of the African Union in mobilizing troops
from among member nations to keep the peace in that
highly volatile area and the ready offer of some States
such as Ghana to contribute troops, promised support
thus far from partners in the international community
to equip and airlift the troops has been inadequate and
slow in coming.
The Security Council must therefore step in with
timeous assistance. It must also consider a contingency
plan for the possible deployment of a United Nations
force to replace the African Union Mission in Somalia
by next February.
The President (spoke in French): President
Kufuor, what you have said about Somalia is especially
correct and welcome.
I now invite His Excellency Mr. Thabo Mbeki,
President of the Republic of South Africa, to take the
floor.
President Mbeki: First of all, Mr. President,
thank you very much for taking the initiative to call
this meeting of the Security Council to discuss what is
indeed an important matter. I will be very brief, partly
because I am expected in the General Assembly
shortly. I want to go and respond to President Bush
there.
To come at this matter quite practically, it is a
very important matter for us as Africans, and indeed
we count very much on the support of the Security
Council to address this important issue. I must say that

4

the African continent, as members are aware, is indeed
very committed to addressing this matter itself.
Members will have seen many examples in which the
framework for the resolution of all sorts of matters has
come out of African initiatives. The political settlement
in Liberia came out of a process that was led by the
Economic Community of West African States. The
process that has culminated now in the Ouagadougou
agreement in Côte d’Ivoire, the peace process in
Burundi, the peace process in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo and the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
in North and South Sudan were all matters that were
handled by the continent itself. I am mentioning that
just to emphasize the seriousness of the continent itself
in dealing with the matter on our agenda today.
The letter that was sent out by the French
representative raises two important questions, that I
think are really what we really need to focus upon. It
mentions promoting an effective partnership between
the United Nations and Africa based on the African
regional organizations, and it goes on to ask:
“In order to go farther, how can enhanced
African crisis management and resolution
capacities be facilitated and how can the need for
African peacekeeping training be met? How can
the post-conflict recovery efforts that must be
carried out by the African countries concerned be
supported? How can the establishment of more
operational crisis prevention mechanisms be
encouraged in Africa?” (S/2007/552, p. 3)
I think, really, that these are the actual matters that the
Security Council needs to address.
Because of the seriousness of our intent with
regard to this matter — no doubt, President Konaré
will speak about this — we have set up a somewhat
comprehensive architecture for peace and security on
the continent, which includes the Peace and Security
Council, the early warning system, a panel of the wise,
an African
stand-by
force,
a
post-conflict
reconstruction and development framework — the
totality of these.
What is missing is the capacity to do those things
and the resources of all sorts to be able to do them. We
would want to address that matter directly ourselves, as
much as we can. I think it would be very good indeed
if some way could be found by which the Security
Council could engage the African Union, represented
here by President Konaré, in some detail on this. Here

07-51572

S/PV.5749

is this architecture by which the Africans are saying:
We want to address these problems ourselves, of course
within the context of the international responsibilities
of the Security Council with regard to peace and
stability. But we do want to; hence, the reference to
regional organizations correctly raised by the French
representative.
What is it that can be done to ensure that we
increase this capacity in all of those areas? I think if we
did that, the result that we would see would indeed be a
much more peaceful and a much more stable African
continent.
The President (spoke in French): It goes without
saying that I fully share President Mbeki’s point of
view.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Susilo
Yudhoyono, President of the Republic of Indonesia.
President Yudhoyono: I am sure that this
important debate on Africa and the challenges to
international peace and security will have a positive
impact on the continent. Peace and security can be
durable only if the sources of conflict are eliminated.
We must therefore respond to the economic, social and
political challenges to peace. That can be carried out
through interregional cooperation.
Interregional engagement between Asia and
Africa dates back to the 1955 Asian-African
Conference that laid the strategic foundations for
robust relations between countries in the two
continents. In the framework of South-South
cooperation, since 1980 Indonesia has offered
capacity-building assistance, generally in the form of
training and workshops in various fields, to hundreds
of participants from African countries. We have also
contributed troops to United Nations peace missions to
the continent. Indonesian personnel have joined peace
operations of the United Nations in the Congo, Liberia,
Mozambique, Namibia, Sierra Leone, Somalia and the
Sudan.
Today, Indonesia is also prepared to contribute
police personnel to the peace mission in Darfur. We
firmly support all efforts to build peace in Darfur
today. We urge all concerned faithfully to implement
agreements that would end the long-raging civil war
that has torn the nation apart. Above all, the
Government of the Sudan must fulfil its commitment to
engaging in peace talks and carrying out an effective

07-51572

ceasefire. All factors that brought about the conflict —
political, economic and social — must be decisively
addressed. Dialogue among the stakeholders in Darfur
must be established and sustained as soon as possible.
The province must be put back on the road to
development. Like the other smaller economies of
Africa, the Sudan needs to catch up with the new
prosperity of its bigger economies. Much of Africa
remains challenged by conflicts that relate to natural
resources, poverty and environmental degradation.
Article 65 of the United Nations Charter is
particularly relevant to Africa. It provides for the
Economic and Social Council to contribute to the work
of the Security Council. As the Charter framers argued,
improving living standards and achieving prosperity
are essential to world peace. As a non-permanent
member of the Security Council, Indonesia will do all
it can to contribute to peace, security and development
in Africa.
As to the ongoing conflicts in Africa, we need to
apply three principles of international relations. First,
many conflicts in Africa are inter-State. In those cases,
the principle of consent is essential; national
jurisdiction must be recognized. Secondly, prevention
is better than cure; it is cost-effective and saves lives.
Thirdly, the Security Council bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, but under Chapter VIII of the
United Nations Charter it is also called upon to work
with regional organizations whenever appropriate and
practical. The United Nations and regional
organizations must therefore enhance their capacity for
confidence-building,
preventive
diplomacy
and
peacemaking. Those are not new concepts, but their
full potential can be realized through refinement and
practice by both the United Nations system and all
regional organizations.
In the face of conflict, resources must be
deployed and measures must be taken to alter or
stabilize a situation on the ground. Troops drawn from
within the region are usually more effective in
peacekeeping. The United Nations/African Union
hybrid operation in Darfur, which brings together
United Nations resources and those of the African
Union, is a fine example. More African troops should
be trained for peacekeeping so that an African stand-by
force can become truly operational.

5

S/PV.5749

In Africa, conflicts that seemed intractable five
years ago are now being resolved, giving us hope that
others will also be resolved soon. But we must always
adhere to the tenets of international relations and
address the social and economic challenges of peace. I
am sure that Africa, with the help of an international
community that is committed to global peace, will
solve its problems and contribute more to global peace
and security.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ivan Gašparovič, President
of the Slovak Republic.
President Gašparovič (spoke in Slovak; English
text provided by the delegation): I take this opportunity
to welcome the Secretary-General here and to
commend you, Sir, for initiating today’s discussion.
The recent history of Africa is replete with
immense human tragedies. Let us recall Rwanda, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Darfur and
northern Uganda, to name but a few. It is our duty to
help African countries to build their own capacities to
protect their populations against genocide, war crimes,
ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.
Because of their complexity, African tragedies
must be considered in the context of the interrelated
issues of security, development and human rights, as
stated in the Outcome Document of the 2005 World
Summit. Slovakia therefore follows with concern
economic and political situations in some parts of
Africa that could lead to new conflicts if they should
deteriorate further. In that context, we are very
concerned about the situation in Zimbabwe.
It is difficult to summarize, in the course of a few
minutes, everything that needs to be done to ensure
that Africa joins those regions of the world that are
currently enjoying times of stability and economic
development. Let me point out just a few aspects that
Slovakia considers to be paramount.
First, we need to place maximum emphasis on the
prevention of conflicts. As implied at the Security
Council’s open debate in August, it is imperative that a
move from a culture of reaction to a culture of
prevention be made at all levels.
Secondly, equal efforts must be made in order to
address the grievances of the past. Slovakia fully
supports fighting impunity. In that regard, we support

6

the role of the International Criminal Court in
particular.
Thirdly, it is of key importance that subregional
and regional organizations take a larger share of
responsibility. In that context, it is necessary to
continue to support the development of cooperation
between the United Nations and such organizations.
Fourthly, given the specificities of Africa, it is
necessary to seek innovative approaches. We therefore
welcome and support the deployment of the African
Union-United Nations Hybrid Operation in Darfur, as
well as the multidimensional presence of the United
Nations and the European Union in Chad and the
Central African Republic. Despite these positive steps,
the international community should not ease up its
efforts aimed at relieving the suffering of the people of
Darfur, who continue to live in uncertainty and to be
dependant on humanitarian support. We are deeply
concerned at recurrent news reports about aerial
bombardments in Darfur, which pose a threat to the
current fragile peace process. We hope that both the
rebels and the Sudanese Government will cease
hostilities as soon as possible and provide the United
Nations and the African Union with full support in the
process of deploying the Hybrid Operation.
Fifthly, merely reacting to acute humanitarian
crises will not suffice. It is equally important to
systematically address the horizontal problems both in
the medium and long term. In that connection, let me
underline the issue of security sector reform. A nonfunctioning security sector is a source of conflict that
also tends to increase the severity and duration of
conflicts. Reform, or the development of a new
security sector, is a precondition for the long-term
stabilization of countries, as well as for the possible
withdrawal of United Nations peacekeeping operations.
In that context, I would like to focus the
Council’s attention on a workshop on security sector
reform that we are preparing together with the
Republic of South Africa. The workshop will be held in
Cape Town on 7 and 8 November 2007.
The Slovak Republic wants to contribute
adequately to the efforts of the international
community aimed at ensuring peace and security in
Africa. In the framework of development aid, we
currently have projects in place that are focused on the
development of infrastructure, education, health care
and small- and medium-sized businesses. We are

07-51572

S/PV.5749

convinced that economic growth and improved social
conditions are key factors in conflict prevention.
In that connection, I would also like to highlight
the statement made by President Bush in the General
Assembly today (see A/62/PV.4) suggesting buying
crops produced locally in Africa in order to help local
agriculture. It is equally crucial to build democratic
institutions, ensure the rule of law and promote human
rights and good governance. In that regard, it needs to
be noted that no external support can replace the role
and efforts of the countries concerned.
In conclusion, let me once again express my
gratitude to you, Mr. President, for initiating today’s
discussion. I believe it will contribute to an even more
active approach to the African continent by the
Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. George W. Bush, President
of the United States of America.
President Bush: Thank you, Mr. President, for
convening this meeting of the Security Council. I
appreciate the opportunity to join you, and I appreciate
your focus on the challenges to peace and security in
Africa, particularly in Sudan and Darfur. The reason I
say that is that my nation has labelled what is taking
place in Darfur as genocide. When we find genocide, it
is time to do something about it. Time is of the
essence. So, Mr. President, you are focusing our
attention on this crucial matter.
I want to thank the Secretary-General as well for
his support of the people of Darfur. I appreciate his
determination to make relieving their suffering a
priority of the United Nations.
I also want to thank Chairperson Konaré for the
leadership of the African Union. After all, it deployed
7,000 troops. But 7,000 troops are not enough if you
believe what is taking place on the ground is
genocide — and maybe some do not think it is
genocide. But if you have been raped, you think your
human rights have been violated. If you are mercilessly
killed by roaming bands, you know it is genocide. The
fundamental question is, are we, the free world, willing
to do more? You made a strong effort, Chairperson
Konaré, and we appreciate you. But you know better
than I do that the area of Darfur is bigger than
France — or Texas. And both are plenty big for 7,000
troops.

07-51572

The fighting in Darfur between the rebels and the
Government continues. Two hundred thousand people
have lost their lives. Two hundred thousand innocents
are no longer with us. More than 2 million people have
been forced from their homes. They are fleeing the
violence and they are going to refugee camps and they
hide in neighbouring countries such as Chad and the
Central African Republic. That is why I appreciate
your leadership, Mr. President, to help these countries
help these refugees. Resolution 1778 (2007), adopted
today, addresses the plight of the refugees in Chad and
the Central African Republic. In other words, it is a
step in the right direction. It is a practical solution to a
big problem. It is part of a grand solution,
Mr. President. That is why your leadership is
appreciated.
The resolution authorizes the deployment to these
two nations of a robust European peacekeeping force
and several hundred police and military advisers. This
United Nations mission is going to help national and
local governments exercise sovereignty over their
territory. It is going to allow workers to deliver
humanitarian aid. That makes us feel good. We are
spending $2 billion so far on providing aid, and we
want to make sure our aid gets to the people who need
help. That is why the United States strongly supports
the resolution and the mission.
We continue to support swift implementation of
existing resolutions of the Council. We want the words
of the Council to mean something. We want it to be
said, when the Council speaks on behalf of suffering
people: Those words will be followed by action. So we
call on the Government in Khartoum to facilitate the
deployment of a robust United Nations peacekeeping
force to save lives. We call on all parties to cease arms
sales to the combatants. We expect people gathered
around this table to send a focused message: that
innocent life matters. We expect President Al-Bashir to
observe a ceasefire during next month’s peace talks,
and we want the rebels to do the same. The message
has got to be: We are tired of people trying to escape
the noose of pressure. We want the pressure to be
uniform. Why? Because we believe in universal
freedom and peace.
The conflict in Darfur has claimed too many
lives, and there is too much suffering. The innocent
victims of this conflict want only to return to their
homes. They want to live in peace. And it is our duty to
help them realize that dream.

7

S/PV.5749

The President (spoke in French): Thank you,
President Bush, for your presence here and your very
strong statement.
I now give the floor to His Excellency
Mr. Romano Prodi, Prime Minister of the Republic of
Italy.
Mr. Prodi (spoke in Italian; English text
furnished by the delegation): President Sarkozy has
raised very important questions on peace and security
in Africa. I wish to clarify two points immediately.
First, we must be clear which Africa we are
talking about. The Africa that I see is a continent that is
transforming its potential into reality. Just look at its
progress towards achieving regional integration, strong
economic growth, democratic political reforms, an
enhanced strategic role, the courage with which many
of its leaders have spoken out against the death penalty,
and the demographic growth that will soon bring
Africa’s population up to the levels of China or India.
In short, Africa is now a protagonist and no longer just
an object of international relations.
Secondly, rather than continue to discuss what we
can do for Africa, let us try to reflect on what Africa at
this moment is asking us to do. In my many meetings
with African leaders, the message that I have heard is
for a relationship between equals to address the
challenges in Africa, as well as the global challenges.
I will now respond to some of the specific
questions raised by the African leaders. I wish to focus
on two particular challenges: Darfur and Somalia, two
grave crises that have been unresolved for far too long,
and that require greater and more timely efforts. I have
seen some signals pointing in the right direction.
The launch of the Hybrid Operation in Darfur is
an important new development that moves in the
direction of recognizing Africa’s responsibility in
Africa — which we call ownership — and the offer of
cooperation from the international community —
which we call partnership. If we are successful — and I
am convinced that we shall be — it will constitute a
key formula for the future. Darfur is a test case for the
international
community’s
ability
to
identify
appropriate responses. Italy is ready to do its part. I
have already indicated to the Secretary-General Italy’s
commitment to the joint mission, in terms of both
finances and logistical air support for troop

8

transportation, in addition to training programmes for
the personnel that will be deployed there.
Let us be clear: the hybrid mission responds
primarily to security demands. Yet, there are other
demands that are of crucial importance to solving the
crisis: political, humanitarian, and those related to the
country’s economic development. This is why, in my
recent meeting in Rome with President Al-Bashir, I
asked him for a strong signal to assure the success of
the political negotiations scheduled to take place in
Tripoli in late October. Mr. Al-Bashir assured me of his
commitment to a unilateral ceasefire upon the
resumption of the negotiations. This is an important
signal, but we must all work together to ensure that the
Tripoli meeting arrives at lasting solutions. Italy is also
continuing its efforts to organize a meeting of the
Intergovernmental Authority of Development to
refocus international attention on the stabilization of
South Sudan.
Somalia is another dramatic case that demands a
rapid response and a sense of urgency. It has taken on a
pressing dimension for Italy because of our special
relationship with this country, which is suffering a
political, humanitarian and security crisis.
There are some hopeful signs. The national
reconciliation process seems to have begun, and the
international community is being called upon to
consolidate it, with a view towards restoring
democratic normalcy in the country through the
reconstruction of Government institutions and of the
country itself. Security Council resolution 1772 (2007)
of last month moves in this direction.
I believe, however, that an additional, collective
effort must be made for the emergence of a
comprehensive strategy inspired by the principles of
ownership and partnership. Italy is financially
committed to supporting the African Union Mission in
Somalia (AMISOM). But, as in the case of Darfur, in
Somalia too we must be committed to closer
cooperation between the United Nations and the
African Union. The International Contact Group for
Somalia, which met in Rome a few days ago, sent a
strong appeal along these lines.
Mr. President, you have asked us for concrete
responses to the challenges facing Africa. What I
consider useful and realistic is to give high priority to
what Africa is requesting: peace, security, support for

07-51572

S/PV.5749

alleviating poverty and fostering growth — continentwide cooperation.
To promote peace and security, Italy has decided
to support African capacity also through a bilateral
African Peace Facility, a fund that will allow us to
support — and, I underline, at the request of Africa —
the efforts of the African Union and the leading
subregional organizations in favour of peace and
security;
rapid-action
interventions
aimed
at
consolidating their institutional and operational
structures; conducting joint United Nations-African
Union actions; strengthening the logistical capacities of
actions decided upon by the African Union; and
dedicating special attention to training human
resources in preventive diplomacy, peacekeeping and
post-conflict rehabilitation. The Sudan and the Horn of
Africa will have top priority. The fund will operate in
close coordination with the fund that already exists at
the European level, because it is clear that our
contribution must necessarily form part of a European
strategy.
Europe must take the lead on defending peace
and security in Africa, as well as on facing other global
challenges that know no borders.
Europe is still Africa’s leading partner in trade,
investment and development assistance. But this is no
longer sufficient: we must strengthen and, in some
cases, create institutional, cultural and political
cooperation. In short, we have to move from a strategy
for Africa to a partnership with Africa. In this
perspective, the upcoming Africa-Europe summit can
no longer be postponed. It should mark an important
step towards a strategic partnership between equals,
based on mutual commitments and responsibilities. I
truly hope that this can be done before the end of the
year. Italy is working to ensure that it will spark the
development of a truly European policy.
To honour the millennium commitments that we
undertook here in New York and that have such a great
impact on Africa, I have already indicated my
willingness to sit at a table next year and see where we
are in the achievement of these goals. I am convinced
that those who have more to give should make a
special commitment. Here, the Group of Eight (G-8)
can and must play an important role. I pledge here and
now to make this a central theme of Italy’s presidency
of the G-8 in 2009.

07-51572

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa
Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar.
Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani (spoke in
Arabic): Mr. President, I appreciate the active
initiatives you have been undertaking since your
election as President of the French Republic, as well as
your interest in discussing the issue of challenges to
peace and security in Africa, which is of interest to my
country for many reasons.
Among these reasons is the fact that 10 Arab
countries are located in Africa. Some of them, such as
the Sudan and Somalia, are facing daunting challenges
at the moment. Moreover, Islam is wide spread
throughout Africa. Furthermore, the predecessor of the
African Union, the Organization of African Unity
(OAU), whose charter was formulated in Addis Ababa
in 1964, was launched as an Arab-African initiative in
Casablanca in 1961.
Fifty years ago, in 1957, Mr. Harold Macmillan,
then Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, made a
famous remark about contemporary history when he
said, “The wind of change is blowing through this
continent”. The wind of change was indeed blowing
through Africa when its countries began to gain their
independence. But the wind of change could become a
wind of destruction, when the continent’s States
experienced the labour pains and difficulties of
independence, the challenges and ordeals of moving
forward with development, and the many other
problems that have afflicted the continent with
conflicts and disputes.
If we do not want to be unfair or harsh towards
Africa, we must seriously and frankly address the
problems that have hindered its progress and
development and have led to the current violence. The
civil wars and armed conflicts that have erupted have
sometimes attracted armies of mercenaries, which are a
source of great concern. That situation has caused one
of the world’s richest continents to lag behind all
others, which itself is one of the real human tragedies
of our era.
Donor countries and the United Nations have not
hesitated to provide assistance to Africa. If such
assistance is to be effective, it must be given under two
conditions: the present of enlightened governance and
the existence of effective international will, guaranteed
by collective United Nations action. We do not believe

9

S/PV.5749

that we are being high-handed when we say that, in
order to effect real change, we must establish new
mechanisms for providing assistance to Africa so that it
will truly benefit Africa’s peoples.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Martín Torrijos, President
of the Republic of Panama.
President Torrijos (Panama) (spoke in Spanish):
I wish to congratulate you, President Nicolas Sarkozy
of France, on the initiative to hold this Security
Council meeting as a way to emphasize how urgent it
is that we address the problems besieging Africa today.
Africa is a continent of contrasts, where mineral
abundance, ecological wealth and cultural diversity
share space with the most abject poverty. There,
arbitrary lines are drawn without respect for physical
or cultural borders. The gradual collapse of the colonial
legacy defined the modern history of the continent, and
there was an increase in discord. But we firmly believe
in Africans’ capacity to overcome the effects of
colonization through their own collective efforts, in the
same way as they have acted as regional intermediaries
in their own conflicts.
The way in which the situation in Chad, the
Central African Republic and the region as a whole has
been addressed is an example of how the Organization
is taking a regional approach to conflict settlement.
Nevertheless, we express our concern at the continued
deterioration of the humanitarian situation in
Zimbabwe and the armed conflict in Somalia, which is
straying ever further from the path of peace.
We note with optimism the international
community’s many efforts to strengthen continental
initiatives to solidify economic and political
integration on the continent. These include the New
Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and
the efforts of regional organizations such as the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Southern African Development Community, which are
pillars of the African Economic Community.
Those initiatives demonstrate the interest of
African countries in healing the wounds left by
colonization. But it will be essential that the States of
the continent respect human rights and make progress
on measurable social and economic indicators. It will
also be necessary for the international community to
refrain from promoting policies that pursue interests

10

left over from the past and without considering what is
truly important: the rights and the dignity of the
peoples of Africa.
Africa’s future depends essentially on Africans,
but the international community must always be
present so that it can help to build a continent of peace
where justice and human rights prevail — a continent
whose inhabitants can once again dream of a future of
well-being and hope.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Guy Verhofstadt, Prime
Minister of Belgium.
Mr. Verhofstadt (Belgium) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I should like to say that I am very happy
that we adopted resolution 1778 (2007) this morning. I
can also announce that Belgium will participate in the
joint peacemaking mission in Chad and the Central
African Republic. Why? Because I believe that Africa,
more than any other continent, needs particular and
concerted attention from us. One out of every five
children born in Africa today dies from a simple
curable illness, hunger or malnutrition. Out of the four
children who survive, two must do so on a dollar a day,
and the third will never learn to read and write. That is
the reality. Moreover, the chances are great that he or
she will also have to engage in child labour. That is
why we must act together for Africa.
However, the effort that we must make to
improve the plight of all these children has never been
so enormous. In fact, we must provide €60 billion.
With such a sum, we could resolve all the basic
problems in Africa. We could guarantee to each African
access to clean drinking water, sanitation, basic health
care and education.
But we must recognize — and this is why it is
very important that we are having this discussion here
this afternoon — that the major obstacle to progress in
Africa is war. So I am pleased that we have decided to
send new peacekeeping forces to Darfur and the
surrounding countries, as we did in, for example, the
Democratic Republic of the Congo with the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo (MONUC). And it is also
thanks to MONUC that the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, for the first time in its history, was able to hold
democratic elections. However, the battle is never over.
The international community must remain vigilant

07-51572

S/PV.5749

regarding the resurgence of violence, which is
currently raging in the Kivus.
(spoke in English)
But I want to use — or abuse; I do not know
which is the better word to use — this meeting to talk
about one of Africa’s greatest outrages: the problem of
child soldiers in Africa. Today, there are 300,000 child
soldiers in Africa, each of whom has his or her own
horror story. If members will allow me, I should like to
tell them one of those stories: that of Christine from
Uganda, one of the children whom I have adopted
financially. Kony’s rebel army forced her to kill her
own uncle when she was 14 years old. After that, she
was kidnapped, presented as a gift to an army
commander and taken to the Sudan. They abused and
raped her, and in the end she found a way to escape. In
doing so, she shot one of her guards dead. The other
guard shot her in the head, but she managed to get
away. Finally, she was taken in by the army and treated
in a hospital for her bullet wound. There, she was also
found to be pregnant.
I can tell you that Christine’s story is just one of
the many thousands of tragic, shocking tales of child
soldiers on the African continent today. I believe that
each one of them is a stain on the soul of human
civilization — an unacceptable stain that politicians
cannot and must not ignore. And I have three measures
in mind to deal with the problem. First and foremost,
what is needed is an embargo on the export of weapons
to all the countries with child soldiers by means of a
new international treaty on the arms trade. That is the
best way to do it and to deal with it. Secondly, the
international community must reach an agreement on
stopping development aid to countries that use child
soldiers in their army.
The current naming and shaming system that
exists inside our Organization is not enough. Offending
countries must not only be named, or shamed, but must
actually be punished. But above all, the offenders
themselves must be put on trial. Take, for example,
Kony, the so-called leader of the Lord’s Resistance
Army of Uganda. He alone has been responsible for the
abuse of almost 70,000 child soldiers on the African
continent. An international arrest warrant has been
issued by the International Criminal Court in The
Hague. We know where he is, but nobody arrests him,
while his activities continue to this day and the terror
continues. Now, from the Congo, he and his troops

07-51572

regularly invade the southern Sudan, where more
children are again kidnapped. The time for talking is
over. Certainly, on this question — child soldiers — a
time for action is here. We know what Kony has done;
we know what he is doing and we know where he is,
and there is not any possible pretext for him not to be
arrested.
I therefore ask individually, the members of the
Security Council to do just that. We have the
possibility; MONUC is in east Congo, and we know
where Kony is. Let us arrest him and put him on trial
and make an example of him, as a warning to all
criminals that the exploitation of children in armed
conflicts is not possible in this modern world.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Belgium for its participation in the mission — that is
very important.
I now give the floor to His Excellency Mr. Denis
Sassou-Nguesso, President of the Republic of the
Congo.
President Sassou-Nguesso (spoke in French):
First, I wish to thank you, President Sarkozy, for your
timely and welcome initiative in bringing us together
today to address an issue which can leave no African
leader unmoved: peace and security in Africa. Here,
there is a fundamental issue at stake, namely the
interrelated nature of the issues of peace, security and
economic and social development. While it is true that
poverty is a fertile breeding ground for terrorism, it is
also true that it exacerbates tensions and fuels
conflicts. The effective implementation of the various
commitments made by the international community in
the field of development, will undeniably contribute to
preventing and resolving the many conflicts in Africa.
Currently, there are hardly any new major
conflicts in Africa. Rather, our continent is dealing
with situations that are entrenched in the past. The
efforts made by the African States and the African
Union have led to relative stability and have revealed
positive perspectives, although in certain regions the
situation remains fragile. Now is the time for action —
to seize every way out of the crisis that is available to
us. Developments in the Côte d’Ivoire are to be
encouraged. The international community should
support the ongoing process in that country.
In Darfur, we must act without delay. We must
devote all of our energies to a successful political

11

S/PV.5749

dialogue, to the effective deployment of the hybrid
force, as well as to humanitarian assistance and the
economic recovery of the Sudan. All the decisions
already taken and to be taken during the upcoming
weeks must be effectively implemented in the field, in
order to prevent any backsliding, or any deterioration
of the situation, the consequences of which would be
felt beyond the Sudanese borders. For that reason,
Congo welcomes the involvement of the European
Union in securing the borders between the Sudan and
its two neighbours — Chad and the Central African
Republic — as was already the case in the context of
the elections held in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo.
However, the progress achieved in organizing
democratic elections in that brother country must be
accompanied by firm measures geared to address
pending problems: suppression of the hotbeds of
violence in the east, reform of the defence and security
sector and economic reforms. Therefore, the United
Nations Organization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo must continue to work closely
with the authorities in that country in order to build
upon the gains achieved.
But there is also the tragedy in Somalia and an
inclusive political dialogue designed to promote
national reconciliation must be encouraged. The Congo
expects the United Nations to provide the African
Union Mission in Somalia with all necessary support
and to play an active role in stabilizing that torn
country. On all those issues, we welcome the
partnership linking the African Union and the United
Nations and welcome the involvement of regional
organizations, including the European Union and the
League of Arab States.
Finally, the Congo wishes to thank all the
participants in the debate, which has provided a new
opportunity for us to mobilize the international
community for Africa.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Sergey Lavrov, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Lavrov (spoke in Russian): I wish to join in
thanking you, Sir, for the initiative to holding today’s
meeting of the Security Council on Africa. Conflicts on
the African continent bring untold suffering to the
population, hinder the transition of African States to

12

sustainable social and economic development and pose
a serious threat to regional and international security.
Russia supports the joint work of the United
Nations and the African Union aimed at preventing and
settling conflicts on the African continent. Special
focus should be given to addressing chronic political
and socio-economic problems that are further
aggravated by new threats and challenges.
We support a more active and responsible
methodology for conflict resolution and advancing the
goals of national reconciliation based on agreements
between the conflicting parties. Disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration of illicit armed
groups, strengthening of State governance, security
sector reform, development of democracy and the fight
against poverty, corruption and the illicit use of natural
resources are the core elements of the peace process.
The resolution of these issues is the focus of the
decisions taken by the African Union and the United
Nations, which should be consistently implemented.
We support a more active and responsible role of
African States in advancing these goals.
It is important that the countries that have
emerged from conflict do not slide back into crisis.
Meaningful assistance to such countries in this respect
must be provided by the Peacebuilding Commission,
which should complete its institutionalization as soon
as possible and focus on fulfilling its mandate.
I agree with those who have spoken today who
believe that another important step was made in the
peacekeeping efforts on the African continent. The
Security Council has decided to establish a
multidimensional joint African Union and United
Nations peacekeeping operation in Darfur. We believe
it will contribute to restoration of peace and order in
the long-suffering province of the Sudan and normalize
the situation around the Sudan. The next step in this
line is to deploy operations in Chad and the Central
African Republic. We welcome the initiative of the
European Union in this regard.
As a permanent member of the Security Council
and as a member of the G-8, Russia is contributing to
the resolution of African conflicts, based on political
and diplomatic means. We actively participate in
international assistance to Africa, including our support
to enhance African peacekeeping capabilities. Russian
personnel are involved in practically all United Nations
peacekeeping operations on the continent, and we are

07-51572

S/PV.5749

sending specialists in other areas as well. We will
continue to provide multilateral support to help Africa
resolve its problems, as we have close and friendly
partnerships with African countries.
Mr. Yang Jiechi (China) (spoke in Chinese): Let
me first congratulate France on assuming the
presidency of the Security Council for September. I am
delighted to see President Sarkozy personally preside
over today’s meeting.
A harmonious world of enduring peace and
common prosperity would be beyond our reach without
stability and development in Africa. The African
people seek a stable and developing Africa, that serves
the common interests of all countries. The United
Nations, in particular the Security Council, is dutybound to help Africa maintain and build peace and
embark on the road toward durable prosperity and
stability.
Peace in Africa faces both opportunities and
challenges. It is necessary to make comprehensive
efforts at the national, regional and global levels to
achieve peace. Reconciliation, development and
cooperation should be the three major pillars
underpinning peace in Africa.
Reconciliation is the key to peace in Africa. All
of the ethnic groups and factions in countries
concerned should put the national interest above
everything else and endeavour to advance an inclusive
political process, protect human rights, restore the rule
of law, work together to promote national development
and enable all people to benefit from peace dividends.
Disputes between States should be resolved through
dialogue and consultation. That is the right way to
address them. One cannot choose one’s neighbour, but
can certainly learn to live with one’s neighbour.
Differences are inevitable, but ways can always be
found to iron them out.
Development is the basis for peace in Africa.
Conflicts are invariably accompanied by poverty,
forming a vicious cycle. In the last analysis, peace in
Africa hinges on whether there is faster economic and
social progress, whether the Millennium Development
Goals can be met as scheduled and whether the benefit
of development can reach all. The rich natural
resources in Africa should be a source of peace, not
war.
Conflict
prevention,
peacekeeping
and
peacebuilding should all aim to promote development.
We support the international community’s efforts to

07-51572

help Africa in terms of capital, technology and
governance. But there should be respect for African
countries’ national conditions and development
models, and one should not impose one’s own way on
them.
Cooperation is the means to achieve peace in
Africa. Only unity among African countries can lead to
a bright future for the continent. The African Union
has, since its founding, played an effective role in
resolving the Darfur issue and the Somalia issue. This
fully shows that the African people are capable of
resolving their problems in their own way. The
international community, for its part, has a pressing
need and, more importantly, the moral obligation to
help Africa. We support the United Nations and the
Security Council in providing more assistance to
regional
organizations
in
institution-building,
information
sharing,
personnel
training
and
peacekeeping operations. When the Security Council
decides to take mandatory measures, it should pay
particular attention to the views of African countries.
The Beijing Summit of the Forum on ChinaAfrica Cooperation was successfully held last
November, during which it was decided to establish
and develop a new type of China-Africa strategic
partnership. A symbol of further growth of traditional
China-Africa friendship, this partnership will boost
China-Africa cooperation and contribute to world
peace and development. China will, acting on the
principles of equality and mutual trust, mutual respect,
mutual benefit and common development, continue to
strengthen its cooperation with Africa and work
together with the international community to promote
peace and development in Africa.
Mr. García Belaunde (Peru) (spoke in Spanish):
Allow me first of all to express Peru’s appreciation for
the convening of this meeting to address the issue of
peace and security in Africa, where the majority of the
cases on the Security Council’s agenda originate.
The interrelatedness between underdevelopment
and violence is particularly flagrant in the armed
conflicts in Africa, in countries of marked instability
where low levels of development go hand in hand with
weak State structures and, generally, with a fragile rule
of law. This explains the lack of equity in income
distribution, as well as the low level of political and
social inclusion of ethnic groups within a State. In this
context, it should come as no surprise then, that once

13

S/PV.5749

violence erupts, it often spreads to neighbouring States
through the actions of illegal armed groups and
through the wave of refugees and of internally
displaced persons, turning what were initially internal
conflicts into humanitarian emergencies, and then
finally into threats to regional peace and security.

neutralizing remaining hot beds of violence and
empowering countries to address global phenomena
such as climate change or pandemics. To that end, the
international community must support reconstruction,
the building of democratic institutions, the promotion
of development and political and social reconciliation.

Facing challenges of such magnitude, the
Security Council must maintain a strategic vision that
sees peace and security in Africa as the result of a
skilled management of four main variables: prevention,
cooperation
with
regional
and
subregional
organizations, the humanitarian issue and post-conflict
management.

The Peacebuilding Commission, created for this
very purpose, must meet the challenge of serving as an
effective complement in order to support and sustain
the collective security system.

We know full well that conflict prevention is less
costly than ending conflicts. Effective conflict
prevention in Africa should be based on long-term
programmes that are geared towards meeting the basic
needs of the population, adopting inclusive policies
and working to improve social and economic
indicators. In this undertaking, the principal
responsibility lies with the African Governments,
whose efforts deserve the support of the international
community and of the international financial
institutions.
Regional cooperation is a second element. Peru
recognizes the achievements that have been made in
building a continental and subregional collective
security system for Africa. This approach must be
further developed as, pursuant to Chapter VIII of the
Charter, regional arrangements are assigned the
principal responsibility for resolving the regional
conflicts affecting them. Early warning, mediation
before
conflict
escalation,
reconciliation,
reconstruction and stabilization must all be the subject
of cooperation between the United Nations and
regional and subregional African organizations.
On the humanitarian question, the priority for
peacekeeping operations must be the protection of
civilian populations through the timely deployment of
peacekeeping forces, in order to halt violence and
prevent new humanitarian catastrophes. These efforts
must include the fight against impunity, and further
mechanisms must be established in order to punish acts
of genocide.
Finally, there is a need to adequately tackle the
post-conflict situation in order to reinforce peace
through the forging of inclusive economic, political
and social processes. This undertaking entails

14

Achieving peace and development on the African
continent is necessary for international stability. With
the support of the international community, Africa’s
leaders and peoples must fulfil the promise of a future
of freedom, a future free from the hunger and terror
that marked the period of colonization.
The President (spoke in French): I invite His
Excellency Mr. Kim Howells, Minister of State at the
Foreign and Commonwealth Office of the United
Kingdom, to take the floor.
Mr. Howells: Mr. President, the United Kingdom
congratulates you on bringing this debate to the
Security Council, because Africa is central to the work
of the United Nations. There is much good news. Six
conflicts have ended in the past 10 years and, as the
Secretary-General observed, recent elections in Sierra
Leone are a shining example of a nation rejecting
violence and seizing democracy, moving from war
crimes and collapse to a peaceful transition of power
through elections in only seven years. It is a
remarkable story. And Africa is taking responsibility
for solving its problems, through developing the
African Union’s political and peacekeeping capacity
and through cooperation with the United Nations.
Nowhere will this cooperation be tested more
than in Darfur. As President Bush has told us, the
world’s greatest humanitarian disaster is happening
there.
The Secretary-General has identified three tracks
to solving the crisis. First, there is the peacekeeping
track, and I hope that the United Nations and the
African Union will agree on the composition of the
Hybrid Operation so deployment can get back on
schedule. The Sudan must do all it can to speed up the
process. Secondly, there is the political track. The
upcoming talks must be inclusive, and they have to
yield rapid results. We need a ceasefire at the outset

07-51572

S/PV.5749

and a means to monitor and enforce it. Thirdly, there is
the humanitarian track. Sudan must lift the obstacles to
access — and they still are not lifted.
Let us not forget the need for justice. As the
Secretary-General said this morning in his speech to
the General Assembly (see A/61/PV.4), the age of
impunity is dead. There can be no impunity in Darfur.
Sudan should fully cooperate with the International
Criminal Court. Our Belgian colleague gave us a vivid
and tragic example of what happens when these war
criminals believe that no one will make them answer
for their despicable crimes. We have to make them
answer.
If progress is made in Darfur, the United
Kingdom stands ready to support reconstruction and
development. But any party that impedes progress must
face a robust response from the international
community. Darfur complicates progress on the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement in the Sudan, where
progress remains essential.
The crisis in Darfur, as we know, has also spilled
over the border into Chad, and resolution 1778 (2007),
adopted today, paves the way for a European Union
force to protect civilians there. Progress is needed also,
as we all know, in Somalia and the Democratic
Republic of the Congo.
The United Nations should be actively engaged to
find a way forward in Zimbabwe and to relieve the
suffering of the people there. Three million refugees
have already fled — three million — threatening
instability across Zimbabwe’s borders. We welcome
the efforts of President Mbeke and others to find a
political solution, and I hope the Secretary-General
will dispatch a humanitarian mission.
The United Nations has a unique role in Africa,
from ending conflict to delivering the Millennium
Development Goals, where we must all redouble our
efforts. The United Nations has done much for Africa.
But as the people of Darfur, Somalia and Zimbabwe
would tell us, there is also much more it urgently needs
to do.
The President (spoke in French): With the
Council’s permission, I should like to make a few brief
comments as President of the French Republic.
My first comment is that what is happening in
Africa concerns us all. We cannot allow poverty to
progress in Africa. We cannot let war tear Africa apart.

07-51572

We cannot let illness decimate Africans. This is a
problem for the stability of the world.
I say to the Chairperson of the African Union that
there is no contradiction between mobilizing the
international community to assist Africa and our desire
for Africans to take their destiny into their own hands.
We wish to assist Africa in taking its destiny into its
own hands. There are crises that are so serious, so
substantial, that Africa cannot extricate itself from
them by itself. Therefore, I believe in a strengthened
partnership between the United Nations and the
African Union.
And in a certain way, what is happening in Darfur
is extraordinary. We see there the African Union, the
United Nations and Europe, working for peace. And
who here can say that either of those organizations
would have succeeded alone? We are able to make
progress because we are all together, helping Africa,
which will believe once again in its future.
I would like to make a second comment. What
Africa needs are concrete actions, not so many
speeches, but rather concrete actions. Somalia needs
military assistance, including upstream assistance, to
stop piracy and to allow humanitarian assistance to get
through. In Darfur, it is because a hybrid force is going
to be deployed and because a European force will be
deployed in Chad and that a number of countries,
including France and others — the Prime Minister of
Belgium spoke on this subject — that we agree to send
people and wherewithal, that things can progress. For
us, it is not just intellectual solidarity. What we are
talking about operational solidarity.
The third and final comment that I would like to
make concerns respect for the human person. We must
be completely categorical about respect for human
rights, on the progression of the rule of law, on the
need for justice and on punishing criminals. It is not a
matter of giving lessons to anybody. It is simply a
matter of knowing that, in Africa, as elsewhere,
murderers will one day be caught and punished.
Our national public opinions will only support the
huge effort to help Africa — which is never sufficient,
but substantial nonetheless — if we can ensure that
criminals will not go unpunished, that we will not
simply turn the page and go on to the next chapter.
Criminals must be punished everywhere, and that is
perhaps the major responsibility of the international
community. Our collective responsibility is to tell those

15

S/PV.5749

who kill in Africa, in Lebanon or anywhere in the
world that we will come after them wherever they are
and hold them accountable in the only legitimate court,
the court of the entire international community, which
will uphold respect for human beings.
We want a coherent effort, working with Africans
for peace, development and stability in Africa. To do
this, we should accept no complacency when the rule
of law is not respected or human beings are not
respected. It is because we defend these ideas that we
all wish to assist Africa together.
To end this meeting, I give the floor to His
Excellency Mr. Alpha Oumar Konaré, Chairman of the
African Union Commission.
Mr. Konaré (spoke in French): Thank you very
much, Mr. President, for inviting us, the African Union.
Thank you for this important acknowledgment, which
confirms the similar acknowledgment made by
numerous countries who have accredited their
ambassadors in Addis Ababa to our organization; by
the United States of America, which today has hired a
special messenger to the African Union in Addis Ababa
and has given diplomatic status to our Ambassador in
Washington, D.C.; and the European Union, which is
preparing to appoint a special representative for Addis
Ababa. Those are important acts that acknowledge the
fact of integration.
There are regional organizations, and the African
Union is one of them. But it is more than that: there is
the African Union, then there are the other regional
organizations,
because
Africa’s
agenda
will
increasingly be defined by the African Union.
Thank you very much, Sir, for having convened
this highly significant debate, but as you yourself said,
we hope to move beyond words, to move beyond
promises because too many promises have already
been made to Africa. I am convinced that this meeting
will provide added value because there will be followup. You heard for yourself, Sir, in the comments made
by each Head of State and Government around the
table, a call for peace on the continent. How can it be
otherwise, when we consider the individual dramas of
men and women, the number of displaced persons, the
number of refugees, the number of civilians who have
been slaughtered, when we have seen on our continent
the tragedy of the genocide perpetrated in Rwanda,
from which, unfortunately, we have not yet learned all
the lessons.

16

How could one not join in such a debate, when
one is familiar with the tragedies that are unfolding in
Africa, such as the terrible situation in Darfur and in
Somalia? What I would like to say concerning Darfur
is that, on 21 September, together with the United
Nations, we organized a meeting here in New York.
Significant commitments were made, significant
commitments that must be met. The security of
populations must be ensured and we must ensure the
deployment of troops to Darfur as rapidly as possible.
The commitments that were made must be respected.
There is also the issue of political dialogue,
which must also reach completion. The Sudanese
President has announced a ceasefire. It is crucial that
this ceasefire be respected by all. A dialogue
conference is scheduled for 27 September in Tripoli,
and we must do everything in our power to ensure that
all the Sudanese parties are seated at the table. We
know that we can count on you, Sir, to ensure that that
is indeed the case.
When it comes to Darfur, we have told the
Sudanese to have faith, but not complacency. Faith, but
no complacency: this is a primarily African
responsibility. I have no doubt whatsoever that we will
implement the resolution adopted by the United
Nations.
Regarding Somalia, we need to be able to rapidly
deploy African troops in order to give political
dialogue a chance and to strengthen security. We have
heard testimonials about all the efforts deployed by
Africa to ensure peace and security. We have
established a continent-wide structure to that end that
is solid but that needs support. We need support in
training our troops, support in improving our
information and analysis services, but above all,
support to ensure that we have permanent and regular
financing.
Currently, operations are financed one by one.
That makes it impossible to deploy rapidly and often
means that interventions come too late. In addition,
countries that are emerging from crises see their
situation deteriorate, since they do not have solid
support. This is something that we should pay close
attention to. We should also not hesitate to review
Chapter VIII of the Charter of the United Nations in a
creative light, as was suggested a few months ago by
South Africa in this very Chamber.

07-51572

S/PV.5749

The United Nations must take the regional
component into account and integrate it in all of its
actions. For this reason, the partnership between the
African Union and the United Nations must be
developed. The hybrid operation opens the way for
that, and I believe that that indeed is the path to take in
the future.
Around this table, everyone has recognized
Africa’s responsibility. It is essential. The primary
responsibility, the responsibility to promote democracy,
good governance, respect for human rights, is ours,
because that is the primary foundation of security in
any country. It is for that reason that we must
condemn — and ensure zero tolerance for — those
who use child soldiers. We must ensure zero tolerance
for those who use child soldiers. There must be zero
tolerance for those who perpetrate acts of violence
against women. There must be zero tolerance when it
comes to the use of mercenaries in Africa.
With regard to the problems afflicting peace in
Africa, a number of lessons can be drawn. Even with
regard to military operations, we must ensure that the
political objectives are clear and that the democratic
component holds pride of place in the resolution of
conflicts. When commitments are made, they must be
respected, but I am convinced that the examples set by
the great democracies will also contribute to ensuring
the implementation of decisions taken at this table.
When States make commitments, they must honour
them. There is no room for a policy of double
standards. While dialogue is under way, rebel
movements, too, must be bound to respect the rules of
the game.
All of this has been said here before. You
yourself, Sir, referred to it, and it is reflected in the
paper that you distributed. Africa must be helped. The
primary responsibility for ensuring peace in Africa
belongs to Africans themselves. They must shoulder
that responsibility. Our partners must let Africans run
their own business. Financing is important, but it does
not justify unbridled intervention or conduct. I feel that
to be of extreme importance, because the vital interests
of the African peoples are involved.
You yourself, Sir, used the term “rupture”. With
respect to relations with Africa today, that rupture is
apparent at every level, beyond the legacy of
colonization and the cold war. Africa is no longer a
private hunting ground; it is no longer anyone’s

07-51572

backyard; it is no longer a part of the Great Game; and
it is no longer anyone’s sphere of influence. Those are
the few simple rules that will allow the continent to
shoulder its responsibility and to demonstrate interAfrican solidarity.
I should like to make the following three related
points. The dynamic of integration must result in the
reduction of foreign military bases currently operating
in Africa. That should in turn help build African
capacity to maintain a unified Africa. Africa’s strength
lies in its unity and in its capacity to shoulder its own
responsibilities. To its own credit, Africa signed the
Treaty of Pelindaba declaring the continent nuclearweapon-free. That was an excellent undertaking, but
how do we protect Africa without a system of
collective security? What about Africa’s need for
civilian nuclear energy?
You touched upon the critical issue, Sir, of small
arms and light weapons in Africa. Small arms and light
weapons are weapons of mass destruction in Africa.
We must move towards an international convention to
mark those weapons and to ensure that they do not fall
into illegitimate hands. In your paper, Sir, you point to
the new threats that have emerged: the drug mafias, the
tobacco mafias, the immigration mafias, the
multifarious mafias that seek to dominate the
commodities market in Africa today. I would add that a
there is another threat might perhaps be seen rather as
an opportunity: If Africa were to be completely bereft
of new information and communications technologies,
it would be able to turn that misfortune into a security
benefit.
With that in mind when he spoke earlier, the
President of the Congo noted the genuine threat posed
by poverty. Many commitments have been made that
have not been honoured. The Millennium Development
Goals will not be met if things continue as they are
because, if the rules do not change and if Africa does
not gain the capacity to produce its own food and to
process its own commodities and profit from their use,
then it will be sidelined. You said so yourself, Sir.
In 40 years, there will be 1.7 billion people in
Africa. That is equivalent to the population of the
United States of America, Canada, Mexico, all of South
America, Europe and Oceania combined. It is
unthinkable that we could have a secure world while
such grave poverty persists on a continent of such
wealth.

17

S/PV.5749

I thank you, Sir, for inviting me to speak. I hope
that in the not-too-distant future Africa will be
represented here in the Security Council by a
Permanent Representative to the United Nations. That,
too, is a hope that has already been expressed by
speakers here today.

The President (spoke in French): I thank all the
participants for coming together to make this meeting
possible.
The Council has thus concluded its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 4.45 p.m.

18

07-51572
