48

• General· Assembly-Twenty-sixth Session

· Having received and · examined the report of the
Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations of 3
December 1971,34
· Noting with regret tbat tbe mandate entrusted to the
Special Committee ·has not as yet been fulfilled,
Conscious; nevertheless, that the problems with
which tbe Special Committee has been faced are of a
fundamental nature and require close and thorough
consideration to whicb any Member of tbe United
Nations may usefully contribute,
· Bearing in mind tbe concem of Member States in
tbe present dangerous intemational situation over the
need to reacb an early agreement for carrying out
United Nations peace-keeping operations consistent
with tbe Charter of tbe United Nations,
l. Takes note of tbe report of tbe Special Committee on Peace-keeping Operations, in particular paragrapb 14 of tbe report;
. 2. Recommends tbat, in order to expedite progress
and fo enable tbe Special Committee to bold a more
frequent exchange of views on the question, its Working Group should submit reports at intervals of not
ínoie than tbree montbs;
·
3. Stresses the importance of achieving agreed
guidelines to enhance tbe effectivenes of United Nations peace-keeping operations in conformity with the
Charter and to tbis end urges the Special Committee
to accelerate its work;
·
·· · 4. Requests Member States to make available to
tbe Special Committee before 15 March 1972 any
views or suggestions which tbey may wish to submit to
help tbe work of tbe Special Committee;
. 5. Requests tbe Special Committee, taking. into account tbe progress made by its Working Group at that
time, to study tbe views and suggestions received from
Member States and to arrange for furtber discussion
at meetings in which tbose delegations that had contributed views and suggestions, as well as otber inter-:ested delegations, would be invited to participate;
-· 6'. Requests tbe Special Committee to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-seventh session on the
progress it has achieved.
'
2023rd plenary meeting,
17 December 1971 ..
2851 (XXVI). Report of the Special Coinmittee
to lnvestigate Israeli Practices Affecting the
Human Rights of the Population of the Occupied Territories

The General Assembly,
Guided by tbe purposes and principles of tbe Charter of tbe United Nations,
Bearing in mind the provisions and principies of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as
the provisions of the Geneva Convention relative to
tbe Protection of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of
12 August 1949,311
Recalling Security Council resolutions 237 (1967)
of 14 June 1967 and 259 (1968) of 27 September
1968, as well as other pertinent resolutions of the
United Nations,
84 Official Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-sixth
Session, Annexes, agenda item 39, document A/8550.
811 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 (1950), 'No: 973.

· · Having considered tbe report · of tbe Special Committee to Investigate Israeli Practices Affecting tbe Human Rights of the Population of tbe Occupied Territories,36
· Gravely concerned about the violations of the human
rights of tbe inhabitants of the occupied territories,
· Considering tbat tbe system of investigation and protection is essential for ensuring effective implementation of tbe international instruments, such as the aforementioned Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949,
which provide for respect for human rights in armed
conflicts,
.
·. ·
·Noting with regret that die relevant provisions of
that Convention ·have not been implemented by the
lsraeli authorities,
·
Recalling that, in accordance witb article 1 ·of that
Convention, the States parties have. undertaken not only
to respect but also to ensure respect for the Convention
in all circumstances, Noting with satisfaction tbat tbe Intemational Committee of the. Red Cross, after giving careful consideration to the question of the reinforcement of the implementation of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August
1949,37 has arrived at the conclusion that_all tasks falling to a protecting Power under· ·those Conventions
could be considered humanitarian functions and that
the International Committee of tbe Red Cross has declared itself ready to assume ali the functions envisaged
for protecting Powers in tbe Convéntions,38
1. Cómmends the Special Committee to Investigate
lsraeli Practices Affecting tbe Human Rights of the
Population of the Occupied Territories and its members f or their efforts in performing the task assigned to
tbem;
2. Strongly calls upon Israel to rescind fortbwith all
measures and to desist from all policies and practices
such as:
(a) The annexation of any part of the occupied
Arab territories;
( b) The establishment of Israelí settlements on tbose
territories and the transfer of parts of its civilian population into the occupied territory;
· (e) The destruction and demolition of villages,
quarters and houses and the confiscation and expropriation of property;
(d) The evacuation, transfer, deportation and expulsion of the inhabitants of the occupied Arab territories;
(e) The denial of the right of tbe refugees and displaced persons to -return to tbeir homes;
(f) The ill-treatment and torture of prisoners and
detainees;
·
·
(g) Collective punishment;
·
3. Calls upon the Govemment of Israel to permit
all persons who have fled .tbe occupied territories or
have been deported or expelled · therefrom to retum to
their homes; . ·
_
4. Reaffirms that al! measures taken by Israel to
settle the occupied territories, including occupied Jerusalem, are completely null and void;
36 A/8389 and Corr.1 and 2 and Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1
and 2.
·
.
. .
37 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75 •(1950), Nos. 970973 .
. 38 See A/8389/Add.1 and Add.1/Corr.1 and 2, para. 36.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Special Political Committee

5. Calls upon the Govemment of Israel to comply
fully with its obligations under the Geneva Convention
relative to the Protection of Civilian Persons in Time
of War, of 12 August 1949;
6. Requests the Special Committee, pending the
early termination of Israeli occupation of Arab territories, to continue its work and to consult as appropriate with the International Committee of the Red
Cross in order to ensure the safeguarding of the welfare
and human rights of the population of the occupied
territories;
7. Urges the Government of Israel to co-operate
with the Special Committee and to facilitate its entry
into the occupied territories in order to enable it to
perform the functions entrusted to it by the General
Assembly;

49

8. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the
Special Committee with all the necessary facilities for
the continued performance of its tasks;
9. Requests all States parties to the Geneva Convention of 12 August 1949 to do their utmost to ensure
that Israel respects and fulfils its obligations under that
Convention;
10. Requests the Special Committee to report to the
Secretary-General as soon as possible and whenever the
need arises thereafter;
11. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-seventh session an ítem entitled "Report ( or
reports) of the Special Committee to Investigate Israeli
Practices Affecting the Human Rights of the Population
of the Occupied Territories".
2027th plenary meeting,
20 December 1971.
