General Assembly-Eighteenth Session

RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED ON THE REPORTS OF THE THIRD COMMITTEE
CONTENTS
Pagt

1904 (XVIII). United Nations Declaration on ,the Elimination of All Forms of
Racial Discrimination (20 November 1963) (item 43)..................
1905 (XVIII). Publicity to be given to the United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (20 November 1963)
(item 43) .
....................... ...............
1906 (XVIII). Preparation of a draft international convention on the elimination
of all forms of racial discrimination (20 November 1963) (item 43). . .
1915 (XVIII). Community action (5 December 1963) (item 12)..............
1916 (XVIII). World social situation (S December 1963) (item 12)...........
1917 (XVIII). Housing, building and planning (5 December 1963) (item 12)..
1918 (XVIII). Capital punishment (5 December 1963) (item 12).
.. .....
1919 (XVIII). United Nations Children's Fund (5 December 1963) (item 12)..
1920 (XVIII). Participation of women in national social and economic development (5 December 1963) (item 12)...................................
1921 (XVIII). Draft declaration on the elimination of discrimination against
women (5 December 1963) (item 12).........
1922 (XVIII). Sessions of the Commission on Human Rights (5 December 1963)
(item 12) . . . . . . . . . . . .
.................. ....................
1923 (XVIII). Equitable geographical representation on the Commission on
Human Rights (5 December 1963) (item 12).
..................
1958 (XVIII). Membership of the Executive Committee of the High Commissioner's Programme (12 December 1963) (item 38).....................
1959 (XVIII). Report of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
(12 December 1963) (item 38) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1960 (XVIII). Draft International Covenants on Human Rights (12 December
1963) (item 48)....
.......... ........ ... .. ..... ..... ..... .. .. .
1961 (XVIII). Designation of 1968 as International Year for Human Rights
( 12 December 1963) ( item 79) .
.. . . . .
. .. . . .. . .. . .. . .. .
1965 (XVIII). Measures designed to promote among youth the ideals of peace,
mutual respect and understanding between peoples ( 13 December 1963)
( item 47) . . .
.............
Note:
Draft Recommendation on Consent to Marriage, Minimum Age for Marriage and
Registration of Marriages (item 40) .................................. .
Measures to accele-rate the promotion of respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms ( item 41) ................................................. .
Manifestations of racial prejudice and national and religious intolerance (item 42)
Draft Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms of Religious Intolerance
(item 44) . . . . . . . . .. .. ..
.. . . . .. .. .. .. .. . . .. . . .
. ........ .
Draft Declaration on the Right of Asylum (item 45) ......................... .
Freedom of information: (a) Draft Convention on Freedom of Information;
( b) Draft Declaration on Freedom of Information ( item 46) ( 12 December
1963) .................................. · · - . · - · ........ · ...... · · · · ·

35
37
37
38
38
39
40
40
40
41
41
41

42
42
42

43
43

44

of all human beings and seeks, among other basic objectives, to achieve international co-operation in promoting and encouraging respect for human rights and
fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to
race, sex, language or religion,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights proclaims that all human beings are born free

1904 (XVIII). United Nations Declaration on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial Dis•
crimination
The General Assembly,
Considering that the Charter of the United Nations
is based on the principles of the dignity and equality
35

36

General Assembly-l!;igbteentl, Session

and equal in dignity and rights and that everyone is
entitled to all the rights and freedoms set out in the
Declaration, without distinction of any kind, in particular as to race, colour or national origin,
Considering that the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights proclaims further that all are equal before the
law and are entitled without any discrimination to equal
protection of the law and that all are entitled to equal
protection against any discrimination and against any
incitement to such discrimination,
Considering that the United Nations has condemned
colonialism and all practices of segregation and discrimination associated therewith, and that the Declaration on the granting of independence to colonial countries and peoples proclaims in particular the necessity
of bringing colonialism to a speedy and unconditional
end,
Considering that any doctrine of racial differentiation
or superiority is scientifically false, morally condemnable, socially unjust and dangerous, and that there is
no justification for racial discrimination either in theory
or in practice,
Takinq into account the other resolutions adopted
by the General Assembly and the international instruments adopted by the specialized agencies, in particular
the International Labour Organisation and the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, in the field of discrimination,
Taking into account the fact that, although international action and efforts in a number of countries have
made it possible to achieve progress in that field,
discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin
in certain areas of the world continues none the less to
give cause for serious concern,
Alarmed by the manifestations of racial discrimination
still in evidence in some areas of the world, some of
which are imposed by certain Governments by means
of legislative, administrative or other measures, in the
form, inter alia, of apartheid, segregation and separation,
as well as by the promotion and dissemination of
doctrines of racial superiority and expansionism in
certain areas,
Convinced that all forms of racial discrimination and,
still more so, governmental policies based on the prejudice of racial superiority or on racial hatred, besides
constituting a violation of fundamental human rights,
tend to jeopardize friendly relations among peoples, cooperation between nations and international peace and
security,
Convinced also that racial discrimination harms not
only those who are its objects but also those who
practise it,
Convinced further that the building of a world society
free from all forms of racial segregation and discrimination, factors which create hatred and division among
men, is one of the fundamental objectives of the United
Nations,
1. Solemnly affirms the necessity of speedily eliminating racial discrimination throughout the world, in
all its forms and manifestations, and of securing understanding of and respect for the dignity of the human
person;
2. Solemnly affirms the necessity of adopting national and international measures to that end, including
teaching, education and information, in order to secure

the universal and effective recognition and observance
of the principles set forth below;
3. Proclaims this Declaration:
Article 1
Discrimination between human beings on the ground
of race, colour or ethnic origin is an offence to human
dignity and shall be condemned as a denial of the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, as a
violation of the human rights and fundamental freedoms
proclaimed in the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, as an obstacle to friendly and peaceful relations
among nations and as a fact capable of disturbing peace
and security among peoples.
Article 2
1. No State, institution, rroup or individual shall
make any discrimination whatsoever in matters of
human rights and fundamental freedoms in the treatment of persons, groups of persons or institutions on
the ground of race, colour or ethnic origin.
2. No S.tate shall encourage, advocate or lend its
support, through police action or otherwise, to any
discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin by
any group, institution or individual.
3. Special concrete measures shall be taken in ap-propriate circumstances in order to secure adequate
development or protection of individuals belonging to
certain racial groups with the object of ensuring the
full enjoyment by such individuals of human rights and
fundamental freedoms. These measures shall in no circumstances have as a consequence the maintenance of
unequal or separate rights for different racial groups.
Article 3
I. Partir:ular efforts shall be made to prevent discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin, especially in the fields of civil rights, access to citizenship,
education, religion, employment, occupation and housing.
2. Everyone shall have equal access to any place
or facility intended for use by the general public,
without distinction as to race, colour or ethnic origin.
Article 4
All States shall take effective measures to revise
governmental and other public policies and to rescind
laws and regulations which have the effect of creating
and perpetuating racial discrimination wherever it still
exists. They should pass legislation for prohibiting
such discrimination and should take all appropriate
measures to combat those prejudices which lead to racial
discrimination.
Article 5
An end shall be put without delay to governmental
and other public policies of racial segregation and especially policies of apartheid, as well as all forms of racial
discrimination and separation resulting from such
policies.
Article 6
No discrimination by reason of race, colour or ethnic
origin shall be admitted in the enjoyment by any person
of political and citizenship rights in his country, in
particular the right to participate in elections through
universal and equal suffrage and to take part in the
government. Everyone has the right of equal access to
public service in his country.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Thfrd Committee

Article 7

1. Everyone has the right to equality before the
law and to equal justice under the law. Everyone, without distinction as to race, colour or ethnic origin, has
the right to security of person and protection by the
State against violence or bodily harm, whether inflicted
by government officials or by any individual, group or
institution.
2. Everyone shall have the right to an effective
remedy and protection against any discrimination he
may suffer on the ground of race, colour or ethnic
origin with respect to his fundamental rights and freedoms through independent national tribunals competent
to deal with such matters.
Article 8

All effective steps shall be taken immediately in the
fields of teaching, education and information, with a
view to eliminating racial discrimination and prejudice
and promoting understanding, tolerance and friendship
among nations and racial groups, as well as to propagating the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations. of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, and of the Declaration on the granting
of independence to colonial countries and peoples.

Article 9

1. All propaganda and organizations based on ideas
or theories of the superiority of one race or group of
persons of one colour or ethnic origin with a view to
justifying or promoting racial discrimination in any
form shall be severely condemned.
2. All incitement to or acts of violence, whether by
individuals or organizations, against any race or group
of persons of another colour or ethnic origin shall be
considered an offence against society and punishable
under law.
3. In order to put into effect the purposes and principles of the present Declaration, all States shall take
immediate and positive measures, including legislative
and other measures, to prosecute and/or outlaw organizations which promote or incite to racial discrimination,
or incite to or use violence for purposes of discrimination
based on race, colour or ethnic origin.
Article 10

The United Nations, the specialized agencies, States
and non-governmental organizations shall do all in their
power to promote energetic action which, by combining
legal and other practical measures, will make possible
the abolition of all forms of racial discrimination. They
shall, in particular, study the causes of such discrimination with a view to recommending appropriate and effective measures to combat and eliminate it.
Article 11

Every State shall promote respect for and observance
of human rights ari,d fundamental freedoms in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations and shall
fully and faithfully observe the provisions of the present
Declaration, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
and the Declaration on the granting of independence
to colonial countries and peoples.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.

37

1905 (XVIII). Publicity to be given to the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination
The General Assembly.
Considering that the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination1
provides that the United Nations, the specialized aget}cies, States and non-governmental organizations should
do all in their power to ensure the abolition of all forms
of discrimination based on race, colour or ethnic origin,
Considering the great importance of the speedy implementation of that Declaration in order to liquidate
all forms of racial discrimination :1s soon as possible,
Considering it essential that, as a step towards the
elimination of all forms c,f racial discrimination, the
Declaration should be made known throughout the
world,
1. Req1ests that all St:ites shall undertake all necessary measures in order to implement fully, faithfully
and without delay the principles contained in the United
Nations Declaration on the Elimination of All Forms
of Racial Discrimination;
2. Requests the Governments of States and nongovernmental organizations to publicize the text of the
Declaration as widely as possible, using every means
at their disposal, including all the ;1ppropriate media
of communication :
3. Requests the Secrdary-General and the specialized
agencies to ensure the immediate and larg-~-scale circulation of the Declaration, and to that end to publish
and distribute texts in all languages possible;
4. In-vites the Governments of Member States, the
specialized agencies and the non-governmental organizations concerned to inform the Secretary-General of
action taken by them in compliance with the Declaration,
and requests the Secretary-General to submit a report
on this matter, which will be considered by the General
Assembly at its nineteenth session as a separate agenda
item.
1261st plenary meeting,
20 November 1963.

1906 (XVID).

Preparatio11 of a draft inter•
national convention on the elimination of

all forms of racial ·discrimination
The General Assembly,
Having adopted the United Nations Declaration on
the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,1
Considering that that Dei:-lardtion is an important step
towards the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination,
Deeply disturbed by the manifestations of discrimination based on differences of race, colour or ethnic origin
still in evidence throughout the world,
C onvinccd thcrefore of the necessity of taking further
action towards the elimination of racial discrimination,
Emphasi::ing in this connexion the importance of the
speedy preparatioll and adoption of an international
convention on the elirnimition of all forms of racial discrimination. r,s envisaged in General Assembly resolution 1780 (XVII) of 7 December 1962,
l. Requests the Economic and Social Council to invite the Commission vn Human Rights, bearing in
mind the views of the Sub-Commission on Prevention
1 See

resolution 1904 (XVTII), p. 35.
