S/PV.9061

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9061st meeting

Monday, 13 June 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Ms. Dautllari. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Albania)

Members:

Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. De Almeida Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Mr. Biang
Mr. Korbieh
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mrs. Toroitich
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez
Mr. Kvalheim
Ms. Evstigneeva
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki
Mr. Mills

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali (S/2022/446)
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/448)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-38012 (E)
*2238012*

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9061

will start with an update on MINUSMA’s support to the
transition under way in Mali.

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2022/446)
Letter dated 1 June 2022 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2022/448)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and Ms. Sadya
Touré, Director of Mali Musso and writer.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to documents S/2022/446, which contains the report
of the Secretary-General on the situation in Mali, and
S/2022/448, which contains the text of a letter dated
1 June 2022 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I would like to begin
by thanking you, Madam President, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on developments in Mali in
relation to the recently released report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/446), in the context of the discussions
on the renewal of the mandate of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA).
Over the past three months, the Mission has
continued to implement its mandate, based on the
strategic priorities set out by the Security Council. I
2/24

13/06/2022

Since January, MINUSMA, in particular through
the local follow-up committee on the transition, has
remained actively involved in efforts to overcome the
impasse related to the extended transition period. On
4 June, in Accra, the Conference of Heads of State
and Government of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS) once again reviewed the
situation in Mali. The deliberations took place in the
light of the report presented by the mediator, former
President Goodluck Jonathan, following his exchanges
with the President of the Transition, on the eve of
the summit, on how to reconcile the Malian request
for a 24-month extension and the positions of the
regional organization.
After extensive discussions, the Heads of State
and Government asked the mediator to continue the
dialogue to reach an agreement by the time of its
ordinary summit on 3 July. Subsequently, the President
of the Transition issued two decrees, on 6 and 10 June,
respectively, formalizing a 24-month extension of
the transition from 26 March 2022 and establishing a
commission to draw up a preliminary draft constitution,
which must finalize its work within two months. The
adoption of the draft electoral law — a process that is
significantly supported by MINUSMA — is scheduled
for this month and will lay the groundwork for the
operationalization of the single independent electoral
management body.
In the upcoming period, MINUSMA will continue
its efforts to support a consensual way out of the crisis,
including by assisting, as appropriate, in developing
a detailed electoral timeline, establishing a robust
monitoring mechanism and creating an atmosphere
conducive to holding free, fair and credible elections. I
would like to take this opportunity to again commend
ECOWAS for its continued commitment to supporting
a successful transition in Mali.
The prolonged uncertainty surrounding the duration
of the transition has made it more difficult to make
progress in other areas, leaving little political space for
a sustained commitment to the implementation of the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
It is important to bear in mind that some of the crucial
reforms envisaged in the peace process depend on the
successful completion of the transition.
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

During the reporting period, efforts to move the
peace process forward were further complicated by the
lack of trust among the signatory parties, disputes over
issues that are important, but not crucial to the process
and the de facto paralysis of the Agreement Monitoring
Committee, which has not met since October last year,
depriving the parties and their partners of a structured
forum for discussion to address challenges and
find solutions.
In that context, MINUSMA and Algeria, as the
lead country in the international mediation, have
made sustained efforts to encourage the effective
implementation of the peace agreement, in particular
through the holding of several mediation meetings and
continued interaction with the Malian Government
and the other signatory parties. More specifically, the
focus has been, and continues to be, on the organization
of the high-level decision-making meeting agreed by
the parties nine months ago, with the objective of
finalizing the details of a comprehensive disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration process on the
basis of the Government’s offer to integrate a total of
26,000 combatants into State structures and a common
understanding of the broad outlines of the institutional
reforms necessary to fully implement the peace
agreement. The Mission fully supports the preparation
of that meeting, and I hope that the parties will achieve
the long-awaited progress in the peace process.
(spoke in English)
The security situation remains volatile and is of
particular concern along the tri-border area and in the
centre. Since the beginning of this year, we have seen
a deterioration in the Liptako-Gourma tri-border area,
with consequent effects on the Ménaka and Gao regions.
Attacks by the Islamic State in the Ménaka region have
killed hundreds and displaced tens of thousands of
civilians. While those developments are connected to
local trafficking dynamics, intercommunal differences
and the lack of development opportunities, they are
also taking place against a backdrop of the ongoing
redeployment from Mali of Operation Barkhane and
the Takuba Task Force.
I was in Ménaka two weeks ago and saw first-hand
the impact of that developing situation. My interlocutors
did not rule out an attack on the town of Ménaka,
where 5,000 internally displaced persons have been
sheltering so far. Should such an attack come to pass,
the MINUSMA base is likely to be perceived as the last

S/PV.9061

haven for civilians fleeing violence. With limited Malian
forces in the area and only some 600 peacekeepers
available to protect civilians, United Nations personnel
and assets, MINUSMA’s ability to mount an effective
response is limited. We are making contingency plans
to temporarily enhance our presence by relocating
additional troops and capabilities, redistributing tasks
to increase situational awareness and better protect
civilians and improving our coordination with the
Malian Defence and Security Forces.
Our ability to adjust quickly in response to the
threat in Ménaka is one example of how the force and
the MINUSMA police have become more proactive in
their operations. Other examples include prioritizing
the protection of civilians through long-range patrols,
such as in Tessit and Talataye in the Gao region;
establishing temporary operating bases in Ansongo, in
the Gao region, and Ogossagou, in the Mopti region;
and deploying quick-reaction forces and patrols along
main roads and supply routes to ensure the freedom
of movement and deter terrorist attacks on key
infrastructure, including bridges. In that regard, I would
like to honour the memory of all the peacekeepers who
have lost their lives since the inception of the Mission.
Their ultimate sacrifice illustrates the challenges and
complexities we face and further underscores the need
to ensure that the Mission has the requisite capabilities,
including armed and utility helicopters.
In the centre, insecurity continues to be driven by a
combination of intercommunal conflicts, long-standing
governance issues and activity by violent extremists
targeting civilians and their livelihoods, as well as the
Malian Defence and Security Forces and MINUSMA. To
address that situation, since late December the Malian
army has significantly stepped up its military campaign
with the aim of stabilizing the region, which is home to
more than 30 per cent of the Malian population. While
there has been undeniable improvement in some areas
and a concomitant weakening of the extremist groups,
those groups still continue to make frequent attacks
on Malian and MINUSMA forces, as well as civilian
populations suspected of collaborating with the Malian
forces. Going forward, the success of the Malian-led
operations will hinge on two critical factors.
First, the operations must be anchored in a
comprehensive approach that addresses Mali’s
institutional, governance and socioeconomic challenges,
which provide fertile ground for the spread of violent
extremism. In that respect, progress has been made in

22-380123/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

developing a Malian-led political strategy. MINUSMA
is providing multifaceted support to that process
while pursuing its efforts to foster local reconciliation
and facilitate the extension of State authority and the
delivery of basic services. In conjunction with the
United Nations country team, we are also taking steps
to align our activities with the Malian strategy, once it
is formally adopted.
Secondly, military operations must be undertaken
with due regard for human rights and international
humanitarian law. That is not just a matter of ethics but
one of operational efficacy, because the support of the
local populations is vital to the success of the counterinsurgency. In that regard, I note with concern that some
of the operations conducted during the period under
review were marred by allegations of human rights
violations. Overall, and based on our investigations
from January to March of this year, there was a sharp
increase in human rights abuses compared to the
previous quarter. The list of presumed perpetrators of
human rights abuses continues to be led by extremist
groups but, unfortunately, we have also seen an
increase in violations associated with operations by the
Malian defence forces, allegedly supported by foreign
security personnel in central Mali. In that context, we
will continue to pay very close attention to monitoring
the human rights situation and reporting on violations.
We will also sustain our dialogue with the Malian
authorities and enhance our capacity-building support
and training for the Defence and Security Forces. In
that regard, in 2021 the Mission delivered 122 training
sessions benefiting a total of 3,269 Malian Defence and
Security Forces personnel.
The overall security environment has compounded
the humanitarian situation in the country. In 2022,
7.5 million people will require humanitarian
assistance, compared with 5.9 million in 2021. The
total number of internally displaced persons stands
at 370,000, and more than 1.8 million people will be
in immediate need of food assistance by August, the
highest level recorded since 2014. The commendable
efforts of the humanitarian actors to meet their needs
are unfortunately hampered by the lack of adequate
funding. So far, only 11.1 per cent of the $686 million
requested for 2022 has been mobilized.
In view of the challenges I have highlighted, I would
like to echo the Secretary-General’s acknowledgement
of the need for MINUSMA’s continued presence and
his recommendation that its mandate be extended for
4/24

13/06/2022

another year. We will take advantage of the proposed
review to come up with proposals on the best way that
MINUSMA can continue to deliver on its priorities in
Mali and assess the level of our cooperation between the
authorities and the Mission. That last point is important,
as in recent months MINUSMA has experienced
restrictions to its ground and air operations, as well as
significant delays in the rotation of uniformed personnel
from West Africa. I cannot emphasize enough how
critical the freedom of movement is to achieving the
desired level of effectiveness in support of Mali and
its people. We will continue working constructively
with our Malian partners on that issue with a view to
resolving the existing problems.
While the challenges in Mali are numerous and
complex, they are far from insurmountable. If anything,
the Malian people, as demonstrated during the Assises
nationales de la refondation, harbour deep aspirations
for reform, transparent governance and accountability.
Those aspirations and the forces driving them, including
civil society, have shown great resilience and deserve
the international community’s full support.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Touré.
Ms. Touré (spoke in French): I thank the members
for giving me the opportunity to address the Security
Council as a member of civil society on the general
situation in my country, Mali.
This meeting is being held at a time when the people
of Mali are facing many security, political, social,
institutional and economic obstacles. In short, the
population continues to pay a heavy price, as evidenced
in the recent human rights reports of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and civil society organizations.
As a member of civil society, I remain concerned
about the deteriorating diplomatic relations between
Mali and its international partners. This is a worrisome
situation, as our country should not be a battlefield
between major Powers, for it is the people who bear the
full brunt of the consequences of those tensions.
As the Council knows, on 6 June the transitional
authorities set a time frame of 24 months, starting in
March 2022, for the completion of the transition — a
decision that certain political actors have characterized
as unilateral and non-consensual. I am worried that
this decision is being implemented in the context
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

of a divided political arena and a weak civil society
due to the lack of dissenting voices in democratic
and civic debate. Unfortunately, for several months
we have been observing a shrinking democratic
space and restricted freedom of speech and freedom
of expression — sometimes followed by threats
or intimidation.
I am very concerned about the security situation,
which continues to worsen in the centre and north of
the country, where the parties to the conflict, including
terrorist armed groups, continue to commit grave
violations and abuses against civilians. For several
weeks, the village of Boni, in the Douentza region, has
been under a blockade imposed by terrorist groups, in
addition to the already blockaded Farabougou, in the
Ségou region, and blockades elsewhere.
Moreover, armed confrontations between terrorist
groups and other armed groups in the north of the
country, especially in the regions of Ménaka and Gao,
have led to massive population displacements. In all,
the number of people displaced because of violence
went from 350,110 in December 2021 to 370,548 in
April 2022 — a 6 per cent increase.
In that context, I am very concerned that women,
including young girls, are increasingly becoming
victims of conflict-related or gender-based sexual
violence. Women are no longer safe anywhere. Today,
more than ever, we need to call on the transitional
authorities to take women’s rights seriously.
I am also concerned about the closure for nearly
10 years of 1,632 schools in the north and centre of
the country, affecting more than 489,600 children,
who have been deprived of their fundamental right to
education and are now adolescents who have grown up
in a violent environment without guidance or future
prospects. They must choose to leave or stay. If they
choose to leave, at great risk to their lives, they can
either face the waves of the Atlantic Ocean and the
Mediterranean Sea by boat or venture off by foot and
face the immense desert of the Sahel. Or they can stay
and be subject to crime and armed groups.
I remain concerned about youth unemployment,
which is a catalyst for social unrest and insecurity.
The lack of economic development sets the stage for
their easy recruitment by armed groups. In addition,
the instrumentalization of young people for political
ends is a breeding ground for the spread of violence.
Youth employment must be a priority if we are to create

S/PV.9061

a propitious environment for sustainable development
and peacebuilding.
I would also like to commend the recent victories of
the Malian armed forces, which nevertheless raise some
questions. While the security situation is stabilizing
thanks to the various military operations of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces and the procurement of
military equipment, we do not know the cost of that
equipment. An increase in the military budget must
not impact the budget of other critical sectors such as
education, health and access to water and electricity,
which are also very important for the survival of the
population. In that context, I would note that it is
often the lack of access to those basic social services
that creates conflict. If there can be no peace without
development or development without peace, then there
can be no peace or development without respect for the
rule of law and human rights.
On the question of the sanctions of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), I note
that it is the people who have borne the brunt of its
effects. The people of Mali must confront this crisis on
a daily basis. They must remain resilient in the face of
insecurity, political crises, embargoes and the effects
of climate change. But the sacrifices that our people are
making for the good of the nation must not become a
national badge of honour that makes us more receptive
to suffering. The people are standing strong and are
making many sacrifices, but they deserve to be given
better living conditions. We regret the recent decisions
of the World Bank and the African Development Bank
to suspend funding for projects and programmes in
Mali, because the direct beneficiaries of those funds
are the people of Mali.
I would like to underline that general opinion in
Mali is that Security Council meetings on Mali should
not limit themselves to decisions and resolutions taken
under Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations
without those decisions leading to action on the ground.
I therefore reiterate the recommendation of bolstering
MINUSMA’s mandate under Chapter VII of the Charter
so that the Mission can fight terrorism alongside the
Malian armed forces.
I call on the international community, the African
Union, ECOWAS and the transitional Government to
focus on the humanitarian and security emergency facing
the Malian people and work together for the immediate
lifting of sanctions. I urge the transitional authorities

22-380125/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

to pursue dialogue with the international community,
particularly ECOWAS, in the greater interests of the
Malian people. I call on the international community to
not turn its back on its obligation to help Mali because
of the sanctions regime and the deteriorating diplomatic
relations between Mali and some of its partners. I
urge those partners to continue to support Mali in
the implementation of reforms to consolidate the rule
of law, good governance, democracy and the holding
of credible elections. I call for a focus on sustainable
development projects that make even the most remote
communities autonomous and independent. Finally, on
behalf of my country, I urge the partners and friends of
Mali to help my country wage a more effective battle
against terrorism.
The President: I thank Ms. Touré for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers to
paragraph 22 of presidential note S/2017/507, which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
Before giving the floor to the members of the
Council, I want to mention that the High Representative
of the Coalition for the Sahel, Mr. Djimé Adoum, is
present in the Chamber.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): I
thank the Special Representative and Ms. Touré
for their briefings, and I welcome the presence of
Foreign Minister Abdoulaye Diop. I also welcome the
presence in the Chamber of Mr. Djimé Adoum, High
Representative of the Coalition for the Sahel.
As we prepare to renew the mandate of United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), we must be cleareyed: the situation in Mali remains dire. Nearly
2 million people need food assistance, and one third
of the population depends on humanitarian assistance.
Terrorist groups continue their deadly operations.
Violence against civilians is reaching unprecedented
levels. In that connection, I would like to pay tribute to
the three Blue Helmets and three humanitarian workers
who lost their lives earlier this month.
In that challenging context, Mali still needs
MINUSMA. France therefore intends to play its role
6/24

13/06/2022

and propose that the Security Council renew the
Mission’s mandate for an additional year. However,
for MINUSMA to deliver on its mandate, the
Malian transitional authorities must also assume
their responsibilities. The obstacles to MINUSMA’s
activities and troop rotations must stop. The authorities
must also continue their dialogue with the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS), whose
efforts we support.
The objective is to agree on a mutually acceptable
timetable and specific commitments for a return
to constitutional order, which is in the interests of
the Malian people. Violations of human rights and
international humanitarian law must stop, and those
responsible for such violations must be brought to
justice. MINUSMA must be granted access to the areas
concerned so that it may conduct its investigations and
publish its reports in a timely manner.
At the same time, we hear Mali’s calls for
MINUSMA to be more effective and to support efforts
to resume State and public services. Such demands are
legitimate. MINUSMA must do better. In particular,
it must provide more effective protection for civilians,
and that requires reimagining the future. That is why
we intend to propose, within the mandate renewal, to
support the internal review envisaged by the SecretaryGeneral, the objectives of which are to clarify relations
with the host State and determine possible changes to
the configuration of the Mission.
We would also like to keep at the core of the mandate
support for the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, resulting from the
Algiers process. That agreement, we must not forget,
is accepted by all parties and recognized by the
international community. It therefore remains key to
the stabilization of Mali. We remain convinced that it
provides the appropriate framework for bringing about
calm and lasting relations between the north and south
of the country.
France will also propose to continue providing air
support to MINUSMA under the new mandate. As the
Secretary-General and troop-contributing countries
have recalled, such support is necessary for MINUSMA
and for the safety of the Blue Helmets. In northern Mali
in particular, MINUSMA’s presence plays an important
role in assisting in the redeployment of the Malian State.
Its presence is made possible by French air support. In
the context of Operation Barkhane’s departure from
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9061

Mali, France remains ready to provide that support
from outside, within a clear legal framework that is
accepted by Mali.

of the urgent need to address the situation, the A3
would like to note the following points in the light of
the report of the Secretary-General.

Lastly, we must not forget that the situation in Mali
is part of a broader framework. At the level of the Sahel,
the appropriate means must be found to enable African
armed forces to unite in an effective fight against
terrorism. Issues related to security, governance and
development must be addressed simultaneously. That is
precisely the purpose of the work of the Coalition for
the Sahel.

First, we remain concerned about the political
situation in Mali, given both the slow progress in the
implementation of the Algiers Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali and the absence of an agreed
transitional calendar for constitutional rule. That
protracted situation could impact negatively on the
stability of Mali.

France therefore expects all members of the
Council to support the draft resolution we will circulate
at the end of today’s meeting. We are convinced that the
unanimous agreement of the Council is again possible
this year, and we intend to work with all Council
members to that end.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the three African members
of the Security Council — Gabon, my own country,
Ghana, and Kenya (A3).
We welcome the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2022/446) and thank Special Representative of
the Secretary-General El Ghassim Wane for his
comprehensive briefing and insightful perspectives
on the situation in Mali. His continuous engagement
of regional actors, including trough the pursuit of
preventive diplomacy, as part of efforts in resolving the
challenges in Mali is commendable.
We also welcome the participation in today’s
meeting of Sadya Touré, who spoke on behalf of the
Founder and Executive Director of Mali Musso. We also
welcome the presence of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye
Diop of Mali at today’s meeting.
Achieving peace and security remains one of the
foremost priorities of the people of Mali, as well as of
the entire continent of Africa. That much-desired goal
can be realized only through the enhanced support and
cooperation of all stakeholders at the national, regional
and international levels. We therefore support the
continuing and indispensable role of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) in sustaining the peace in Mali
,and we look forward to the renewal of its mandate and
renewed cooperation with the host country.
In the light of the complex political, security and
humanitarian situation persisting in Mali, and mindful

We welcome the decision taken by the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) at the
Extraordinary Summit of the Authority of Heads of
State and Government held in Accra on 4 June, which
encouraged dialogue with the ECOWAS Mediator
with a view to finalizing discussions on reaching an
acceptable timetable for a quick return to constitutional
order. We urge the transitional authorities to continue to
positively engage with ECOWAS on the matter before its
next Ordinary Summit, to be held in July. We take note
of the decision announced by the Malian authorities on
6 June to extend the transitional timelines to 24 months
and hope that will not prejudice efforts by all parties
towards seeking a mutually acceptable solution.
Secondly, despite the increasingly challenging
security environment in Mali, MINUSMA continues to
support security in many parts of the country where it
has a presence. While counting on the support of the
Council for the mandate renewal, the Mission must be
made fit for purpose. In that regard, the Mission will
benefit from stronger support for troop contributions,
capacity-building on counter-terrorism measures and
the provision of adequate logistics, including airlift
assets. Those support enhancements are critical to the
effectiveness of the Mission’s adaptation plan.
The A3 would also like to underscore that, without
cooperation from the host authorities, an appropriate
mandate from the Council will not yield the required
positive results. While there is a major crisis under
way, as defenders of the Charter of the United Nations
and of African sovereignty we remain guided by
the need to reiterate respect for the sovereignty and
political independence of Mali. We therefore reiterate
the importance of renewed cooperation between the
transitional authorities and the Mission. In particular,
it is critical that the Government adhere to the statusof-forces agreement to which it has committed, which

22-380127/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

should be done in a manner that enhances the coherence
of objectives and actions for lasting peace in Mali.
Thirdly, the safety and security of United Nations
peacekeeping troops in Mali is an issue of concern for the
A3. The increasingly sophisticated and deadly attacks
by terrorist groups against civilians and civilian objects
and the Mission’s personnel, particularly through the
use of improvised explosive devices, indirect fire and
rocket-propelled grenades, are alarming.
While acknowledging the efforts of the Malian
army in addressing the security situation, we believe
that a detailed assessment of the capacity gaps of United
Nations troops and the Malian army would be useful in
determining the appropriate strategies to be deployed in
filling the gaps to help counter security threats against
those who sacrifice their lives to guarantee the peace
of others.
We pay tribute to the MINUMSA personnel who
lost their lives in the line of duty and express our
appreciation to the gallant personnel who continue
to make sacrifices for the sake of achieving peace in
Mali. Even as we call for more measures to protect
peacekeepers, we urge that they be supported to be
robust enough in their training, operational posture,
force multipliers and intelligence assets in order
to be able to protect civilians and fully implement
the mandate.
Fourthly, we note the delay in the rotation of those
troop-contributing countries whose troops have spent
more than one year with MINUSMA, following the
non-granting of flight permits. That development,
which affects discipline, control and operational
effectiveness, could have an adverse impact on the
objectives of the Mission and the commitment of troopcontributing countries to the cause of peace in Mali.
We therefore request that the Secretary-General resolve
the matter with the transitional authorities as soon
as possible.
Fifthly, the decision by Mali to withdraw from the
Joint Force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel)
is regrettable, especially in the wake of the decisions to
withdraw the French forces and other Western partners
from Mali, which could create significant security
gaps that should be addressed. It is our view that
regional arrangements and mechanisms still provide
the best opportunities to comprehensively address the
security situation in the Sahel, including Mali. We
therefore underscore the need for renewed cooperation,
8/24

13/06/2022

coordination and complementary efforts between the
actors and mechanisms operating in the region, such
as MINUSMA, the Multinational Joint Task Force,
the Nouakchott Process and the Accra Initiative, as
well as individual Member States, regional economic
communities and regional mechanisms.
We also remain anxious about the spillover effect
of the protracted crisis in Libya on the Sahel, along
with the possible return of foreign terrorist fighters
and the proliferation of small arms and light weapons.
We therefore urge for coordinated action in addressing
the matter by the countries of the region, including
with regard to disarmament, demobilization and
reintegration. The question of adequate, predictable and
sustainable funding for regional security initiatives that
respond to threats to international peace and security is
a pressing matter on which we urge the Council to take
a coherent position. We welcome the ongoing efforts
of the African Union, the United Nations, ECOWAS
and the G-5 Sahel in undertaking a joint strategic
assessment on governance and security in the Sahel
and appeal for the mobilization of requisite political,
financial and technical support in order to facilitate its
successful implementation.
Sixthly, we encourage greater attention to be given
to addressing the root causes and drivers of terrorism
in the Sahel. A major part of that is for the Government
to win the faith of the population by embracing Mali’s
ethnic, regional and political diversity. During and
after the transition to civilian rule, it will be critical
to ensure that while undertaking military measures
against terrorist groups the State combines them with
an inclusive embrace of diversity. That is a critical
foundation for countering terrorist, militant and spoiler
groups while reinforcing the social contract between
the State and the people. In that regard, we commend
the Peacebuilding Commission for its interventions
in Mali, including initiatives targeting women, young
people and self-employment in the agricultural sector,
and we encourage more efforts of that kind.
Lastly, the A3 condemns in the strongest terms the
attacks by terrorists and armed groups on civilians on the
territory of Mali, and the persistent abuses perpetrated
against women, girls and children, including abductions,
arbitrary detentions and sexual exploitation and abuse.
We underscore that such acts are flagrant violations of
international human rights law and therefore encourage
the Malian authorities to carry out swift investigations
that will enable the perpetrators of such atrocious
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

crimes to be prosecuted. A related concern involves
the deteriorating humanitarian situation resulting
from heightened levels of insecurity, as well as climate
change, food insecurity and the coronavirus disease
pandemic, contributing to an increase of more than
13,000 in the numbers of displaced persons over a
three-month period. We therefore once again echo the
Secretary-General’s urgent appeal for donor support to
fill the $651 million gap in the humanitarian response
plan for Mali.
In conclusion, we reiterate the importance of
strengthening cooperation and dialogue between the
Malian authorities, the region, MINUSMA and all their
international partners, and reaffirm our commitment
to the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Mali.
We therefore count on the support of all delegations in
ensuring that the mandate of MINUSMA is renewed in
a manner that enhances its robustness in addressing the
security situation in Mali.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): First
of all, I welcome Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
to today’s meeting. His presence and statement will
help the Security Council to formulate a comprehensive
and accurate picture of the situation in Mali, as well as
the needs and concerns of the Malian side. I also thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-Genera1 Wane
for his briefing, and I listened carefully to Ms. Touré’s
statement. It is clear from the briefings that the current
situation in Mali is complex and complicated, owing
to a number of factors. The international community
should improve its strategic awareness, determine the
deliverables, set priorities and provide constructive
assistance in a targeted manner.
We should actively support Mali’s counter-terrorism
efforts. Terrorist forces have now spread from the Sahel
region to the Gulf of Guinea, the Horn of Africa, the
Great Lakes region and even Southern Africa. Mali is
on the front line of counter-terrorism in Africa and has
recently had some success in implementing a series of
counter-terrorism military operations. We should focus
on the big picture and the overall challenges of countering
terrorism in Africa, provide additional support to the
Malian Government in terms of funding, equipment
and intelligence and uphold the Malian Government’s
sovereign right to carry out security cooperation with
its external counterparts. The countries of the Sahel
region represent an indivisible security community.
They should strengthen their unity and form synergies

S/PV.9061

in building a solid barrier against the terrorism. The
Group of Five for the Sahel is an important mechanism
for comprehensive regional counter-terrorism efforts,
and we believe that it can play its role in full as long
as it focuses on counter-terrorism and eliminates
interferences. The joint African Union-United Nations
Joint Strategic Assessment on Security in the Sahel
should be dedicated to promoting regional solidarity
and cooperation.
With regard to the human rights issues that some
other speakers have mentioned, China believes that
counter-terrorism actions should respect and protect
human rights while opposing double standards on
counter-terrorism and the politicization of human
rights issues. China welcomes the close cooperation
between the Malian Government and the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) on
the political transition. The Malian Government has
recently announced a new transition period and has set
out the goal of restoring constitutional order through
the holding of elections. China has always supported
African-led solutions to African problems and
encourages the Malian Government accordingly. We
have always advocated for respect for the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Mali and encourage the
Government to continue its cooperation with ECOWAS
to broaden consensus and reach agreement on issues
related to the political transition so that the sanctions
can ultimately be lifted and Mali can return to the
ECOWAS family as soon as possible. The political
transition is merely the first step. Mali still needs
the international community’s robust support in
achieving lasting peace and security, implementing the
outcomes of the national reconstruction conference and
strengthening the country’s governance capacity.
It is imperative to strengthen trust among the
signatories to the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation
in Mali, reach agreement on outstanding issues by
holding high-level meetings and promote disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration and the development
of the country’s northern regions. We should help Mali
expand and restore State authority, alleviate the effects
of the humanitarian crisis, foster the people’s sense of
ownership, eliminate the root causes of the conflict and
lay the foundations for peace.
Under the leadership of Special Representative
of the Secretary-Genera1 Wane, the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) has overcome difficulties and

22-380129/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

challenges and actively discharged its responsibilities,
which China fully acknowledges. The original purpose
for which the Security Council established the Mission
was to assist the Government in implementing the
peace agreement and restoring State authority in the
north, which should continue to be the Mission’s top
priority and the primary benchmark for the Council in
reviewing its performance.
As one of the largest United Nations peacekeeping
operations,
MINUSMA
must
strengthen
its
communication and coordination with the country
concerned and focus on the core mandate and pooled
resources for their optimal use, based on Mali’s needs.
The current priority is to make full use of existing
resources in an effort to improve the effectiveness of
peacekeeping operations. The challenges facing the
Mission in performing its duties cannot be solved by
raising the troop ceiling alone, and neither can the
expectations of the Malian Government be met in
that way.
MINUSMA has suffered the highest number of
casualties of all United Nations missions in recent
years. While it is of course impossible for peacekeeping
operations to be absolutely risk-free, we should do
our best to minimize security risks. We hope that the
Mission will take effective measures to address the
outstanding risks to the safety of its peacekeepers.
MINUSMA has encountered a number of logistical
difficulties in the implementation of its mandate. The
Secretariat, the country concerned and the Mission
should strengthen communication and coordination
in order to properly resolve the problems facing the
implementation of the status-of-forces agreement.
The United Nations is about to conduct a
comprehensive assessment of the Mission’s work.
During that process, it should fully heed the views
of the host country, strengthen communication and
consultations and align its work with Mali’s needs
and priorities.
Mr. De Almeida Filho (Brazil): My delegation
thanks Special Representative Wane for his useful and
informative briefing and welcomes His Excellency
Minister Diop as leader of the Malian delegation at
this meeting of the Security Council. We also paid
careful attention to the presentations by the civil
society representative.
10/24

13/06/2022

We received with dismay the news of the terrorist
attacks against the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
in Kidal on 1 June and in the vicinity of Douentza on
3 June. We regret the casualties among peacekeepers
from Egypt and Jordan and express our sincere
condolences to and solidarity with the Governments
of both countries, as well as the victims’ families and
MINUSMA itself.
Brazil reiterates its firm condemnation of terrorism
in all its forms and manifestations. There is no
justification for such acts. We support the efforts of
the Malian armed forces to fight terrorism, as well as
the initiative to improve communication with the local
population to ensure support for military operations.
However, we consider it essential that the
transitional authorities resume effective and close
cooperation with the Joint Force of the Group of Five for
the Sahel. Moreover, the authorities should refrain from
acts that may impose restrictions on MINUSMA’s work,
especially with regard to the freedom of movement and
the rotation of contingencies. Such acts inevitably have
an undesirable impact on the Mission’s ground and
air operations and ultimately affect the fulfilment of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
It is encouraging to see that the ceasefire and
other provisions of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali are being respected despite
the recent deterioration of the security situation. We
encourage the Malian political forces to remain engaged
in dialogue and seek a swift conclusion to the transition
period by defining a realistic timetable.
In that regard, Brazil supports the decision of the
Economic Community of West African States, at its
recent summit of Heads of State and Government, to
keep open the channels of dialogue with the transitional
authorities. We welcome the efforts of mediator
Goodluck Jonathan to find a solution to the impasse
and urge the transitional authorities to cooperate with
the regional organization so that sanctions can be lifted
and Mali’s relations with the countries of the region
normalized as soon as possible.
Brazil also supports confidence-building measures
among the Malian political forces. The return to
democratic normality is a collective endeavour that
must include women, young people and ethnic and
religious minorities.
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9061

The report of the Secretary-General (S/2022/446)
contains worrisome information regarding the human
rights situation. We reiterate our concern over reports
of abuses and violations, especially those allegedly
perpetrated by members of the Malian armed forces and
foreign combatants. Those reports must be investigated
transparently and promptly.

We reiterate the decision of the Security Council
that those involved in planning, directing, sponsoring or
conducting attacks against MINUSMA peacekeepers,
as well as those planning, directing or committing
acts in Mali that constitute human rights abuses or
violations, including those involving the targeting of
civilians, may be subject to sanctions.

Restrictions on civil society and the freedom of
expression are also deeply unsettling. Censorship
and the persecution of opponents are incompatible
with a democratic and pluralistic society and lead to
the erosion of hard-won progress in the country’s
stabilization. We urge the transitional authorities
to refrain from actions that limit civic space, while
reaffirming their commitment to a prompt return to the
constitutional framework.

MINUSMA’s nearly decade-long presence in
support of peace is an expression of international
solidarity with Malians. The United States looks
forward to discussions with our colleagues in the
Security Council to renew the mandate for MINUSMA,
which protects civilians, makes a difference in the lives
of the Malian people and advances the international
community’s goal for a peaceful, stable and secure
Mali and Sahel region.

This month, the Security Council will renew
MINUSMA’s mandate. Brazil is ready to engage
constructively in negotiations to ensure that the Mission
is up to the challenges posed by the deterioration of the
security conditions in Mali, especially following the
withdrawal of French troops.
Mr. Mills (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Wane for his briefing today.
I would especially like to thank Ms. Touré for her
important yet troubling observations about the serious
challenges facing the people of Mali, in particular
women and young people, as well as the dire need
for the Government to more effectively provide
basic services to its people. I also welcome Foreign
Minister Diop to today’s briefing. My delegation
appreciates his attendance, given the importance of the
mandate renewal.
Let me begin, as others have, by expressing our
deepest condolences and sympathy to the families and
friends of the Egyptian and Jordanian peacekeepers
and International Committee of the Red Cross workers
who were killed and wounded in attacks two weeks ago.
The United States condemns, in the strongest terms, all
attacks against civilians and peacekeepers.
We also condemn the misinformation and
disinformation campaigns that threaten the safety
and security of peacekeepers and hinder the ability
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) to fully
carry out its mandate to support the people of Mali.

As we discuss MINUSMA’s support to the people
of Mali, I have three key messages today.
First, the success of any peacekeeping mission
hinges on the commitment of the parties to advance and
pursue sustainable political solutions. As the Council
has stated previously, it is urgent that the Malian
authorities demonstrate their commitment to implement
the Algiers accords. We regret to note that the Comité
de suivi de l’accord has not met since October.
It is equally urgent that the Malian authorities
restore constitutional rule by holding timely elections.
We welcome the continued engagement of the Economic
Community of West African States (ECOWAS) with
the Malian authorities to support efforts to restore
constitutional rule. We encourage the transitional
Government to continue to be responsive to ECOWAS.
The United States acknowledges the announcement
by Mali’s transition Government of a 24-month
transition timetable, starting in March 2022. We do
not endorse that timeline as final, but we acknowledge
that it responds to the Council’s call for a clear and
unambiguous commitment to a transition timeline.
We urge Mali and ECOWAS to reach agreement in
particular on a robust monitoring mechanism with
tangible benchmarks for the remainder of the transition.
Transparent and inclusive processes that respect diverse
perspectives and freedoms will be critical to building a
strong foundation for the future.
Secondly, we are deeply troubled by the recent
report of MINUSMA and the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights
detailing the human rights crisis in Mali. The report

22-3801211/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

documents a dramatic increase in human rights
violations and abuses against civilians by both terrorist
groups and the Malian armed forces with “foreign
security personnel”, otherwise known to most of the
world as the Kremlin-linked Wagner Group forces. The
Malian authorities are fully responsible for the actions
of their security partners. Last March, reports emerged
about the horrific massacre and mass graves in Moura.
The Malian authorities have still refused to allow
MINUSMA access to the site to conduct an independent
investigation. That is unacceptable. MINUSMA must
have immediate access to all sites of reported attacks to
conduct the investigations, which are mandated by the
Council itself.
The alarming increase in allegations of human
rights abuses and violations is exactly why the United
States continues to warn countries against partnering
with the Russian-backed Wagner Group, whose forces
are widely reported to commit egregious human rights
abuses everywhere they deploy. The Wagner Group
will not bring peace to Mali. Instead, the Wagner Group
will only divert natural and economic resources away
from Mali’s fight against terrorism.
Thirdly and lastly, Mali must allow MINUSMA
to do its job. As the Council stated previously, the
transitional Government must respect the status-offorces agreement. Restricting MINUSMA flights,
movements or access, especially over vast swaths of
central Mali, limits MINUSMA’s ability to anticipate,
deter and effectively respond to threats and to protect
civilians. MINUSMA’s inability to fully operate due to
Mali’s restrictions leaves Mali vulnerable. We urge the
transition Government to fully support and coordinate
with MINUSMA. The Mission is there specifically at
the request of the Malian authorities to help extend
State authority, mitigate intercommunal violence and
deter the ability of terrorists to harm civilians.
The United States stands ready to continue its
support for the people of Mali and for MINUSMA. We
are committed to the stability and security of Mali and
the Sahel region.
Mr. De la Fuente Ramírez (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Special Representative Wane and
Ms. Sadya Touré for their briefings. I extend the
warmest welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Mali, Mr. Abdoulaye Diop.
I begin by expressing my country’s condolences to
the families of the peacekeepers of the United Nations
12/24

13/06/2022

Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) who lost their lives in recent weeks.
We call on the Malian authorities to investigate those
regrettable attacks and to identify the perpetrators in
order to proceed in accordance with international law.
Over the past months, the lack of an agreement on
the terms of the political transition has led to significant
delays on key issues, notably the stalemate over the
peace agreement.
Mexico has taken note of the decision of the Malian
authorities to complete the transition within 24 months.
We now urge the transition Government to step up its
contacts with the Economic Community of West African
States (ECOWAS) so that a compromise can be reached
to ensure that inclusive, fair and credible elections can
be held without delay at the end of that period.
Agreement with ECOWAS is also indispensable for
the gradual lifting of regional sanctions. My country
believes that it is a priority to agree on an end to such
measures, which affect the daily lives of Malians and
the prospects for economic recovery in the region as
a whole.
On security, we acknowledge the efforts of the
Malian authorities to combat terrorism, and we
reiterate our call for that fight to take place in the
context of respect for international human rights law
and international humanitarian law.
Mexico expresses its deep concern over reports
of human rights violations and trusts that the Malian
Government will fulfil its obligation to investigate
and, as appropriate, punish those responsible for such
deplorable events as those recorded in Moura. In that
regard, we recall that MINUSMA can contribute to that
task and request the authorities to cooperate with the
Mission in that area of human rights.
Violence by armed groups remains the main threat
to the Malian civilian population. At the same time, we
believe that an active military response is not enough
to eradicate it. The deployment of the State’s welfare
drive, in particular through basic services, and regional
involvement are also vital elements in containing
the violence.
Regional cooperation is the only way to improve
border controls and stop illicit arms trafficking in the
Sahel. We urge the African Union and ECOWAS to
support measures to prevent Mali from serving as a hub
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

for arms transfers between North Africa and the Gulf
of Guinea.
Mali’s decision to withdraw from the Group of Five
for the Sahel complicates the situation. We call on the
authorities to find regional cooperation frameworks to
respond to the transnational challenges affecting the
entire Sahel.
Mexico supports the work of MINUSMA and
believes that the Council’s unanimous support in the
renewal of its mandate is indispensable. It is urgent
that the Mission adapt to the new security situation
prevailing in Mali and, to that end, the Council must
ensure that it has the necessary capabilities.
For MINUSMA to fulfil its objective of stabilizing
Mali, it is also vital that the national authorities
respect the status-of-forces agreement and guarantee
the Mission’s freedom of movement and the regular
rotation of its personnel.
If we really want the situation in Mali to improve,
a united Security Council will have to strengthen
MINUSMA’s mandate.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I would like to thank Special Representative
El Ghassim Wane for his comprehensive briefing and
commend him and the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
for their tireless efforts in support of peace and stability
in Mali. We also listened carefully to Ms. Sadya Touré.
We welcome the participation of His Excellency
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Mali’s Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation, in today’s meeting.
The United Arab Emirates is closely following the
situation in Mali and the wider Sahel region. We share
the Secretary-General’s concerns about the deteriorating
political, security and humanitarian situation. However,
we believe that intensified national and regional efforts,
coupled with strong international support, can enable
Mali to address those challenges and ultimately allow
Malians to live in peace.
The security situation remains deeply concerning,
especially in the context of the increased transnational
threat that terrorist groups pose to the security
and stability of Mali and the wider region. Despite
significant counter-terrorism efforts, they continue to
expand their control and launch sophisticated attacks,
causing serious harm to civilians and peacekeeping
forces. The United Arab Emirates strongly condemns

S/PV.9061

those attacks and calls for all the perpetrators to be held
accountable. We would also like to express our sincere
condolences to the Governments of Jordan and Egypt
and the families of the peacekeeping victims of the
recent attacks.
Tackling security issues in Mali requires a
two-pronged approach, focusing on ensuring the
implementation of the United Nations Integrated Strategy
for the Sahel alongside MINUSMA’s stabilization
efforts. In that regard, we look forward to learning
more from the Secretary-General’s upcoming analysis
and recommendations over the next six months on how
to ensure that MINUSMA’s mission is fit for purpose
in its current operating environment. We continue to
support the Secretary-General’s recommendation to
renew MINUSMA’s mandate for another year, and we
look forward to engaging constructively with other
Council members to negotiate its mandate.
In terms of the political process, the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2022/446), as well as the outcome
of the most recent meeting of the Economic Community
of West African States, makes it clear that Mali is at a
critical juncture. Continued dialogue and engagement
among the country’s key stakeholders, as well as
regional and international actors, remains vital at this
moment, while continued commitment to the key tenets
of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali is essential to supporting stability and recovery
in Mali, along with a focus on the strategy prioritizing
the challenges in the country’s centre. Progress on the
political transition will be critical as well, and we stress
the importance of ensuring the inclusive participation
of communities. We encourage Mali to redouble its
efforts to advance the political process and to remain
steadfast in its commitment to building a country that
meets the aspirations of its people.
I would like to highlight that the humanitarian
situation and food insecurity in Mali is another issue
requiring the Council’s urgent attention. According to
the Secretary-General’s report, more than 7.5 million
people are in urgent need of assistance in Mali and
more than 960,000 children under five are at risk of
acute malnutrition. The situation is untenable. Regular
updates to the Council should include forecasts of
expected hunger levels and the implications for local
communities, especially for their most vulnerable
members, such as women and children, so that the
Council can support early action. Furthermore, the dire
humanitarian situation in Mali is exacerbated by the

22-3801213/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

country’s vulnerability to climate change. We believe
that part of the response to that dual threat demands
that the Council encourage climate finance actors to
increase support for food and water investments in Mali.
At the moment, highly fragile countries receive only $2
per capita of climate finance, despite the fact that such
finance offers very high returns on stability and early
recovery. We also welcome the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General’s efforts to increase the use
of renewable energy where it can reduce costs and
security risks, as well as to foster a positive legacy for
host communities.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates reaffirms
its continued support for Mali on its path towards peace,
stability and prosperity.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland) (spoke in French): I too
would like to thank Mr. Wane, the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, for his briefing this morning,
and I am particularly grateful to Ms. Touré for her
informative and relevant comments. I also recognize
the presence of His Excellency Mr. Abdoulaye Diop,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Mali. We welcome him
to this meeting, as we do the presence in the Chamber
of High Representative Adoum.
Let me begin by expressing my deepest
condolences on behalf of Ireland to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) and to the families of
the peacekeepers who recently lost their lives in Mali.
We also wish a speedy recovery to the wounded. I
commend the peacekeepers of MINUSMA and its
leadership and staff on their continued commitment
and service to the people of Mali. Their work has never
been more challenging or more essential. We call on
the Malian authorities to fulfil their obligations as a
matter of urgency in order to facilitate MINUSMA’s
critical work. We also call for respect for the status-offorces agreement.
(spoke in English)
The restrictions that have been placed on
MINUSMA’s human rights reporting and investigative
tasks are particularly worrying. That is taking place
in an environment where civilians are under attack
on all fronts — from jihadists, militias, self-defence
groups and occasionally the Malian armed forces. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/446) highlights a
significant surge in human rights abuses and violations,
yet we know that there are thousands of other Malians
14/24

13/06/2022

suffering injustice whose stories we will never hear. It
is notable that the increase in documented violations
attributed to the Malian Defence and Security Forces
has occurred since the recent establishment of
partnerships with foreign security personnel, including
reportedly the Wagner Group. The Malian authorities
must take immediate action to address this, including
by ensuring the protection of people from all ethnic
groups and compliance with international law by all
security partners.
All of us should be deeply concerned about the
fact that the Mission has recorded a threefold increase
in the number of civilians killed in the first quarter of
the year. That is 543 lives lost to violence in just three
months. Of those, 249 were killed by the Malian armed
forces, the very people meant to protect them. We call
for all allegations of civilian murders, human rights
abuses and violations to be investigated promptly,
transparently and thoroughly, and for the perpetrators
to be held to account. Sustainable progress in counterterrorism can be achieved only through respect for
human rights and international humanitarian law.
Otherwise, these operations risk perpetuating the cycle
of violence and amplifying the very problem they were
intended to resolve.
The Malian people are also suffering from an acute
humanitarian crisis. One in four are food insecure,
and that number is only likely to rise as we enter
the lean season and as the effects of climate change
continue to worsen. At this time of crisis, unhindered
humanitarian access to all parts of Mali must be
guaranteed, humanitarian workers must be protected
and humanitarian principles must be respected. We
were appalled by the recent killing of two Red Cross
workers in Kayes and offer our sincere condolences to
their families and colleagues.
(spoke in French)
Political stability is essential to addressing the
humanitarian, security and human rights crises in Mali.
That requires an agreement on a timetable for a return
to constitutional order and the holding of free, fair and
inclusive elections. We acknowledge the establishment
of a committee to draft a new constitution. We encourage
the Malian authorities to engage constructively with
the Economic Community of West African States,
the African Union and the United Nations. Regional
cooperation remains crucial, and we regret Mali’s
withdrawal from the Group of Five for the Sahel.
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9061

While discussions on the transition and elections
are ongoing, the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali must not be forgotten. The slow
progress in implementing the agreement, including
the complete lack of progress on the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, threatens
hard-won gains. Women’s participation remains
essential, and we welcome the addition of 15 women to
the Agreement Monitoring Committee.

We remain particularly alarmed by the increase
in grave violations against children, which must
end now. The protection of civilians must be at
the core of interventions. We call on all parties to
uphold their obligations under international law. The
lack of protection will only further fuel violence
and displacement.

In conclusion, I would like to acknowledge
the tireless efforts of MINUSMA and regional
actors, as well as humanitarian personnel, civil
society actors and journalists in Mali, all of whom
are operating in an increasingly difficult context.
We look forward to working with all Council
members this month to adopt a mandate for our
peacekeepers — one that is clear, credible and realistic
and allows MINUSMA to contribute to the protection
and stability that the Malian people deserve.

First, we have taken note of Mali’s announced
24-month extension of the transition period. Agreement
must urgently be reached with the Economic Community
of West African States in order to ensure a return to
constitutional order in a way that can be monitored.

Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): I thank the briefers
for their insights. We also welcome Foreign Minister
Diop’s presence, as well as that of Mr. Djimé Adoum,
High Representative of the Coalition for the Sahel.
Special Representative Wane’s remarks are, in essence,
a tale of a United Nations that remains committed to
Mali despite the hardships. It is with sorrow, again,
that we pay tribute to our colleagues in the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) who recently made the
ultimate sacrifice. We also remind the host country of
its responsibilities. That includes timely rotations for
all United Nations personnel.
Almost two years after the military took power by
force in Mali, the political, security and humanitarian
crises persist. We are deeply worried about the
reported increase in human rights violations and abuses
committed, including by Malian armed forces and the
Wagner Group. In paragraph 32 of his most recent report
(S/2022/446), the Secretary-General notes “the highest
number of civilian casualties to date recorded in Mali”,
including due to terrorist and armed group attacks.
We note with concern that reports from Moura
indicate an ethnic dimension, with most victims
coming from the pastoralists Fulani ethnic groups. In
accordance with its mandate, MINUSMA should be
given full and unrestricted access to investigate what
took place in Moura and elsewhere.

For Mali to be able to move forward, at least three
things must happen, without delay.

Secondly, progress must be made on the
implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, which is fundamental to
maintaining stability in the whole country.
Thirdly, State presence and basic services must
be ensured, including in the north. As Ms. Sadya
Touré explained to us today and as resolution 2601
(2021) makes clear, education, including for girls,
simply cannot be ignored in any efforts for progress
and prosperity.
We embark upon MINUSMA’s mandate renewal as
the Mission is more troubled and more crucial than ever.
We must collectively consolidate its mandate, including
through an increase in the Mission’s troop ceiling, in
order to allow for better protection of civilians. Norway
also sees the need for a more robust and cross-border
effort. That is why we are in favour of a United Nations
support office for the Joint Force of the Group of Five
for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
Realistically, however, we see limitations to what
robustness could be achieved within MINUSMA as a
country-specific United Nations peacekeeping mission.
We should therefore renew MINUSMA’s mandate,
but urge the United Nations-African Union (AU) joint
strategic assessment on security in the Sahel to arrive
at clear recommendations quickly. It should include a
thorough discussion on the need for a robust, regionally
led, cross-border, counter-terrorism force to address
the increasing challenge from terrorism in Mali and the
wider region.
Such discussions also cannot shy away from
critical issues, such as predictable and sustainable
financing and human rights compliance. AU-led peace

22-3801215/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

enforcement operations in Somalia demonstrate that
solutions are possible. Norway will support both the
renewal of MINUSMA’s mandate and efforts to seek
wider Sahel solutions.
Mr. Tirumurti (India): I would like to thank
Mr. El Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), for his briefing. I also thank
Ms. Sadya Touré for her insights. I welcome the
presence of His Excellency the Foreign Minister of
Mali at today’s meeting. His presence is a testimony to
the importance Mali attaches to our discussions.
The increase in the frequency of attacks against
United Nations peacekeepers is of alarming concern.
We express our condolences for the deaths of the
Egyptian and Jordanian peacekeepers who lost their
lives earlier this month in attacks against MINUSMA.
Such attacks deserve the Security Council’s strongest
condemnation, and we call for swift action on part of
all stakeholders for the expeditious implementation of
the provisions of the resolution 2589 (2021) in order to
bring the culprits to justice and ensure accountability
for crimes against United Nations peacekeepers.
The transitional road map is the sine qua non for
securing peace in Mali. The lack of clear understanding
on the transitional road map to restore constitutional
order is having an adverse impact on MINUSMA’s
activities, as well as on the implementation of the
2015 Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali.
We appreciate the ongoing engagement between the
Economic Community of West African States and the
Malian transitional authorities and hope for a swift
understanding on the transitional road map, including
on a monitoring mechanism. That road map needs to
be realistic and objective, while factoring in genuine
operational challenges.
The continuous attack on MINUSMA peacekeepers,
civilians and security forces in Mali demonstrates the
grave security threat posed by terrorist groups such as
Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam waal-Muslimin and the Islamic
State in the Greater Sahara, some of whom are inspired
by the terrorist ideologies of Al-Qaida and the Islamic
State in Iraq and the Levant. Those terrorist groups
continue to expand their operations — not only in Mali
and the Sahel region but also in other regions of the
African continent.
16/24

13/06/2022

The tri-border region of Mali, the Niger and
Burkina Faso has become a hotspot of terrorist groups
due to the security vacuum created by the departure
of international forces. That situation is further
complicated by the lack of cooperation among the
internal stakeholders of the Joint Force of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel).
In that context, let me submit five issues for the
Council’s consideration.
First, the challenge of terrorism in Mali needs to
be accorded high priority and treated with the same
level of urgency as other global hotspots that face
the scourge of international terrorism. In that regard,
it is important that G-5 Sahel countries resolve their
differences expeditiously in order to enable the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel to resume its operations.
Secondly, the crisis in Mali has systemic
multidimensional challenges. The long-standing
shortcomings in the administrative, constitutional and
security set up cannot be addressed in the absence
of political stability. We hope the agreement on the
transitional road map will pave the way for an effective
implementation of the 2015 peace agreement, including
administrative and electoral reforms, leading to an
inclusive election in the agreed time frame. We need to
encourage all Malian and regional stakeholders to take
concerted actions in that regard.
Thirdly, a lasting solution to the Malian crisis can
be achieved only through a Mali-owned and -led process
that is inclusive and representative. It is our hope that
the people of Mali will overcome the political crisis
through inclusive dialogue and democratic processes.
Fourthly, the role of MINUSMA remains critical
in helping Mali to achieve stability. The Mission
continues to operate in an increasingly dangerous
asymmetrical threat environment. While we appreciate
the efforts taken to address the safety and security
issues concerning United Nations peacekeepers, it is
equally important not to burden MINUSMA directly
with counter-terrorism operations. Such counterterrorism operations need to be undertaken by the
national security forces, which command a better
understanding of the terrain and local dynamics. In that
regard, we note the recent efforts made by the Malian
security forces in the past months.
Fifthly, we have also noted the concerns raised by
MINUSMA with respect to the capacity gaps arising
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

due to the withdrawal of international forces. The safety
and security of peacekeepers is of the utmost priority for
us. We therefore we see value in augmenting the troop
ceiling, as proposed by the Secretary-General in July
2021, so that MINUSMA is able to protect its personnel,
convoys and camps and deliver its mandate effectively.
However, such augmentation should be supported by
providing MINUSMA adequate additional resources.
In conclusion, India continues to remain closely
engaged with Mali in numerous capacity-building
programmes, such as scholarships for higher studies
and professional training in India, including in defence
and security-related areas. India remains steadfast in
supporting the people of Mali in their quest for enduring
peace, security and development. It is important that
the international community stand in solidarity with
the people of Mali in these challenging times.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for his
update and to echo the condolences expressed by others
regarding the recent deaths of Egyptian and Jordanian
peacekeepers in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We pay tribute to their courage and sacrifice. I also
welcome the vital perspective of Ms. Touré on the
challenges facing young people and girls.
The previous time that the Security Council met to
discuss Mali (see S/PV.9012), reports had just emerged
of a massacre in Moura. Hundreds of civilians were
reportedly killed during a counter-terrorism operation
backed by Wagner Group mercenaries. At the time,
many members urged the Malian authorities to afford
MINUSMA immediate, unhindered access to conduct
an independent investigation. More than two months
have passed, and MINUSMA continues to be denied
access to the area.
The United Kingdom is deeply concerned about
this and many other instances of restrictions imposed
by the Malian authorities on MINUSMA, especially
on aerial movements. Restrictions on free movement
and status-of-forces agreement violations hinder the
Mission’s ability to deliver its mandate and could
jeopardize safety and security.
MINUSMA’s most recent quarterly human rights
report is clear — the incident in Moura was not a one-off
event. While we continue to be deeply concerned about
the escalation of terrorist violence and abuses against
civilians, the report also documents a significant

S/PV.9061

increase in human rights violations by the Malian
Defence and Security Forces, with the involvement of
so-called foreign military elements. Members of the
Council are under no illusions: that is the Russianbacked Wagner Group.
Counter-terrorism operations must be conducted
in full compliance with international human rights
standards and international humanitarian law. Continued
violations only risk fuelling the cycle of violence. It is
in Mali’s own interests to allow professional United
Nations investigators to operate freely.
The root causes of conflict and insecurity in Mali
must be addressed. An inclusive political transition
is essential. We note the recent statement by the
authorities on their preferred timeline. We strongly
encourage the Malian authorities to continue dialogue
with the Economic Community of West African States
so that an agreement can be reached.
The recent visit by Under-Secretary-General
Martin
Griffiths
again
highlighted
Mali’s
worsening humanitarian crisis, which continues to
disproportionately affect women and girls. Increased
violence in Ménaka is causing mass displacement,
a spike in humanitarian needs and severe risks to
civilians. The United Kingdom commends the vital
work of humanitarian organizations and, following the
shocking attack on two Red Cross workers on 1 June,
we reiterate that aid workers must not be targeted. We
call for full, safe and unimpeded humanitarian access.
Finally, we support the renewal of MINUSMA’s
mandate later this month. However, as we enter
negotiations, the Council needs a frank conversation
about what the political, human rights and security
developments of recent months mean for the future of
the Mission. Simply maintaining the status quo is not
tenable. We therefore support the Secretary-General’s
proposal for a review to consider how best MINUSMA
can continue to deliver on its priorities. We look
forward to working with France and other colleagues
on that important mandate renewal.
Ms. Evstigneeva (Russian Federation) (spoke
in Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General El Ghassim Wane for his briefing
on the work of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and recent developments in the country.

22-3801217/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

We welcome Ms. Sadya Touré and the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and International Cooperation of Mali,
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, to today’s meeting.
We believe that the only way for Malians to surmount
the current challenges is through the establishment of
internal political stability and security in the country.
The more territory that is under the control of the State,
the more effective counter-terrorism efforts will be and
the better protected the people of the country will be.
We note that the focus of the transitional
authorities is on gradually and consistently resolving
accumulated issues. The restoration of constitutional
order is without a doubt a priority. We note the decision
of the Government of Mali to establish a timeline for
the transitional period of 24 months, beginning on
26 March. That step is an optimal compromise, which
in our view should receive the serious consideration
of colleagues from the Economic Community of West
African States.
We advocate the continuation of dialogue between
Bamako and the Economic Community of West
African States, since that will help to ensure the lifting
of regional sanctions, which have caused suffering
for both the population of Mali and the countries that
have imposed the restrictions. We believe that the
authorities and the people of Mali should maintain
control over issues related to the transitional period.
The hasty organization of elections, under external
pressure and without taking into account the difficult
security situation, would not result in the restoration
of constitutional order but would instead lead to
further destabilization.
We support the commitment of Bamako to
implement the 2015 Algiers Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which is the bedrock for
achieving lasting peace and national harmony. Recent
pauses in the implementation of the Agreement,
including the implementation of the disarmament,
demobilization and reintegration programme, are
linked to the need to address the top priority, which is
to ensure security.
We fully support the current Malian authorities
in their view that security is the absolute top priority
for the transitional period. The withdrawal from Mali
of both the French Operation Barkhane contingent
and the European Takuba Task Force, without prior
coordination with the Malians, has created an additional
threat to internal stability.
18/24

13/06/2022

Mali’s intention to seek possible military technical
support from other external players, including the
Russian Federation, is fully understandable. Such
cooperation has already yielded benefits. In late March,
Malian armed forces conducted a successful military
operation in the centre of the country, during which
more than 200 Islamic fighters were neutralized. The
northern and eastern parts of the country are also being
gradually liberated from those armed groups.
We would like to recall that Russian-Malian
cooperation, including at the military level, has a longstanding history, as is the case with other African
States ,and we have not received any complaints
from our African partners in that regard. We note the
very negative response of the West to strengthened
Russian-Malian military cooperation, which we see as
another manifestation of neocolonialist approaches and
double standards.
Unscrupulous insinuations have been made
about so-called massacres perpetrated by the Malian
armed forces, with the complicity of Russian military
instructors, against civilians in Moura. Disinformation
has also been spread about mass graves near Gossi.
I would like to recall that Russia raised that issue in
the Security Council, and we were promised evidence.
But ultimately no coherent information was provided,
except for blurred photographs that show virtually
nothing and a few social media posts. That is all the
evidence that could be provided.
We support the investigation conducted by the
Malians into all the circumstances surrounding those
events. In response to the remarks of our colleagues, I
would like to reiterate the following points, which we
have made on several occasions.
Many private military companies operate in Africa,
including West Africa. The market for military services
in the region has long been the preserve of Western
private military companies, many of which, according
to media reports, including British mercenaries,
have been involved in attempted coups and other
sordid activities.
The fact is that many African States have agreed
contracts with private military companies, which they
have the sovereign right to do. We wish to reiterate
a point we have made repeatedly at many Security
Council meetings, which is that any and all States have
the right to determine how they will provide for their
own security. That is understandable given that there
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

is no certainty that someone else will address it on
their behalf.
I would like to recall that Mali, and the entire Sahel
region, is a victim of the irresponsible, unjustified and
Council-unauthorized intervention in Libya in 2011.
Those actions were the reason that the region became
the target of banditry and terrorism. It is not only us,
but also the countries of the Sahel, that say that. Why
have countries in the Sahel become so vulnerable? For
example, Mali had one of Africa’s great civilizations,
a centre of learning and trade. The reasons largely
lie in the colonial past, which unfortunately never
completely disappeared even after the countries of the
region won their independence. It was replaced by socalled domination by contract, whose main purpose is
to maintain the levers of political and economic control.
As a result, most States were never granted the ability
to provide security and dignified living conditions
throughout their territories. To be fair, we should point
out that after the crisis in Libya that the West itself
created, the international community has tried to help
the Sahel. But how effective has that help been? Foreign
troops came into the region, lofty announcements
followed about helping in the fight against terrorism.
Yet the situation has become even more unstable and
continues to deteriorate.
And what happened when Mali questioned that
approach? We should point out that such attitudes are
also gaining ground in other countries of the region.
Sanctions have ensued, development assistance has
been cut off, there have been accusations of human
rights violations and vilification in the Western press.
What is particularly sad is that neighbours have been
antagonized as some have been portrayed in a better
light than others. So apparently one country is fighting
terrorism the right way, with the help of its so-called
democratic partners, while others, it is claimed, are too
harsh — and they cooperate with Russia.
There is only one answer to this, which is that it
is more important for the West to maintain its spheres
of influence than to actually help Africans solve their
problems. In that regard, we are sorry to see external
actors using their influence to pressure the Malian
side through multilateral mechanisms, including the
Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel). Unfortunately,
as a result of its internal disagreements, Bamako
felt obliged to pull out of it. But we in Russia firmly
believe that the main role in maintaining peace and
security in the Sahelo-Saharan region should belong

S/PV.9061

to Sahelians themselves. We support the States of the
region in pursuing genuine independent policies to
resolve the relevant issues, based on the principle of
African solutions to African problems. We are certain
that results can be obtained if the African countries are
allowed to find an effective response for themselves to
the terrorist challenge through mutual respect and by
rebuilding trust, without outside pressure.
In conclusion, we support the work of MINUSMA
and pay tribute to the Blue Helmets operating in the
difficult conditions created by asymmetric threats and
especially to those who have paid the ultimate price.
The situation in the country remains volatile, with many
issues still in flux and undefined. In that regard, we do
not believe that it is appropriate or the right time to
make any serious changes to MINUSMA’s mandate and
to burden the Mission with new tasks, especially any
that would go beyond the principles of peacekeeping
and cooperative relations with the host country. We
support the Secretary-General’s proposal to undertake
an assessment of the modalities of MINUSMA’s work
over the next six months, after which we could consider
some modifications, if necessary.
In this very difficult situation, it is essential to
continue effective assistance to the Malian authorities
while encouraging them to pursue a balanced and
carefully judged policy for resolving the crisis in their
country. We urge all of our Security Council colleagues
in that effort. We are ready to cooperate closely with
them in the interests of speedily normalizing the
situation in Mali and achieving lasting peace and
stability throughout the Sahel-Sahara region.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Albania.
Let me begin by thanking Special Representative of
the Secretary-Genera1 Wane for briefing the Security
Council. I also want to commend the work carried out
by all the peacekeepers and personnel of the Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), who are
operating in extremely challenging conditions. I want
to thank Ms. Touré for her insightful remarks, and
we welcome the participation in today’s meeting of
Mr. Abdoulaye Diop, Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali. I would now like to
make three points.
First, we strongly condemn the recent attacks on
the personnel of MINUSMA and the International
Committee of the Red Cross that resulted in the death of

22-3801219/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

three Egyptian and Jordanian peacekeepers and two aid
workers. We express our condolences to the families of
the victims and the Governments of Egypt and Jordan.
We call on the Malian authorities to investigate those
attacks and hold the perpetrators to account.
The security situation in Mali is dire and remains
a major challenge to the country’s stability. The
continued offensives by jihadist groups have amplified
the humanitarian crisis, as Under-Secretary-General
Griffiths rightly highlighted following his visit to Mali.
With regard to the decision by the Malian authorities to
delay the return to civilian rule by 24 months beginning
in March, we believe that there is a need for dialogue, and
we commend the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to engage with
the Malian authorities on finding a mutually agreed
timeline. It is vital to reach a swift resolution of the
political deadlock between Bamako and ECOWAS.
Mali needs a clear road map towards the restoration
of constitutional order. Malian civil society is central
to rebuilding the transition and democracy, and as
Ms. Touré underlined, it must be properly included in
any transition plan that the Malian authorities develop.
We are concerned about the impact that the conflict is
having, especially on women and girls, and about the
fact that more than 1,600 schools have been closed.
Secondly, we are deeply disturbed by the reports
documented by MINUSMA of human rights violation
and abuses, as well as violations of international
humanitarian law, representing a 150 per cent increase
from the previous year. That trend has particularly
grown since the arrival of the Wagner Group.
Thirdly, we echo the Secretary-General’s belief
that MINUSMA’s presence remains as necessary as
ever. As its mandate renewal approaches, we hope that
the Council can reach a consensus that reflects the
current challenges facing MINUSMA and strengthen
its focus on protecting civilians and promoting the
peace dividends of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process. In that regard, we call on the Malian authorities
to allow MINUSMA full, unrestricted and unhindered
access so that it can fully implement its mandate and
conduct investigations.
In conclusion, we welcome the Secretary-General’s
initiative on conducting a thorough analysis of how
MINUSMA can best continue to deliver on its priorities
to facilitate stability in Mali, and we look forward
20/24

13/06/2022

eagerly to his recommendations to the Council in
six months.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I would like to once again draw the attention of
speakers to paragraph 22 of the Security Council’s
latest note by the President (S/2017/507), which
encourages all participants in Council meetings to
deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in line
with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I now call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs and
International Cooperation of Mali.
Mr. Diop (Mali) (spoke in French): I would like
to acknowledge the presence of the representative of
Malian civil society. At the outset, on behalf of the
Government and the people of Mali, I thank the United
Nations for its efforts and for the sacrifices it has often
made in restoring peace and stability to my country.
I also thank my brother Mr. El Ghassim Wane, Head
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), for
presenting the report of the Secretary-General on the
situation in Mali (S/2022/446).
At the outset, I would like to firmly emphasize that
Mali, a country at war with terrorism and insecurity,
continues to face a multidimensional crisis following
the intervention in Libya, which caused it to lose two
thirds of its territory. Despite the international support
Mali has received since 2013, unfortunately the security
situation has only worsened. The insecurity that had
been localized in the north of Mali spread to its centre,
before proliferating throughout the country and beyond
into its neighbours and even into some coastal States.
That means that the results achieved have not
met the expectations of the Malian people, or those
of the people of the region. To reverse that trend, the
Malian people decided to take their destiny into their
own hands and play their part to the full. To that end,
the Government of Mali has developed strategies and
made enormous sacrifices by investing massively in its
defence and security apparatus. That investment has
enabled the Malian armed forces to grow in strength,
with remarkable results on the ground, as recognized
by the Malian people.
I listened carefully to the observations made here
today, and I would now like to respond, on behalf of
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

the Government of Mali, to the report of the SecretaryGeneral and the statements made by Security Council
members, several of whom have stressed the need
for the implementation of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali, which emerged from the
Algiers process.
I would like to begin by highlighting the
Government of Mali’s surprise at the fact that the report
notes that the signatory movements have denounced
the Government’s special recruitment of 2,000 new
elements to be deployed to the Malian armed forces
in the northern and central regions of the country. The
Government has not in fact received any complaints
from any group or group of movements in that regard.
However, I would like to reassure the Council that
the special recruitment initiated by the general staff of
the Malian armed forces is aimed at elements of selfdefence groups, as well as the recovery of weapons,
with the ultimate objective of reducing violence in their
localities. In no way does that recruitment interfere
with the Agreement’s disarmament, demobilization
and reintegration (DDR) process, which concerns
combatants from movements who signed the Agreement
and are already registered in the database of the national
commission on DDR.
The Government of Mali wishes to make it clear
that it remains fully committed to the diligent and
intelligent implementation of the Agreement for Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali resulting from the Algiers
process. In that regard, we recall that from the time of
its signature to the present day, significant progress has
been made in the implementation of the Agreement,
particularly on the political, security, development,
justice and reconciliation fronts.
The recommendations of the National Refoundation
Conference, held in December 2021, form part of
the Government’s commitment to implementing the
Agreement, in particular those related to the drafting
of a new Constitution in order, among other things,
to establish the Senate and accelerate the State
decentralization and deconcentration process. I cannot
neglect to mention the progress made in the DDR
process, as the Special Representative also mentioned,
as well as the increasingly significant participation of
women in the peace process, including at the level of
the Agreement Monitoring Committee.

S/PV.9061

I would like to once again commend Algeria for its
active role and to thank all the countries participating
in the international mediation team for their support.
With regard to the security situation, the Government
wishes to underscore that, with the increased strength
of the Malian armed forces, convincing results have
been recorded on the ground, in particular with
regard to the neutralization of prominent members of
Katibat terrorist groups; the recovery of equipment;
the liberation of local communities from the control of
terrorists; the destruction of terrorist sanctuaries; and
the return of displaced populations.
Another result of the increased strength of the
national armed forces, which the Malian people have
welcomed, there has been a marked improvement in
the political, security and humanitarian situation since
December 2021, as well as a significant reduction in
intercommunal violence in the centre of the country.
The Government wishes to reassure the Council
that the increased strength of the Malian armed forces
has enabled them to adapt to the evolving security
situation on the ground. Steps have been taken to
ensure that there will be no security vacuum following
the departure of the French forces and the Takuba
Task Force.
The Malian Government is aware that the security
of the Mission and its personnel is the responsibility
of the host country and will do its utmost to assume
that responsibility. In order to facilitate the transitional
phase, we invite MINUSMA to complete its adaptation
plan in collaboration with the Malian authorities.
A number of allegations have been made in this
Chamber in relation to the security situation, and I
would like to take this opportunity to respond to them.
I imagine that some Council members were referring
to the bilateral cooperation between Mali and the
Russian Federation, which is aimed at strengthening
the operational capabilities of the Malian Defence and
Security Forces and has yielded results on the ground.
I would like to thank the Russian Federation for
responding to Mali’s requests for support in that regard.
Although some speakers referred to the Wagner
Group, I would like to make it very clear that Mali knows
nothing about the Wagner Group. The Wagner Group is
not a problem for us. Our problem is how to ensure the
survival of our State, which, as I mentioned earlier, lost
two thirds of its territory following the intervention of

22-3801221/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

which Council members are well aware. Our problem
is how we provide for the safety and security of the
Malian people, who are in dire straits, as not even their
most fundamental rights are protected. Our concern is
how we safeguard the unity and territorial integrity of
our country in order to preserve it.
Of course, our response hinges on the diversification
of our partners, specifically on the security front. In
that regard, I would once again reiterate that Mali has
the right to choose its own partners, and will do so in
a sovereign and responsible manner, just as every other
country in this Chamber has the right to do. We will
continue to pursue that track in order to achieve the
desired results on the ground.
In that connection, Mali remains open to all
partners. As I mentioned, our problem is not the Wagner
Group, but rather how to guarantee security for our
country. Therefore, we are interested in all proposals
that will assist us in meeting those needs. All partners
wishing to contribute to that effort are welcome to do so.
However, Mali will not tolerate any partner attempting
to impose their own views on who Mali can or cannot
cooperate with. That is not acceptable.
Once again, I would recall that the large-scale
operations under way in Mali are being conducted
in accordance with international humanitarian law
and international human rights law. In that regard, I
welcome the investments made by the United Nations
and a number of countries that are represented here
in this Chamber to build the capacity of the Malian
Defence and Security Forces.
I also recall that, as part of those operations,
Mali’s respect for human rights is not to please its
foreign partners but for its own benefit. Mali is an old
country that has long been a part of civilization. We
have a medieval Constitution dating back to the year
1325 — the Kouroukan Fouga — that affords particular
importance to respect for human rights. We are first
and foremost doing it for ourselves. We are also doing it
to meet our international commitments. We are doing it
because we are aware that we cannot succeed in Mali’s
current fight against terrorist groups by violating rights.
We need to win the hearts and minds of the Malian
people. Mali has absolutely no interest in taking that
path, and we are aware that such a path could backfire.
However, the Council should be aware that Mali is also
a victim of a disinformation war, aimed precisely at
punishing countries for their choices.
22/24

13/06/2022

I think that we can continue. With regard to the
renewal of the MINUSMA mandate, I would like
to share Mali’s position and its concerns, but also its
expectations that the Security Council take them into
account. First of all, I would like to make it clear that,
for the Government of Mali, it is essential that the
mandate be focused on the protection of the civilian
population and support for the re-establishment of State
authority throughout its national territory.
In that perspective, it is essential to better define
and explain the concept of the protection of civilians
in a context of asymmetric warfare, as was recalled
earlier by the representative of India. It is necessary to
clarify against whom we want to protect the population,
considering the main threat comes from armed terrorist
groups. In that context, how can MINUSMA protect
the population if it is not able to deal with that threat?
In that particular context, as the Ambassador
of India also recalled, MINUSMA’s mandate must
necessarily take into account the increasing strength
of Mali’s Defence and Security Forces, which are now
in the front line against the terrorist groups, which
are certainly suffering losses but are also inflicting
enormous damage on the ground.
Similarly, in the context of the above-mentioned
renewal of the MINUSMA mandate and the request
for air support from Operation Barkhane, the
Government of Mali expresses its strong opposition
to the intervention of the French Barkhane force on its
territory after the unilateral decision to withdraw that
force, which was also followed by Mali’s termination
of the defence agreements with France. We therefore
call for respect for our country’s sovereignty and the
decisions taken by the Malian authorities in that regard.
Secondly, the Government of Mali stresses the need
for better coordination of MINUSMA’s actions with the
Malian State in order to ensure the full effectiveness
of its future mandate. The Government of Mali also
stresses the need for MINUSMA to work closely and
effectively with the Malian authorities and stakeholders
to help Mali to protect its civilian population and restore
its authority throughout its territory.
On the allegations of restrictions imposed on
MINUSMA, it should be noted that the Malian
Government has not taken any restrictive measures
particularly or specifically targeting the Mission.
The introduction of temporary restrictions on part of
the national airspace, which is a sovereign decision,
22-38012

13/06/2022

The situation in Mali

has a dual purpose. First, it is a matter of protecting
Malian forces engaged in a new dynamic and offensive
posture to regain the initiative and reduce the ability
of terrorist groups to harm the Malian population.
The success of that dynamic depends on the freedom
of manoeuvre of the national forces. The Council will
recognize that. The second goal is to address risks
to air traffic associated with the intensive use of the
third dimension by the Malian forces, in particular
with flights by military aircraft, including unmanned
aircraft, and frequent artillery fire. Indeed, the security
and safety of the users of Malian airspace is a sovereign
responsibility of the State. It is therefore necessary that
coordination measures be put in place to prevent any
unfortunate incident. It should be noted that all flights
requested by MINUSMA are authorized as long as
coordination is carried out and risks to air traffic are
managed and that it does not interfere negatively with
ongoing military operations.
With regard to the question of the return to
constitutional order in Mali mentioned by the
Secretary-General in his report and by several
members of the Security Council, I would like to
recall the Malian people’s commitment to democracy.
Decree No. 2022-0335/PT-RM of 6 June 2022 sets
the duration of the transition at 24 months, starting
on 26 March 2022 and ending on 26 March 2024.
Similarly, Decree No. 2022-0342/PT-RM of 10 June
2022 established, under the President of the Transition, a
commission to draw up a preliminary draft constitution
for the Republic of Mali, in the context of rebuilding.
The Special Representative of the Secretary-General
spoke at length on that development. That shows the
commitment of the national authorities to the return to
constitutional order. I think that that is the message that
we would like to convey to the international community
through the decree. We want everyone to be able to work
with us within that time frame to get out of the current
situation and have an elected President by 26 March
2024 at the latest so that the country can regain its place
in the community of nations.
In the next few days, a new electoral law will be
adopted by the National Transitional Council. That law
also covers the single body in charge of managing the
elections. I would recall that the recent events that took
place in Mali in 2020 were mainly following election
disputes. That electoral law will therefore be before the
Transitional Council in the next few days and will be
adopted. The Government will immediately proceed

S/PV.9061

with publishing the timeline of the transition to further
meet the expectations of ECOWAS and the other
partners by the beginning of July, we hope.
Similarly, as part of the continuing dialogue with
ECOWAS — a dialogue that has never been broken
off, I recall, but is strengthening and which even has
a positive momentum — a follow-up mechanism will
be set up in consultation with the local transition
follow-up committee, which, moreover, includes the
United Nations, whose contribution in the context of
that committee I welcome, and the African Union.
Accordingly, the Government of Mali hopes that the
embargo, which unjustly affects the Malian people and
the economy of Mali, as well as that of the region, will
be lifted very soon. In that regard, my Government
expresses its deep gratitude to all the leading figures
who are working tirelessly to achieve that result,
particularly the President of the Togolese Republic,
His Excellency Mr. Faure Essozimna Gnassingbé, and
the ECOWAS Mediator, His Excellency Mr. Goodluck
Jonathan of the Federal Republic of Nigeria.
The Secretary-General and several members of the
Security Council have expressed their concern about
the human rights situation in Mali — a significant
concern. I would like to stress that the Government
remains committed to respecting, and ensuring respect
for, human rights, with regard to both our own forces
and international forces present on our territory.
I would also like to reiterate that there is no
deliberate desire on the part of the Malian authorities
to grant impunity in cases of proven human rights
violations. Malian justice is therefore systematically
referred to whenever cases of human rights violations
are reported, including when such allegations are made
against the Malian Defence and Security Forces. I
must say that last year, the military courts sentenced
many members of the Malian Defence and Security
Forces, who are answering for their deeds. That
shows the commitment of the Government of Mali,
despite the many challenges, to making every effort to
combat impunity.
However, the Government of Mali would like
to draw the Council’s attention to the risks of the
politicization and exploitation of human rights for the
purposes of hidden agendas and to the multiplicity and
multiplication of human rights mechanisms and their
increasing burden on the functioning of the Malian
Administration, whose officials must respond to their

22-3801223/24

S/PV.9061

The situation in Mali

numerous, simultaneous and often uncoordinated
requests at a time when that same Administration is
called on to serve the urgent needs of our population. I
hope that the Council takes that into account.
The Government of Mali wishes to recall that the
improvement of the human rights situation is closely
linked to progress in the security sector, as well as the
return of State representatives and basic social services
for the benefit of the population we serve. Indeed, it is
to achieve those major objectives that Mali has called
on the support of the international community, which
is there to help us rather than to create problems for us.
To conclude this chapter on human rights, I would
like to remind the Council that the Government of Mali
has rejected allegations of human rights violations and
abuses attributed to the Malian Defence and Security
Forces in the latest MINUSMA quarterly report.
Indeed, after careful investigation, we have come
to the conclusion that those allegations are biased,
uncorroborated, based on uncontested testimony and
not supported by any tangible evidence. I would like
to take this opportunity to categorically reject the false
impression conveyed by this quarterly MINUSMA
report that Malian forces are using violence to target
individuals from certain ethnic communities. Mali is
an age-old multi-ethnic country with a multi-ethnic
army. Mali is therefore incapable of targeting particular
ethnic communities.
Clearly, those allegations are intended to tarnish
the image of the Malian armed forces and to discredit
them in the eyes of the population and the international
community. Nevertheless, the Government of Mali
remains open to constructive dialogue with human rights
organizations, including the Malian National Human
Rights Commission, in order to combat impunity.
On the regional dimension, as many members made
reference to, I heard several Council members express
regret at Mali’s withdrawal from the Group of Five for
the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), including the Joint Force. I would
like to remind them that this is a sovereign decision taken
by Mali in response to violations of the organization’s
founding treaties, double standards and hostile external
interference from a founding member State. Mali’s

24/24

13/06/2022

withdrawal was formally notified to the G-5 Sahel
bodies. I invite the Security Council to take note of that
decision, including with regard to the implementation
of MINUSMA’s mandate. As a result, the G-5 Sahel can
no longer intervene on Malian territory.
However, the Government of the Republic of
Mali remains faithful to its commitment to regional
integration and cooperation for the achievement of
objectives that serve the interests of our peoples. In that
regard, Mali will continue its bilateral cooperation with
the countries concerned, as well as its regional security
partnership within the framework of appropriate
mechanisms, in a spirit of good neighbourliness,
brotherhood, solidarity and friendship with those
countries and their peoples.
The Government remains aware that the lasting
resolution of the Malian crisis continues to be the
primary responsibility of the Malian people. Mali
therefore remains determined to play its full part to
restore peace and security throughout its national
territory through the use of political and security levers,
socioeconomic development, justice and reconciliation.
However, the realization of those ambitious projects
requires a clear, pragmatic, realistic and holistic
reading of the situation, as well as the understanding
and support of the Council and all of Mali’s partners in
order to move forward.
The Government and the people of Mali reiterate
their appreciation and gratitude for the enormous
contribution of the United Nations to the stabilization
efforts under way in my country, particularly
through MINUSMA.
In conclusion, I pay tribute to the memory of all
victims of this crisis — military, foreign and Malian,
including the Blue Helmets who fell in recent days — who
have given their lives in defence of Mali’s honour.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I will now adjourn the meeting so that the Council
can continue its discussion on the subject in closed
consultations.
The meeting rose at 12.20 p.m.

22-38012
