General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

80

tions and specialized agencies to continue and intensify
their assistance to Ethiopia in its relief and rehabilitation efforts in their respective areas of competence and
to implement promptly and fully the relevant provisions of General Assembly resolutions 3202 (S-VI)
of 1 May 1974, 3441 (XXX) of 9 December 1975
and 31/172 of 21 December 1976, and Economic and
Social Council resolutions 1833 (LVI), 1876 (LVII),
1971 (LIX), 1986 (LX) and 1978/2;
3. Appeals to Governments of Member States and
to intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations and all voluntary agencies to continue and increase their assistance to the Government of Ethiopia
for relief, rehabilitation and recovery of the droughtstricken areas;
4. Calls upon all concerned to ensure that the
international assistance provided be used for the sole
purpose of relief and rehabilitation;
5. Requests the Secretary-General, the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator and the Administrator of the United Nations Development Programme to report to the General Assembly at its
thirty-fourth session and to the Economic and Social
Council at its first regular session of 1979 on the
implementation of paragraphs 2 and 3 above and of
other relevant resolutions of the Assembly and the
Council.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/22.

Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator

The General Assembly,
Recalling section II, paragraph 14, of its resolution
3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975, and its resolution 32/56 of 8 December 1977,
Noting Economic and Social Council resolution
1978/41 of 1 August 1978,
Reaffirming that it is necessary to ensure a continued sound financial basis for the Office of the United
Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator, as recognized by
the General Assembly in its resolution 31/173 of
21 December 1976,
Reaffirming also the central role of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator in the
mobilization, direction and co-ordination of international disaster relief assistance, in accordance with the
mandate established by the General Assembly in its
resolution 2816 (XXVI) of 14 December 1971,
Bearing in mind that the timely receipt and distribution of information about the responses of donors is
essential for the execution of the mandate of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator,
Having heard the appeal made by the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator to donors and recipients
of disaster relief assistance to make better use of the
machinery which now exists in the co-ordination centre
of the Office of the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator at Geneva,
1. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the
Secretary-General on the activities of the Office of the
United Nations Disaster Relief Co-ordinator7 and of
7 A/33/82.

the additional information provided by the Co-ordinator in his statement to the Second Committee on
14 November 1977;R
2. Commends the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator for his efforts on behalf of the victims
of disasters;
3. Calls upon Governments and international organizations to co-operate with the United Nations
Disaster Relief Co-ordinator by furnishing his Office,
as expeditiously as possible, with detailed information
on their current and intended relief contributions, in
cash and in kind, in order to render more effective
the provision of assistance to the victims of disasters;
4. Further calls upon recipient Governments to cooperate with the United Nations Disaster Relief Coordinator by informing his Office of the relief contributions offered and received;
5. Requests the United Nations Disaster Relief
Co-ordinator to develop further his working arrangements with donors and recipients of relief assistance;
6. Invites all Governments to contribute to the
trust fund of the Office of the United Nations Disaster
Relief Co-ordinator, taking into account the financial
difficulties indicated in the report of the SecretaryGeneral;
7. Requests the Governing Council of the United
Nations Development Programme at its next session to
give consideration to the inclusion of technical cooperation activities for disaster preparedness and prevention in its regional and interregional programmes.
63rd plenary meeting
29 November 1978
33/77.

Third General Conference of the United
Nations Industrial Development Organization

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order and 3281 (XXIX)
of 12 December 197 4 containing the Charter of
Economic Rights and Duties of States, as well as resolution 3362 (S-VII) of 16 September 1975 on development and international economic co-operation,
Recalling also its resolution 31 / 164 of 21 December
1976 and resolution 32/ 164 of 19 December 1977 by
which it decided that the Third General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization should be convened in 1980,
Accepting with appreciation the offer of the Government of India to act as host to the Conference, 9
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/ 65 of 4 August 1978 on industrial development co-operation,
Noting with appreciation the report of the Industrial
Development Board on the work of its twelfth session, 10 in particular the recommendations of the Board
8 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Second Committee, 34th meeting, paras. 1-16.
9 See A/32/232.
10 Official Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/33/16).

V.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Second Committee

contained in chapter V of that report on the preparatory arrangements for the Conference,
Stressing that the Conference should promote the
realization of policies and measures for national action
and international co-operation in the field of industrial
development and the acceleration of industrialization
of developing countries set forth in the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial Development
and Co-operation, 11 adopted at the Second General
Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, held at Lima from 12 to 26 March
1975,
1. Decides to convene the Third General Conference of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization at New Delhi from 21 January to 8 February 1980;
2. Endorses the provisional agenda for the Conference as contained in the annex to the present
resolution;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to invite:
(a) All States to participate in the Conference;
( b) Representatives of organizations that have
received a standing invitation from the General Assembly to participate in the sessions and the work of all
international conferences convened under its auspices
in the capacity of observers to participate in the Conference in that capacity in accordance with Assembly
resolutions 3237 (XXIX) of 22 November 1974 and
31/152 of 20 December 1976;
(c) Representatives of the national liberation movements recognized in its region by the Organization of
African Unity to participate in the Conference in the
capacity of observers in accordance with General Assembly resolution 3280 (XXIX) of 10 December
1974;
(d) The United Nations Council for Namibia to
participate in the Conference in accordance with paragraph 3 of General Assembly resolution 32/9 E of
4 November 1977;
( e) The specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency, the regional commissions and
the interested organs of the United Nations to be
represented at the Conference;
(f) Interested intergovernmental organizations to
be represented by observers at the Conference;
(g) Directly concerned non-governmental organizations in consultative status with the Economic and
Social Council to be represented by observers at the
Conference;
4. Also requests the Secretary-General to ensure
that the necessary arrangements are made for the effective participation in the Conference of the representatives referred to in paragraph 3 ( b) and ( c)
above, including the requisite financial provisions for
their travel expenses and per diem;
5. Decides that the languages of the Conference
shall be those used in the General Assembly and its
Main Committees;
6. Requests the Industrial Development Board and
the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization to report to the General
Assembly at its thirty-fourth session, through the Eco11 See

A/10112, chap. IV.

81

nomic and Social Council, on the progress of the
preparatory work for the Conference.
85 th plenary meeting
15 December 1978
ANNEX
Provisional agenda for the Third General Conference of
the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
1.

Opening of the Conference.

2.

Organization of the Conference:

3.
4.

5.

(a)

Election of the President;

(b)

Adoption of the agenda;

(c)

Adoption of the rules of procedure;

(d)

Election of officers other than the President;

(e)

Organization of committees;

(f)

Credentials of representatives to the Conference.

General debate (statements by heads of delegations).
Review and appraisal of the world industrial situation,
with specific reference to the industrialization of the
developing countries:
(a)

Review of progress in the implementation of the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action on Industrial
Development and Co-operation;

(b)

Review and appraisal of major policies, problems
and obstacles affecting the implementation of the
Lima Declaration and Plan of Action and steps
taken and proposed to resolve them.

Strategy for further industrialization as an essential element
of the development process in the 1980s and beyond:
(a)

Adoption of appropriate industrialization policies
and strategies aimed at achieving the Lima target;

(b)

Recommendations for policies, procedures and frameworks to foster, develop and strengthen:
(i)

Domestic industrial processing of natural resources;

(ii)

Industrial skills;

(iii)

International co-operation in the field of transfer and development of industrial technologies
with a view to increasing the technological
capabilities of the developing countries;

(iv)

Improved mechanisms for industrial co-operation to promote the flow of integrated technical
and financial assistance to developing countries, including regional co-operation and special measures for the least developed, landlocked and island countries;

( c)

Industrial co-operation among developing countries:
recommendations on policies, procedures and strategies;

(d)

Redeployment of industries from developed to developing countries;

(e)

System of consultation;

(f)

Creation of appropriate industrial structures in developing countries, with a view to accelerating their
economic growth and increasing their share in world
industrial production in order folly to realize their
economic potential within their national interests,
in accordance with the Lima Declaration and Plan
of Action and the resolutions of the seventh special
session of the General Assembly;

(?)

Role of foreign investment, including that channelled through transnational corporations, in promoting industrial growth in accordance with national
objectives of economic and social development and

82

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

regulations and other conditions applicable to such
investment.
6.

Institutional arrangements:

7.

(a)

Review of the effectiveness of co-ordination and
follow-up on matters concerning industrial production, international industrial co-operation and related
issues covered by other organizations within the
United Nations system;

(b)

Review of the effectiveness of the institutional arrangements for the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, with reference to the long-range
strategy for the Organization, to meet the challenge
of industrialization in the 1980s and beyond.

Conclusions and recommendations.

8.

Adoption of the report of the Conference.

9.

Closure of the Conference.

33/78.

Industrial development co-operation

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 3201 (S-VI) and 3202
(S-VI) of 1 May 1974 containing the Declaration and
the Programme of Action on the Establishment of a
New International Economic Order, 3281 (XXIX) of
12 December 1974 containing the Charter of Economic
Rights and Duties of States and 3362 (S-VII) of
16 September 1975 on development and international
economic co-operation,
Recalling also the Lima Declaration and Plan of
Action on Industrial Development and Co-operation, 12
adopted at the Second General Conference of the
United Nations Industrial Development Organization,
held at Lima from 12 to 26 March 1975, which established the main measures and principles for industrial
development and co-operation within the framework
of the establishment of the new international economic
order,
Emphasizing the decisive contribution of industrialization to economic and social development in
developing countries,
Stressing the need to overcome constraints impeding
the implementation of the measures proposed for the
attainment of the targets contained in the Lima Declaration and Plan of Action,
Reaffirming the role of the United Nations Industrial
Development Organization as the central co-ordinating
organ within the United Nations system for the promotion of industrial development co-operation,
Taking note of Economic and Social Council resolution 1978/65 of 4 August 1978 on industrial development co-operation,
Having considered the report of the Industrial Development Board on the work of its twelfth session, 13
including the decisions and resolution contained in the
report,
Aware of the need for additional resources and expanded programmes to accelerate the pace of industrialization of developing countries,
Convinced of the need for the United Nations system
to use the resources available to it for industrial development in an effective manner,
12 Ibid.

18 Official

Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 16 (A/33/16).

Convinced of the importance of measures for the
development and strengthening of the industrial technological capabilities of developing countries through,
inter alia, the transfer and acquisition of technology
and access to information on industrial technology,
including advanced technology,
Taking note of the report of the Executive Director
of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization on industrial redeployment from developed
to developing countries, 14 submitted in pursuance of
General Assembly resolution 31/163 of 21 December 1976,
Recalling also its resolution 32/ 163 of 19 December 1977 on the strengthening of operational activities
in the field of industrial development in the least
developed among the developing countries,
Noting the statement made by the Executive Director of the United Nations Industrial Development
Organization, 15

I
1. Reaffirms that the desirable annual funding level
for the Industrial Development Fund is $US 50 million
and that this level should be achieved in so far as
possible during 1979;
2. Urges those countries, especially the developed
countries, which have not so far contributed to the
Fund to do so;
3. Calls upon all States, in particular the developed countries, to take appropriate action to increase their voluntary contributions to the Fund;
4. Requests the countries currently making specialpurpose contributions to make the utilization of such
contributions as flexible as possible and requests the
Secretariat to suggest suitable projects;
5. Stresses the need to optimize utilization of the
Fund for financing operational activities, including
pilot projects, in priority areas such as:
(a) Strengthening the technological capability of
the developing countries;
( b) Co-operation among the developing countries;
( c)

Training programmes;

( d) Special measures for the least developed, landlocked, island and most seriously affected countries;

6. Recommends to the Governing Council of the
United Nations Development Programme an appropriate increase in the annual volume of financial resources under the Special Industrial Services Programme;
II
1. Reaffirms the need to strengthen the effectiveness of the industrial development field advisers network, taking into account General Assembly resolutions 3086 (XXVIII) of 6 December 1973, 31/162
of 21 December 1976 and 32/165 of 19 December
1977;
2. Requests that, pending the completion of the
appraisal of ways of increasing the effectiveness of the
system of industrial development field advisers, as
14 A/33/182.
15 Official Records

of the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Second Committee, 18th meeting, paras. 29-39.
