United Nations

S/PV.9317

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9317

th meeting
Monday, 8 May 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Baeriswyl . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Switzerland)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Spasse
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang
Mr. Fiallo Karolys
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault
Ms. Bongo
Mr. Agyeman
Mr. Hamamoto
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Polyanskiy
Ms. Shaheen
Mr. Phipps
Mr. Wood

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 April 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/297)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of
the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-12974 (E)
*2312974*

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

The meeting was called to order at 10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 26 April 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/297)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of the Islamic
Republic of Iran, the Syrian Arab Republic and Türkiye
to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite Mrs. Izumi
Nakamitsu, High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/297, which contains the text of a
letter dated 26 April 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I give the floor to Mrs. Nakamitsu.
Mrs. Nakamitsu: I thank Council members for
the opportunity to brief them on the implementation
of Security Council resolution 2118 (2013), on the
elimination of the chemical weapons programme of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Since the Council’s previous consideration of this
matter (see S/PV.9275), and consistent with established
practice, the Office for Disarmament Affairs has been
in regular contact with its counterparts at the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on activities related
to resolution 2118 (2013). The OPCW Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) has continued its efforts
to clarify all outstanding issues regarding the initial
declaration and subsequent declarations of the Syrian
Arab Republic. Unfortunately, all efforts by the OPCW
Technical Secretariat to organize the next round of
consultations between the DAT and the Syrian National
Authority continue to be unsuccessful.
2/13

08/05/2023

As Council members were previously informed, the
OPCW Technical Secretariat has provided the Syrian
Arab Republic with the list of pending declarations
and other documents requested by the DAT since 2019
that could assist in resolving the current 20 outstanding
issues. In May 2022, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
proposed to address the declaration-related issues
through exchange of correspondence. I have been
advised that, although the Syrian Arab Republic agreed
to that proposal, the OPCW Technical Secretariat has
still not yet received from the Syrian Arab Republic
any declarations or other documents requested. That
includes the complete declaration of activities at the
Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) and
the declaration of quantities of nerve agents produced
at one chemical weapons production facility that was
declared by the Syrian Arab Republic as never having
been used to produce chemical weapons.
Owing to this situation, and in a further attempt to
implement its mandate, the OPCW Technical Secretariat
proposed to deploy a reduced team comprised of several
members of the DAT to the Syrian Arab Republic to
conduct limited in-country activities. The first such
deployment took place from 17 to 22 January, and the
second took place from 12 to 19 April. The outcome of
the first deployment was reported to the States parties
to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) in March,
and the outcomes of the second deployment will be
reported to the OPCW Executive Council in due course.
The OPCW Technical Secretariat remains fully
committed to implementing its mandate aimed at
verifying the fulfilment of the Syrian Arab Republic’s
declaration obligations under the Convention, decisions
by OPCW policymaking organs and resolution 2118
(2013). However, as has been previously emphasized,
full cooperation by the Syrian Arab Republic with the
OPCW Technical Secretariat is essential to closing
all outstanding issues. Considering the identified
gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that remain
unresolved, at this time the OPCW Technical
Secretariat assesses that the declaration submitted by
the Syrian Arab Republic still cannot be considered
accurate and complete in accordance with the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
With regard to the inspections of the Barzah and
Jamrayah facilities of the SSRC, I have been advised
that the OPCW Technical Secretariat continues to plan
the next round of inspections, to be held in 2023. I regret
to inform the Council that the Syrian Arab Republic
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

has yet to provide sufficient technical information or
explanations that would enable the OPCW Technical
Secretariat to close the issue related to the detection
of a Schedule 2 chemical at the Barzah facilities of the
SSRC in November 2018.
Regarding the unauthorized movement of the two
cylinders related to the chemical weapons incident
that took place in Douma on 7 April 2018, in which
those cylinders were allegedly destroyed in an attack
on a chemical weapons production facility, the OPCW
Technical Secretariat is still awaiting information
related to the unauthorized movement of those
cylinders. I again call upon the Syrian Arab Republic
to respond with urgency to all of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat’s requests.
With regard to the invitation extended by the
OPCW Director-General to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic for
an in-person meeting, I note that the OPCW Technical
Secretariat stands ready to engage further on an agreed
agenda for the meeting through the agreed channel.
It is my understanding that the United Nations
Office for Project Services (UNOPS) continues to
provide support to the OPCW mission in Syria, in
accordance with the Tripartite Agreement concluded
between the OPCW, UNOPS and the Syrian Arab
Republic. The current extension of that agreement
remains in force until and including 30 June.
I have been advised that the OPCW Fact-Finding
Mission (FFM) continues to study all available
information related to allegations of the use of chemical
weapons in the Syrian Arab Republic. In that context,
I understand that the FFM is currently preparing
upcoming deployments and will report to the Executive
Council on the results of its work in due course. The
Investigation and Identification Team also continues
its investigations into incidents in which the FFM has
determined that chemical weapons were used or likely
used in the Syrian Arab Republic and will issue further
reports in due course.
In conclusion, I would like to call the attention
of the Council to the fifth Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
which will take place next week. The Conference is
an important opportunity for States parties to renew
and strengthen their commitments to the CWC and the
norm against the use of chemical weapons. As I have
previously urged the Council, we must make every effort

S/PV.9317

to ensure the continued resilience of the taboo against
those horrific weapons. The use of chemical weapons
anywhere, by anyone, under any circumstances, is a
grave violation of international law. There can be no
justification for their use. Those responsible for such
attacks must be identified and held accountable for the
sake of the victims and as a deterrent to future chemical
warfare. It is my sincere hope that Council members
will unite on the issue and show leadership, not only
in the Council, but also at the upcoming Review
Conference, in upholding the hard-won gains of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and demonstrating that
impunity for the use of chemical weapons will not be
tolerated. The United Nations Office for Disarmament
Affairs stands ready to provide whatever support and
assistance it can.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): As in previous meetings to discuss the Syrian
chemical dossier in past reporting periods, we are
compelled to note that there has been no significant
progress on the ground that would require the attention
of the Security Council. We are meeting today only to
enable a number of Western delegations to repeat the
same hackneyed anti-Syrian talking points, which are
clearly intended for domestic consumption. It goes
without saying that this entire performance seriously
undermines the Council’s effectiveness and credibility.
We are likely to hear once again from our Western
colleagues the unfounded allegations that there has
been no progress on closing the Syrian chemical
weapons dossier, ostensibly owing to Damascus’ lack
of cooperation. They do not shy away from saying
that, despite its biased approach, even the Technical
Secretariat of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) acknowledges, including
in its recent report (see S/2023/297), that Damascus
continues to cooperate with the organization. We
note that the twenty-fifth round of consultations
between Damascus and the Declaration Assessment
Team since the initial declaration has yet to take place
because the Technical Secretariat is not interested in
such a scenario. The Technical Secretariat continues
to find an increasing number of reasons to delay the
consultations so that Western countries can continue

23-129743/13

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

to present the situation as evidence of the Syrian
authorities’ supposed unwillingness to cooperate, all
of which is nothing other than a scene from the West’s
monthly staged performance in this Chamber. The
understudy in this play is none other than Fernando
Arias, Director-General of the OPCW, who has not only
never visited Syria, but also stated his unwillingness to
do so under the contrived and legally unsubstantiated
grounds that Syria’s rights within the organization have
been suspended. In other words, Mr. Arias simply is
unwilling to discharge his duty, while opting to toe the
line of the Western countries.
Given the fact that we have nevertheless met
to play our role in this pointless spectacle, which is
diverting the resources of the Security Council, we
would like to reiterate that we do not acknowledge the
legitimacy of the punitive decision of the Conference
of the States Parties — which was brazenly pushed
through by Western delegations in violation of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the principle of
consensus — or the work or outcomes of the illegitimate
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT), established
in violation of the principle of consensus and article XV
of the CWC. The only thing worth mentioning today is
the Arria Formula meeting that we held on 24 March,
in which we heard new convincing evidence of the
methodology used by both the Fact-Finding Mission and
the IIT in direct violation of the CWC’s principles of
investigation, especially in terms of the principle of the
chain of custody. Of course, our Western colleagues are
deaf and blind when it suits them and contend that such
evidence is Russian and Syrian propaganda. After all,
their only goal is to cover up the Technical Secretariat’s
fabrications and its manipulation of the report on the
staged incident in Douma in 2018. That, of course, is
also part of today’s performance.
Against the backdrop of the trends and
circumstances we have described, we harbour little
hope that, during one of the organization’s major
events — the fifth Review Conference of the States
Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention — to be
held from 15 to 19 May in The Hague, the discussions
will not be politicized. It is unlikely that the collective
West, confident in its impunity, will eschew further
violations of the basic principles of the work of the
organization and the provisions of the Convention
itself. The truth is that the OPCW is rapidly losing its
authority, owing to the efforts of Washington and its
satellites, and its role has been reduced to that of an
4/13

08/05/2023

obedient tool in the hands of the West in its crusade
against Russia and its allies. We are convinced that,
regardless of the Western outrage in The Hague, the
Security Council should not be turned into a platform
for promoting the anti-Syrian narrative of the United
States and its allies. Repeatedly discussing the carbon
-copy reports of the Director-General every month,
especially in his absence, is pointless. We are taking
the floor today only because there was no meeting on
this topic in April, and we abstained from taking the
floor in March (see S/PV.9275). Once again, we call for
a reasonable schedule for discussions on this subject in
the Council — one meeting per quarter on the Syrian
chemical weapons dossier would be more than enough.
Mr. Wood (United States of America): I thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her briefing this morning
and for the steadfast work of the United Nations Office
for Disarmament Affairs and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) on this
important issue.
As we have heard from the High Representative and
seen in numerous reports of the OPCW, the Al-Assad
regime has not met its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention and resolution 2118 (2013).
Specifically, the regime has yet to offer a full accounting
of its chemical weapons and is not cooperating fully nor
being transparent with the OPCW. Full consultations
with the OPCW Declaration Assessment Team remain
necessary because Syria will not fully disclose and
verifiably eliminate its chemical weapons programme.
It has only been through the diligent and thorough
efforts of the Declaration Assessment Team that the
Al-Assad regime has been forced to reveal on seven
separate occasions more and more of its chemical
weapons programme. Those revelations filled in glaring
gaps in Syria’s still woefully inaccurate declaration.
But the regime also continues to thwart the Declaration
Assessment Team, refusing to allow the lead technical
expert to deploy to its territory and preventing full
consultations from taking place for more than two years
now. The Declaration Assessment Team is currently
able to carry out only limited in-country activities,
decidedly undermining the effectiveness of its visits.
Russia’s shameless shielding of Syria’s defiant
behaviour enables the Al-Assad regime and leaves the
Syrian people facing the prospect of further chemical
weapons attacks. Rather than calling for the full
implementation of resolution 2118 (2013), which Russia
originally supported, Russia has chosen to attack
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9317

the credibility and professionalism of the OPCW,
undermining the Charter of the United Nations in
the process.

cooperation of the Syrian National Authority and
its compliance with all aspects of the decision of the
Executive Council of 27 September 2013.

The United States condemns the Al-Assad regime
in the strongest possible terms for its repeated use of
chemical weapons against Syrian civilians, including
in Douma on 7 April 2018, as described in the report
of the OPCW Investigation and Identification Team
(IIT) released in January. We commend the IIT for
its professionalism, rigour and thoroughness in its
investigation and preparation of that report. We
expect that the IIT’s future reports will identify the
perpetrators of other chemical weapons attacks that
occurred in Syria.

We encourage the Syrian Arab Republic to continue
its efforts to fulfil its obligations in line with resolution
2118 (2013) and the Chemical Weapons Convention
(CWC) to help in resolving protracted issues, including
the matter of the detection of a Schedule 2.B.04
chemical at the Barzah facilities in November 2018;
the declaration of all chemical weapons and their
production facilities in the country’s possession and
the organization of the 25th round of consultations
with the DAT. We further urge the focal points of
the Syrian authorities and the DAT alike to expedite
arrangements for the proposed high-level meeting and
reach a decision on the agenda for that meeting, which
would foster the needed momentum for the conclusive
resolution of the outstanding issues and, ultimately,
speed up the process.

We once again call on the Syrian regime to amend
its Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) declarations
to make them accurate and complete, as required by the
CWC, and provide immediate and unfettered access to
OPCW staff, as required under resolution 2118 (2013).
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to
deliver this joint statement on behalf of the three
African members of the Security Council — Gabon,
Mozambique and my own country, Ghana (A3).
We thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing and
welcome the participation in today’s meeting of the
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, the Islamic
Republic of Iran and Türkiye.
We take note of the content of the 115th monthly
report of the Organization for the Prohibition of
Chemical Weapons (OPCW) (see S/2023/297), as
well as the submission of the 113th monthly report
of the Syrian Arab Republic. The A3 reiterates its
commitment to the established norms against the use of
chemical weapons and continues to support all efforts to
eliminate their production, storage or use. To that end,
we acknowledge the report on the limited in-country
activities, conducted by the reduced team deployed
to the Syrian Arab Republic in January, comprising
several members of the Declaration Assessment Team
(DAT), and await the report of the most recent visit
in April.
Notwithstanding the recent developments, the A3
remains concerned about the slow pace of progress
concerning efforts to eliminate the Syrian Arab
Republic’s chemical weapons programme. We maintain
that substantial progress could be made with the full

The use of chemical weapons does not only pose
serious health risks but also presents a grave threat
to international peace and security. The international
community therefore has a responsibility to protect
humankind from those weapons by promoting adherence
to international instruments that prohibit their use by
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
In conclusion, we reaffirm our support for
resolution 2118 (2013) and wish to underscore the need
for a definite closure of the issues pertaining to the
Syrian chemical weapons programme. We therefore
urge all stakeholders to show full commitment to the
resolution of all outstanding issues in order to avoid
lingering doubts related to the production and possible
use of chemical weapons in Syria.
Mr. Phipps (United Kingdom): As always, I
would like to begin by thanking High Representative
Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing. As Mrs. Nakamitsu
said, at next week’s fifth Review Conference of the
States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention,
States parties will take stock of the Convention’s
implementation and set future priorities. They will also
reaffirm the importance of the Convention.
The Convention and wider non-proliferation can
hold only if its rules are upheld, and rule-breakers are
held to account. The Al-Assad regime has repeatedly
breached its obligations under the Convention and
resolution 2118 (2013). There is undeniable and direct
evidence of the Syrian State murdering its own civilians

23-129745/13

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

using chemical weapons on at least nine occasions.
The Council has failed to hold the regime to account
for the use of those abhorrent weapons. That failure is
primarily due to the actions of one permanent member,
which has itself used chemical weapons in recent years,
including in my country in 2018. This is not a show, and
this statement is not groundless.
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) has put exceptional amounts of
resources into trying to help Syria resolve the outstanding
issues regarding its initial declaration. Those issues are
not academic and include the whereabouts of hundreds
of tons of chemical weapons agents. As we heard again
from Mrs. Nakamitsu, access for OPCW staff remains
restricted, and despite worrisome findings by the
Declaration Assessment Team, the denials of Syria and
Russia continue.
We commend the OPCW team’s continued efforts
and underscore that the fundamental obligations that
Syria has as a State party to the Convention must be
upheld. It must give up all its chemical weapons, stop
banned activity and comply in full with the OPCW.
Until Syria has made meaningful progress on those
issues, its chemical weapons programme is an ongoing
threat to international peace and security that the
Council needs to address. We must collectively send
a clear message about our shared commitment to the
ban on chemical weapons, and we need to defend and
uphold the international consensus that those weapons
should never be used.
Mr. Fiallo Karolys (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish):
I thank the High Representative for Disarmament
Affairs, Izumi Nakamitsu, for her briefing. I also
thank the Director-General of the Organization the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) for his most
recent report (see S/2023/297).
That report once again reflects the lack of progress
on the issue of chemical weapons in the Syrian
Arab Republic. Ecuador reiterates its request for the
prompt and diligent submission of the statements and
documents requested by the Declaration Assessment
Team, and for immediate and unrestricted access to
the OPCW Technical Secretariat staff to all sites and
locations under investigation.
We deplore the position taken by Syria to exclude the
lead technical expert from the Declaration Assessment
Team as a precondition for the holding of the 25th round
of consultations, thereby impeding the proper conduct
6/13

08/05/2023

of the consultations. We urge the Syrian authorities
to establish effective and unrestricted cooperation in
fulfilment of their responsibilities under, inter alia, the
Chemical Weapons Convention and relevant Security
Council resolutions, including resolution 2118 (2013).
The Council must have access to the findings of the
activities of the reduced teams that have been deployed
to carry out activities in the country. Ecuador reiterates
its support for the work of the OPCW, as well as for the
integrity, impartiality, objectivity and independence
of its technical teams. We reiterate the importance of
accountability as the best mechanism for deterrence.
Lastly, recalling the preamble of the Convention,
in which States resolved to eliminate weapons of mass
destruction of all kinds, Ecuador is opposed to the
production and stockpiling of chemical weapons and
condemns in the strongest terms the use of chemical
weapons and toxic substances by anyone, against
anyone, anywhere and under any circumstances.
Mr. Sun Zhiqiang (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
thank High Representative Izumi Nakamitsu for her
briefing.
China’s position on chemical weapons-related issues
is consistent and unequivocal. China firmly opposes
the use of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and
under any circumstances and looks forward to a world
without any chemical weapons as soon as possible. We
urge those countries that possess chemical weapons to
destroy them all as soon as possible.
Dialogue and consultations are the only way
to resolve the Syrian chemical weapons issue. The
Syrian Government has made clear remarks on many
occasions that it opposes the use of chemical weapons
and that it is ready to work with the OPCW to resolve
outstanding issues. Recently, despite its domestic
security challenges, the Syrian Government hosted a
small team of members of the Declaration Assessment
Team in order for them to conduct activities in the
country. This is a welcome development.
The international community should consider
Syria’s efforts objectively, recognize its willingness
to cooperate and the outcomes achieved thus far,
and create an enabling environment for dialogue and
cooperation between Syria and the OPCW Technical
Secretariat. We encourage both parties, on the basis
of mutual respect and equal cooperation, to maintain
communication on issues such as the twenty-fifth round
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

of technical consultations and the meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs.
With regard to the fact that the Syrian Government
and the Technical Secretariat have different answers
to certain questions, we maintain that science and
facts should be respected and that an objective and
fair approach should be upheld. Both parties should
continue with thorough discussions and strive to move
in the same direction so as to jointly resolve outstanding
issues as soon as possible.
In conclusion, I wish to reiterate that the Council
should reduce the frequency of its consideration of the
Syrian issue, or consider combining the various tracks
of the dossier. That would enable us to take a holistic
approach to the Syrian issue and make the Council’s
work more efficient.
Mr. Hamamoto (Japan): First, I would like to thank
Under-Secretary-General Nakamitsu for her briefing.
I would like to begin by reiterating Japan’s
principled position on this chemical weapons file: any
use of chemical weapons, anywhere, at any time, by
anyone and under any circumstances is unacceptable,
and those responsible for their use must be held
accountable. For that purpose, we strongly support
the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons
(OPCW) and reaffirm the importance of the ongoing
work of the Fact-Finding Mission and the Investigation
and Identification Team (IIT) in establishing the truth
regarding the alleged instances of chemical weapons
use and identifying the perpetrators. We extend our full
support to their impartial, independent and professional
work, and we welcome the third IIT report on the
Douma incident.
Syria’s chemical weapons use remains a threat to
international peace and security. We maintain deep
concerns regarding the continuing discrepancies, gaps
and inconsistencies in Syria’s initial and subsequent
declarations. We welcome the continued efforts
undertaken by the OPCW and its Technical Secretariat
to address all outstanding issues, including the second
round of limited in-country activities conducted by the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) in Syria. We look
forward to hearing the outcome of the visit during our
next meeting.

S/PV.9317

However, we regret to hear that the recent efforts to
hold the next round of consultations between the DAT
and the Syrian National Authority have unfortunately
been unsuccessful, as previous efforts were. Syria should
take the necessary steps to facilitate the holding of those
consultations and refrain from making further excuses
to impede the entry of the DAT’s lead technical expert
to its territory. We once again urge Syria to comply with
its obligations under the CWC and the relevant Security
Council resolutions and to immediately declare and
completely eliminate its chemical weapons programme.
As highlighted by Under-Secretary-General
Nakamitsu, the fifth Review Conference of the States
Parties to the CWC is scheduled to take place later this
month. We strongly urge all States parties to actively and
constructively participate in that Review Conference
discussion. Now is not the time to diminish the authority
of the CWC or the OPCW. Instead, now is the time for
the Council to stand united and demonstrate our strong
support for their invaluable contributions to the global
efforts towards the elimination of the threat of chemical
weapons use.
Mr. Sénéchal de Goffredo (Brazil): At the outset,
let me state that my delegation welcomes the decision by
the League of Arab States to reinstate Syria as a member
of that organization.
I would like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu
for her briefing today.
Let me begin by reiterating that Brazil considers the
use or threat of use of any weapon of mass destruction
incompatible with international humanitarian law. We
condemn the use of chemical weapons anywhere, by
anyone and under any circumstances. The use of such
weapons poses a threat to international peace and
security and violates the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We have closely studied the most recent report by the
Director-General of the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), dated 26 April (see
S/2023/297). While the report provides us with little new
information, we are nevertheless encouraged by the fact
that the reduced team that visited Syria early this year
delivered its report to OPCW States parties at the end
of last month. That visit and its subsequent report are
important steps in rebuilding confidence between Syria
and the OPCW. We hope that those steps can serve as
a basis for further dialogue on a mutually acceptable
arrangement for the return of the full Declaration
Assessment Team (DAT) to Syria in the near future.

23-129747/13

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

The report on the limited in-country activities
undertaken by the reduced DAT gives us hope that
constructive thinking is still possible on the file. We call
on Syria and the OPCW to build on that experience by
exploring new formats for high-level political dialogue,
as well as for in-country activities by the technical
teams. We believe that this would increase confidence
on both sides. At the same time, closer cooperation is
needed between the OPCW and the United Nations,
since the ultimate instance for the attribution of
responsibility is the Security Council.
In conclusion, cooperation between Syria and the
OPCW and between Syria and the United Nations
remains the best hope for closing the so-called Syrian
file and for preventing and deterring any future use of
those abominable weapons.
Mrs. Jaraud-Darnault (France) (spoke in French):
I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for her briefing.
As we all know, we are here because the Syrian
regime has used weapons of mass destruction against
its own population. Independent investigations by the
United Nations and the Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) have demonstrated that
nine times. Nevertheless, almost a decade after the
adoption of resolution 2118 (2013), the regime has still
not shed light on its stockpiles. We know, however,
that not all of them have been destroyed. The lack of
progress is frustrating, and the responsibility in that
regard lies entirely with the Syrian regime.
It is imperative that the Syrian regime allow OPCW
personnel to deploy to Syria, as per its mandate. The
restrictions that have again been imposed by Syria on
the deployment of the initial Declaration Assessment
Team are unacceptable. Limited deployments of OPCW
teams to Syria, as the one that took place last month, is
not a viable alternative. Syria must stop obstructing the
work of the Technical Secretariat and comply with its
international obligations.
Despite the obstacles it faces, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat continues its investigative work with
tenacity, independence and professionalism. I wish to
once again commend it.
There must be no impunity for war criminals.
The fight against impunity is the foundation of the
effectiveness and credibility of the prohibition regime.
France will continue to work with its partners to
that end.
8/13

08/05/2023

Mr. Spasse (Albania): I thank Mrs. Nakamitsu for
her presentation.
Ten years after the adoption of resolution 2118
(2013), we still have not seen any evidence of Syria
having destroyed its chemical weapons programme.
That is troubling and deplorable.
We commend the work of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) in shedding
light on allegations of chemical weapons use in Syria,
including through the work of the Fact-Finding Mission
and the Investigation and Identification Team (IIT).
Albania welcomes the publication of the third report
of the IIT, which concludes that the Syrian Arab Air
Force used chemical weapons on 7 April 2018 in Douma,
killing 43 people. The report further confirms Syria’s
systematic non-compliance with its obligations under
the Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). This is the ninth instance of the use of chemical
weapons independently attributed to the Syrian regime
by the United Nations and OPCW mechanisms.
The use of chemical weapons constitutes a flagrant
violation of international law, a war crime and a crime
against humanity. We condemn in the strongest terms
the Syrian regime’s repeated use of these atrocious
weapons, in flagrant violation of international
obligations. Those responsible for the use of these
weapons must be brought to justice.
The most recent consultation between the
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and Syria took
place in February 2021. The organization of the twentyfifth round of consultations has still not taken place.
Syria continues to put unreasonable conditions on the
consultations and asks to exclude the main technical
expert from the DAT, contrary to its obligations under
the Convention and resolution 2118 (2013). We regret
this persistent obstruction by the Syrian regime.
Nevertheless, the Technical Secretariat offered to deploy
reduced DAT teams to carry out limited activities in
Syria. We await with interest the conclusions of their
visit in April.
Many important questions regarding Syria’s
chemical-weapons programme remain unanswered.
The two most recent reports of the OPCW Technical
Secretariat confirmed clearly persistent gaps and
discrepancies in the initial Syrian declaration. The
current 20 outstanding questions must have an answer.
Syria must declare the full extent of its chemical-weapons
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

programme and return to full compliance with the
Chemical Weapons Convention and resolution 2118
(2013). We look forward to the meeting between the
OPCW Director-General and the Syrian Minister for
Foreign Affairs. With equal interest, we await the
results of the ninth round of inspections of the Barzah
and Jamrayah facilities, conducted in September 2022.
Finally, we deplore the non-cooperative approach
of the Syrian regime with the OPCW Technical
Secretariat. Syria is playing for time in the hope that
the issue of the use of chemical weapons will fade from
the Council’s agenda. We should not let that happen.
Mr. Camilleri (Malta): I also thank High
Representative Nakamitsu for her informative
briefing today.
On nine occasions, the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) or joint
United Nations-OPCW investigations have concluded
that Syria has used chemical weapons against its own
people — nine instances in which the armed forces of
a State attacked Syrian civilians with weapons of mass
destruction. Such acts are completely indefensible.
Perpetrators cannot and must not go unpunished.
Most recently, the third report of the OPCW
Investigation and Identification Team (IIT) concluded
that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
Syrian Arab Air Force were the perpetrators of the
Douma chemical-weapons attack, which killed 43
people and injured dozens more. It has been made
clear that the methodology used in the findings of the
report was drafted in keeping with the best practices
of international fact-finding bodies and commissions of
investigation, as well as applicable OPCW procedures.
We reiterate our full confidence and support for the
independent, unbiased and expert work of the OPCW
and its Technical Secretariat. They play a vital role in
the global prohibition of chemical weapons and in the
complete elimination of all chemical weapons in Syria.
Time and time again, we see an unfortunate pattern
of Syria’s continued failure to fully cooperate with the
OPCW. Syrian authorities failed to grant access to
the sites of the Douma incident, despite the country’s
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013). The pending declarations
and other documents requested by the Declaration

S/PV.9317

Assessment Team (DAT) since 2019 have not yet
been provided by the Syrian Arab Republic, and the
declaration submitted is still considered inaccurate
and incomplete.
Malta regrets that Syria continues to impose
limitations on the composition of the DAT team to be
deployed, which has prevented the twenty-fifth round
of consultations. The full DAT team should be able
to deploy as soon as possible for that purpose. In the
meantime, Malta looks forward to the outcome of the
DAT’s limited in-country activities conducted in April.
We hope that an agenda for the proposed meeting
between the Director-General and Foreign Minister
Mekdad can be agreed as soon as possible. Malta
strongly encourages the renewed extension of the
tripartite agreement between the OPCW, the United
Nations Office for Project Services and Syria. The
agreement is due to expire soon, on 30 June.
It is only through Syria’s meaningful cooperation
with the OPCW that we can ensure that Syria’s
chemical-weapons programme has been completely and
verifiably eliminated. Syria must provide the necessary
assurances on its chemical weapons programme, in
accordance with the Chemical Weapons Convention.
We reiterate and stress that can be no justification
for the use of these abhorrent weapons. Those who
used them must be held accountable. We once again
underline our full support for the universalization of
the prohibition of chemical weapons.
We must uphold our own decisions, uphold the
norm against chemical weapons and hold Syria to
its obligations under resolution 2118 (2013) and the
Chemical Weapons Convention.
Ms. Shaheen (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): I thank Mrs. Izumi Nakamitsu for her briefing.
Before I touch upon the topic of today’s meeting,
I would like to welcome the decision taken by the
Arab States yesterday to readmit Syria to its seat at
the League of Arab States. That decision was taken
based on our shared belief in the importance of having
an effective Arab role that contributes to resolving the
region’s crises and restoring security and stability to it.
We hope that this step will pave the way for a solution
to the Syrian crisis through a clear Arab approach and
that the Syrian people will finally see a glimpse of hope
after years of war.

23-129749/13

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

In the context of our meeting today, the United
Arab Emirates confirms the following points.
First, engaging in a meaningful dialogue between
the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW) and Syria is necessary for any
tangible progress on this dossier. We stress here the
need to work in the spirit of the principles upon which
the OPCW was founded, in their technical nature.
These include consensus and non-politicization.
Regarding the visit of the OPCW’s reduced team to
Syria last month, we stress the importance of moving
forward with holding comprehensive consultations
between the two parties as soon as possible. We do
not see any reason to not do so. In that context, we
welcome Syria’s proposal to hold a round of high-level
consultations in order to develop a new plan of action to
resolve issues related to the Syrian chemical file.
Secondly, the threat of chemical terrorism remains
an important issue that must be given sufficient
attention, especially while Da’esh continues to launch its
terrorist attacks that pose serious threats to the security
and stability of Syria. We must be vigilant because the
Da’esh organization will not hesitate to use any means
or weapons to achieve its goals and regain control, as it
did before.
Thirdly, there is a need to examine the effectiveness
of the Council’s recurring meetings on the Syrian
chemical file, especially in light of the absence of any
developments that warrant holding a meeting. Instead,
meetings on this issue could be held every three months,
and as needed.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates stresses
once again the importance of making progress on the
chemical-weapons file in Syria. We look forward to
witnessing tangible progress on all tracks related to the
Syrian file in the upcoming period.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Switzerland.
First of all, I would like to thank Mrs. Nakamitsu,
the High Representative for Disarmament Affairs, for
her briefing.
Switzerland welcomes the fact that for the second
time this year, some members of the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) Declaration
Assessment Team were able to visit Syria, from 12 to
10/13

08/05/2023

19 April. Their reduced team conducted limited activities,
including site visits and technical exchanges with the
authorities. We look forward to receiving the report of
the visit. We hope that it will lead to the restoration of
full cooperation between Syria and the OPCW. To that
end, we reiterate that Syria must provide immediate and
unhindered access to OPCW personnel, including the
right to inspect all sites.
Syria’s obstruction of visits by the full Declaration
Assessment Team is a serious breach of the obligations
outlined in resolution 2118 (2013), which was unanimously
adopted by the Security Council. In addition, 20 points in
Syria’s initial statement remain outstanding. Syria must
provide the necessary answers to the OPCW Technical
Secretariat. Switzerland would like to once again reaffirm
its full confidence in the OPCW and all of its teams,
including the Investigation and Identification Team,
whose integrity and professionalism are unquestionable.
We welcome the fifth Review Conference of the
Chemical Weapons Convention, to be convened in The
Hague from 15 to 19 May. It will be an opportunity to
strengthen the role of the Convention in combating the use
and proliferation of those weapons of mass destruction
and in disarmament. The adoption by consensus of a joint
declaration would send a clear message in that direction.
Switzerland condemns the repeated use of chemical
weapons in Syria, as reported by the Fact-Finding Mission
and the Investigation and Identification Team, which has
severely affected civilians, including many children.
The use of chemical weapons is prohibited and in armed
conflict can constitute a war crime. For the sake of our
collective security, it is essential to combat impunity for
such crimes by identifying, prosecuting and punishing
those responsible. In that regard, we welcome the formal
cooperation between the OPCW and the International,
Impartial and Independent Mechanism to Assist in the
Investigation and Prosecution of Persons Responsible
for the Most Serious Crimes under International Law
Committed in the Syrian Arab Republic since March
2011. It is an important step towards implementing
resolution 2118 (2013), as well as ensuring compliance
with relevant international law.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I would like to congratulate you,
Madam President, on assuming the presidency of the
Security Council for the month of May, and I would
also like to thank your predecessor, the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation, for his successful
leadership of the work of the Council in the past month.
At the outset, I want to renew my country’s
condemnation of the use of chemical weapons at any
time, anywhere, by anyone and in any circumstances.
We reiterate our rejection of the false accusations and
lies made about my country in that regard by some
States. I would also like to reaffirm Syria’s full and
transparent cooperation with the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), and its
fulfilment of all its obligations under the Chemical
Weapons Convention (CWC). In 2013, the Syrian
Arab Republic made a strategic decision to accede
to the CWC. We demonstrated our commitment to
implementing it immediately, even before it entered
into force in Syria, by providing detailed information
about our chemical programme and then destroying the
related stockpiles and production facilities in record
time, which is attested to by the relevant reports of the
OPCW. I would like to point to some aspects relating to
the issue under discussion.
First, on 15 March and 15 April, respectively, the
Syrian National Authority submitted its 112th and
113th monthly reports related to the implementation
of the decision of the OPCW Executive Council dated
15 November 2013.
Secondly, with regard to the work of the Declaration
Assessment Team, I would first like to clarify that Syria’s
initial declaration was submitted within a short period
of time, with limited experience, which was why the
Team came to help Syria — with its consent — to make
its initial declaration consistent with the provisions of
the CWC. The Declaration Assessment Team therefore
cannot and should not be considered an inspection
team in any way. A reduced number of members of
the Team visited Syria twice this year, first from 17 to
22 January and subsequently from 12 to 19 April. The
Syrian National Authority provided all the cooperation
and facilitation necessary to ensure the success of
their work. During both visits, several consultations
were also held with the Syrian National Authority,
discussing many aspects related to unresolved issues in
the declaration. We facilitated visits to some sites, the
collection of samples and interviews of witnesses.

S/PV.9317

During both visits, none of the activities carried
out by that team — which, by the way, is the same
Declaration Assessment Team, without just the one
expert that the OPCW Technical Secretariat insists on
sending — differed in any way from all the previous
24 rounds of consultations. That therefore raises the
question as to why the OPCW Technical Secretariat
has so far refused to fully hold the twenty-fifth round
of consultations despite the fact that the reduced
team has carried out all the activities assigned to the
Declaration Assessment Team. Or does it aim only to
provide pretexts for others to falsely accuse Syria of
non-cooperation?
Thirdly, regarding the inspection activities at the
facility of the Scientific Studies and Research Centre,
in March the OPCW inspection team issued its report of
its ninth round of inspections, conducted in September
2022. The report refers to Syria’s cooperation, as
well as the inspection team’s ability to implement the
objectives entrusted to it, and it does not mention any
activities that run counter to the Convention. In that
regard, it is regrettable that neither the most recent
monthly report of the Director-General (see S/2023/297)
nor the briefing delivered today by Mrs. Nakamitsu
referred to the results of the report of that ninth round
or the report of the eighth round before it. That means
that the Technical Secretariat is not addressing those
results when they reflect Syria’s full cooperation with
its teams. Does that not raise a serious question about
the impartiality and balance that should characterize
the Director-General’s reports?
Fourthly, Syria welcomed the holding of highlevel consultations between the Minister for Foreign
Affairs and Expatriates of the Syrian Arab Republic,
the Chairman of the Syrian National Authority and the
Director-General of the OPCW, and earnestly looks
forward to their holding as soon as possible, after an
agreement on the agenda is reached.
Fifthly, although the Syrian Arab Republic has
continuously underscored the need for the Fact-Finding
Mission to reform its working methods, address its
serious defects and produce professional and impartial
reports, it has continued to cooperate with that Mission,
has received its teams and has provided it with all
possible forms of facilitation to make its mission a
success. Syria continues to wait for the Fact-Finding
Mission to issue its reports on the incidents on which
Syria has reported.

23-1297411/13

S/PV.9317

The situation in the Middle East

In conclusion, I would like to point out that the
Chemical Weapons Convention, like other international
conventions, was drafted on the basis of the delicate
balance between the rights and obligations of the States
parties. Therefore, certain countries’ claim that Syria is
in non-compliance with the CWC at a time when they
have worked to deprive Syria of its rights and privileges
as a State party to the Convention runs counter to the
spirit of the balance weighing the rights and obligations
enshrined in the Convention, in addition to the biased
and unprofessional way in which the Technical
Secretariat is handling the Syria dossier by focusing on
obligations and ignoring rights. My country continues
to work openly with the OPCW, despite the Technical
Secretariat’s departure from the technical and unbiased
foundation established by the CWC. The responsibility
for correcting that departure lies with the States parties
to the Convention, so that the Technical Secretariat can
correct its course and revert to being an impartial tool
for the implementation of the CWC.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the Islamic Republic
of Iran.
Mr. Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Switzerland on its
first presidency of the Security Council. I would also
like to thank Russia for its successful work as President
of the Council for the month of April. We welcome the
presence of Mrs. Nakamitsu at this briefing.
As the main victim of chemical weapons, the
Islamic Republic of Iran strongly condemns the use
of chemical weapons by anyone, anywhere and under
any circumstances. The use of chemical weapons is a
serious violation of international law and a crime against
humanity. It constitutes a threat to international peace
and security. Our people will never forget the role that
some Western countries played in assisting the Saddam
regime in the systematic use of chemical weapons
against the Iranian people during the war Iraq imposed
on Iran. Some Western countries either remained silent
or were complicit in the commission of such atrocities.
Because of their harmful actions and double standards,
the Security Council was unable to carry out its duties,
based on the Charter of the United Nations, to take
effective action to hold the perpetrators accountable
for such atrocious crimes. It is disturbing to see such
double standards and detrimental practices continue
to persist, as evidenced by the politicization of the
Chemical Weapons Convention and the Organization
12/13

08/05/2023

for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW)
for short-sighted political gain. Such an approach not
only risks creating divisions among Member States but
also undermines the credibility and legitimacy of the
disarmament machinery.
The Syrian Arab Republic remains committed to
upholding its obligations under the Chemical Weapons
Convention. In line with that commitment, the Syrian
Government has continued its constructive cooperation
with the OPCW. Syria has submitted its monthly
reports to the OPCW Director-General, outlining its
activities related to the destruction of chemical weapons
and their production facilities. Moreover, a reduced
Declaration Assessment Team visited Syria twice, once
in January and once again in April, during which time
the Syrian National Authority provided the necessary
facilitation to ensure the success of the work of the
Team. Furthermore, consultations took place between
the two sides, and many aspects related to some of
the outstanding issues were discussed, facilitating
visits to sites, the collection of samples and interviews
of witnesses.
The use of chemical weapons by terrorist
organizations poses a grave threat, about which
the Syrian Arab Republic has repeatedly expressed
its concern. Such a threat should not be ignored or
underestimated and calls for condemnation, as well as
an immediate response to prevent such weapons from
falling into terrorists’ hands.
We support constructive dialogue between Syria
and the OPCW at the highest level, within a specific
time frame to resolve outstanding issues and finally
close the file. However, any investigation must be
impartial, professional, credible and objective and must
fully comply with the Convention’s requirements and
procedures. Furthermore, it is crucial that the OPCW
remain a neutral and objective international body,
guided solely by scientific and technical considerations
in its efforts to prevent the use of chemical weapons
and promote the goals of the Convention. We call
on all Member States to uphold the principles of the
Convention and work together to ensure the impartiality,
professionalism and integrity of the OPCW.
Lastly, despite the absence of new developments,
continuing to convene monthly meetings on the
Syrian chemical file, at which some members repeat
previous claims against the Syrian Arab Republic, is
not constructive. Using a political approach and double
23-12974

08/05/2023

The situation in the Middle East

standards on this file can only jeopardize the process
of addressing unresolved issues and will only serve
to detract from the technical nature of the discussion
at hand.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We congratulate Switzerland
on its first presidency of the Security Council. We would
also like to thank High Representative Nakamitsu for
her briefing.
Syria became a State party to the Chemical Weapons
Convention in 2013. Like every other State party, the
Syrian regime has the following obligations under the
Convention, as well as under resolution 2118 (2013).
First, it must never, under any circumstances,
develop, produce, transfer or use chemical weapons.
The reports of the investigative bodies mandated
by the United Nations and the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), however,
have established the Syrian regime’s responsibility in
nine chemical weapons attacks in Syria, both before
and after the date on which the regime became a State
party to the Convention.
Secondly, it must fully cooperate with OPCW
and provide assistance to its Technical Secretariat.
The 115th monthly report of the OPCW DirectorGeneral and the briefing by the High Representative
this morning show that it has not been possible to hold
the next round of consultations between the OPCW
Declaration Assessment Team (DAT) and the Syrian
National Authority for more than two years, owing to,
inter alia, the regime’s objection to the composition of
the DAT delegation.

S/PV.9317

Thirdly, it must submit timely, accurate and
complete declarations related to the chemical weapons
and chemical weapons facilities on its territory. In the
most recent monthly report of the Director-General
(see S/2023/297), we see once again that pending
declarations and other documents requested by the
Declaration Assessment Team since 2019 have not been
submitted by the regime, which has also yet to provide
sufficient technical information or explanations that
would enable the Technical Secretariat to close the
issue related to the detection of a schedule 2 chemical
at the Barzah facilities. Neither has the Technical
Secretariat received a response to its inquiries
regarding the unauthorized movement of two cylinders
related to the 2018 Douma attack. As a result of
identified gaps, inconsistencies and discrepancies that
remain unresolved, the OPCW still cannot consider
the declaration submitted by the regime accurate and
complete. We call on the Syrian regime to fulfil its
obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention
and resolution 2118 (2013).
The use of chemical weapons anywhere constitutes
a threat to international peace and security. It is a grave
violation of international law and unacceptable in any
circumstances. We strongly condemn the repeated use
of chemical weapons in Syria. We will continue to
support the efforts of the United Nations and the OPCW
to ensure accountability for those grave violations.
Ending impunity and holding perpetrators to account is
indispensable to achieving lasting peace in Syria.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

23-1297413/13
