S/2022/38

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
24 January 2022
Original: English

Letter dated 20 January 2022 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and the
Permanent Representatives of the members of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the 8949th meeting of the Security Council
convened on 18 January 2022 under the agenda item “Women and peace and
security — Protecting participation: addressing violence targeting women in peace
and security processes”. The interventions of the in-person participants will be
published as an official record of the Security Council (S/PV.8949).
In accordance with the understanding reached among Council members for
the 8949th meeting, the following delegations submitted written statements, copies
of which are enclosed: Colombia, Guatemala, Lebanon, Myanmar, the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, Peru, Qatar, the Republic of Korea, South Africa and Ukraine.
These statements will be issued as an official document of the Security Council
in accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 7 May 2020 from the
President of the Security Council addressed to the Permanent Representatives of
the members of the Security Council (S/2020/372), which was agreed in the light of
the extraordinary circumstances caused by the coronavirus disease pandemic, and
reference to the official document will be made in the official record S/PV.8949.
(Signed) Mona Juul
President of the Security Council

22-00768 (E) 030222 090322

*2200768*

S/2022/38

Annex I
Statement by the Permanent Mission of Colombia to the
United Nations
[Original: Spanish]
We appreciate the convening of this open debate highlighting the importance
of women’s participation in conflict-resolution processes.
Gender equality is one of the key achievements of this Government. The
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) has been achieved by integrating its
guidelines into policies to ensure its comprehensive and ongoing implementation,
in particular the women’s equity policy and the policy of peace with legality. As
a result, the country has a women and peace and security agenda that includes the
gender perspective and women’s involvement in peacebuilding, women’s political
empowerment, a policy to prevent any form of violence against women, the greater
participation of women in the security forces and the key issue of economic
empowerment. A woman with economic autonomy has the possibility of exercising
her rights and, at the same time, represents the most effective means of preventing
violence. We highlight seven actions.
First, 57 per cent of the gender indicators of the framework implementation
plan have been fulfilled or are well advanced in the implementation of the peace with
legality policy. I would highlight that more than 25,000 women have been beneficiaries
of land reform, being 44 per cent of the total. In terms of financial inclusion, more
than 680,000 women have had access to credit, being 36 per cent of the total. And
45 per cent of women ex-combatant beneficiaries of the Final Agreement for Ending
the Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace in Colombia participate in
productive projects that receive technical assistance, financing and support from
the Government.
Second, a year ago, the Congress adopted a reform to the electoral code that
establishes mandatory parity lists and includes a definition of political violence
against women. That is a historic milestone that creates a level playing field for
women’s participation in elected office and recognizes that, by action or omission,
their political rights can be undermined in the electoral process.
Third, a national political training school for women was established. This
Government is convinced of the importance of training women to the highest
standards in order to increase their participation in elected office. The school has
trained nearly 5,000 women throughout the country.
Fourth, for the election of representatives to the House of Representatives in
the 16 special transitional electoral districts for peace for victims for the periods
2022 to 2026 and from 2026 to 2030, specific measures were included for women’s
civil society groups to nominate women candidates. To ensure that right, a validation
procedure was established by the Presidential Council for Women’s Equality and the
National Registrar’s Office.
Fifth, the protection of women social leaders and human rights defenders is
fundamental to strengthening democracy. In December, a public policy on respect
and guarantees for human rights defenders was issued for the first time, which is
particularly significant for women, as it includes guidelines with a gender focus and
definitions of women human rights defenders and leaders. It also incorporates good
practices from the Comprehensive Programme of Guarantees for Women Leaders
and Human Rights Defenders, which has been internationally acknowledged by
organisations such as the Kroc Institute.
2/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Sixth, acknowledging women victims of the conflict, the implementation of
the national plan for comprehensive victim support and reparation was strengthened,
with a differential and gender focus. That 10-year public policy includes 50 specific
commitments to ensuring support and attend to and reparations for women victims
of violence.
Seventh, there is a policy to promote gender equality in the security forces
and prevent violence. Gender units have been set up and improved, and women’s
participation in that area has increased by 38 per cent. A training programme in
cybersecurity and cyberdefence for women is also being implemented given the
strategic nature of that issue in developing a national security policy.
Closing gender gaps to achieve greater participation of women in politics,
implementing effective strategies to guarantee rights and prevent violence against
women social leaders in partnership between the Government and civil society,
recognizing the rights of victims through a gender-based approach, developing
equality programmes to increase women’s participation in the security forces and
promoting more legal economic opportunities are central pillars of the policy to
strengthen peace and security. That is how we are moving forward in Colombia.

22-007683/18

S/2022/38

Annex II

Statement by the Permanent Representative of Guatemala to the
United Nations, Luis Lam Padilla
My delegation thanks Her Excellency Anniken Huitfeldt, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Norway, as well as Ambassador Mona Juul, Permanent Representative,
and the Norwegian team for convening this very relevant open debate. We also
extend our appreciation to the briefers.
Despite the advances in women’s representation in decision-making processes
over the past decade, progress towards achieving gender parity in political and public
life has been slow. The data presented in the Secretary-General’s report (S/2021/827)
shows that women hold just 25.5 per cent of parliamentary seats worldwide, and the
proportion is even lower in conflict and post-conflict countries. Globally, women
constitute 36.3 per cent of local-level elected positions, and 25.9 per cent at the local
level in conflict-affected countries.
Those numbers show the necessity in all countries to rethink internal policies
in terms of the opportunities provided to women to participate as important actors
in all aspects of life. Another relevant point is the protection provided to them in
the areas where they develop their work. All too often, women have been affected
by persecution and violence and their human rights are subject to constant abuses
and violations.
Guatemala supports the above-mentioned Secretary-General’s report, which
states that women and peace and security is one of the overarching priorities of
the Action for Peacekeeping initiative, which includes commitments to the full
participation of women in peace and political processes. As set out in resolution 1325
(2000), the systematic integration of the women and peace and security agenda into
all stages of planning, implementation, analysis and reporting will ensure a greater
representation of women in all peace operations.
Guatemala gives special priority to the participation of women in peacekeeping
operations. According to recent data provided by our Ministry of National Defence,
a total of 300 women have been deployed as staff, military and civilian personnel
in different missions. Women peacekeepers have proven that they can perform
appropriately under the same difficult conditions as men. It is an operational
imperative that our countries recruit and retain female peacekeepers, for they have
made a positive impact in peacekeeping environments, including by supporting the
role of other women in the field and contributing to the protection of women’s rights.
Guatemala further encourages all Member States to strengthen the participation
of women while creating safe and enabling environments for them, especially for their
participation in civil society, including in situations of armed conflict, as mandated
in resolution 2493 (2019). Ensuring an enabling environment, preventing threats and
hate speech, intimidation and attacks, and developing immediate responses when
such attacks do occur is necessary to reach our shared goal of women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in all phases of international peace and security.
Women’s direct participation and influence in peace and security processes,
as well as in decision-making mechanisms, increases the probability that protection
measures will be more gender sensitive. Therefore, it will ensure that needs at the
local level are better reflected, and gender concerns will be adequately included
in prevention mechanisms in post-conflict situations. Their important role remains
crucial, and awareness must be raised in that regard.
Finally, allow me to say that Guatemala is a multicultural, multilingual and
diverse country and the laws instilled in our Constitution allow for equal rights
of men and women. Guatemala reiterates that without meaningful and inclusive
participation of all women societies cannot succeed.

4/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Annex III
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, Amal Mudallali
Allow me at the outset to congratulate Norway on assuming the presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January and for organizing this important
debate on women and peace and security under the theme “Protecting participation:
addressing violence targeting women in peace and security processes”. I also would
like to thank the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Michelle Bachelet, and the
women civil society representatives for their insightful interventions.
I wish to warmly welcome the incoming non-permanent members of the
Security Council — Albania, Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the United Arab Emirates —
and congratulate the outgoing members — Estonia, the Niger, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Tunisia and Viet Nam — on their successful tenure.
I seize this opportunity to commend Norway on its leadership in the United
Nations on the women and peace and security agenda.
Lebanon attaches great value to its continuous cooperation with Norway at
the United Nations, especially on topics pertaining to human rights, women’s rights
and human rights defenders. In that arena, Lebanon is proud to be, for the second
time, the first co-sponsor of the biennial resolution on human rights defenders led by
Norway in the Third Committee. Our co-sponsorship testifies to the importance that
Lebanon attaches to this topic.
We welcome the participation of women civil society briefers in today’s open
debate, and we stress that their participation is crucial to reflect the realities on
the ground.
Unfortunately, as highlighted in the 2021 report of the Assistant SecretaryGeneral for Human Rights, Ilze Brands Kehris, on cooperation with the United Nations,
its representatives and mechanisms in the field of human rights (A/HRC/48/28), the
trend of reprisals against women victims and human rights defenders because of their
cooperation with the United Nations has continued unabated. We need to continue
providing our civil society with an open, inclusive and safe space for interaction
without fear of threats, intimidation or reprisals.
Women and girls are traditionally portrayed as victims of conflicts. However,
they should be seen as active agents of change in peacebuilding and peacekeeping,
as part of civil society, as human rights defenders and as journalists.
Still in 2022, violence against women continues unabated. According to
the United Nations, it is estimated that one in three women experiences sexual or
physical violence in her lifetime.
For women activists, leaders, journalists and human rights defenders, the odds
are worse. This was demonstrated in the 2021 report of the Secretary-General on
women and peace and security, in which he stressed that: “Across regions, violence
has been used to silence women leaders and prevent them from running for office
and carrying out their duties in any position they hold” (S/2021/827, para. 56).
Across the globe, women who dare to speak up are silenced, stigmatized,
harassed, attacked, marginalized and sometimes even killed. Perhaps the most
flagrant example is Afghanistan, where women live in “a climate of constant fear”
as the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights defenders,
Mary Lawlor, describes it, adding that threats against women include beatings,
arrests, enforced disappearances and killings.
22-007685/18

S/2022/38

We reiterate the call of the Security Council in paragraph 6 of resolution 2493
(2019), in which it
“[s]trongly encourages Member States to create safe and enabling environments
for civil society, including… community women leaders, women peacebuilders,
political actors, and those who protect and promote human rights, to carry out
their work independently and without undue interference …, and to address
threats, harassment, violence and hate speech against them”.
For my country, Lebanon, this year is an important one in terms of women’s
participation in political life. Today, as we look forward to the upcoming parliamentary
elections in May, the meaningful participation of women, especially young women,
as both candidates and voters, is essential to ensuring that the elections will be more
inclusive and representative. Their active participation today is crucial, especially
given that Lebanese women have been granted the right to vote and run for elections
since 1952. Their increased presence in parliament will contribute to shaping a more
equitable and inclusive society.
Within the framework of our national action plan on women and peace and
security, we strongly believe that the full, meaningful and equal political participation
of women is an essential requirement for gender equality and for an inclusive, healthy
and functioning democracy. Along these lines, we welcome the call of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Coordinator for Lebanon, Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, for
women and youth to step forward in the registration process for candidates.
More than 20 years after the adoption of the landmark resolution 1325 (2001),
on women and peace and security, we are still witnessing a backlash against women
activists, women journalists, women human rights defenders, women peacebuilders,
women leaders and other women civil society actors. Today, we must act to protect
all women, including those at the heart of the women and peace and security agenda,
and to ensure that they can continue their work free of violence, threats, reprisals,
harassment and abuse.
As the 2021 Nobel Peace Prize laureate journalist Maria Ressa reminded us
in her acceptance speech: “Now it’s time to build, to create the world we want…We
have to make it happen. Please, let’s hold the line, together.”

6/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Annex IV
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Myanmar to the
United Nations, Kyaw Moe Tun
I wish to thank the presidency of Norway for organizing the open debate on
this crucial topic. I also thank the briefers for their statements.
Two decades after the Security Council’s adoption of resolution 1325 (2000),
on women and peace and security, the realization of the vision of the women and
peace and security agenda is far from adequate, even though there have been some
improvements. Women are still very much globally underrepresented in peace
processes, Governments and public administrations. Violence targeting women is
still pervasive. The coronavirus disease created a shadow pandemic of domestic
violence and further exacerbated the challenges. Gender-based violence against
women and children are mounting, particularly in conflict situations. We are of
the view that the international legal framework fails to sufficiently protect women
and girls, as well as civilians, mainly because those who are supposed to abide by
international laws are brazenly violating them with near total impunity.
Advancing the meaningful inclusion and participation of women in peace and
security processes will be possible only when their personal security and human
rights are protected in the first place. Women peacebuilders, civil society and
community leaders, and human rights defenders must be able to raise their voices and
concerns without any fear of intimidation and violent reprisals. Their perspectives,
input and experiences need to be given due consideration in conflict prevention,
resolution and peacebuilding processes. Structural capacity and cultural barriers
that undermine their representation at the decision-making level must be addressed
in order to harness their full potential in building peaceful societies.
In Myanmar, after the military perpetrated the illegal coup on 1 February
2021 by detaining democratically elected civilian Government leaders, women were
on the front lines of daily demonstrations against the coup, despite imminent risks
of deadly brutalities. They are still the leading figures of widespread opposition to
the military rule. Women and girls in Myanmar —including teachers, nurses, civil
servants, factory workers, human rights defenders and students — were attacked,
detained, tortured and sexually abused by the security forces for their participation
in peaceful protests and the civil disobedience movement.
Since the military coup, the rule of law has been effectively diminished, as
evidently shown by the recent sham convictions of elected civilian Government
leaders. Access to justice for women and girls and effective remedies for their
suffering are now practically non-existent. For instance, a female journalist who
was seriously injured when a military vehicle was intentionally rammed into the
protesters, on 5 December 2021 in Yangon, was not allowed to meet with her lawyer
until yesterday. As military air strikes and disproportionate and indiscriminate
attacks, including the burning of houses and massacres, have displaced hundreds
of thousands of civilians across the country, displaced women, girls and children,
especially in ethnic areas, have been widely affected. They are at greater risk of all
forms of violence by the unaccountable military, which employs sexual violence as
a tactic of war, as documented by the United Nations.
Moreover, intense and sustained armed violence, including air strikes by the
State Administration Council, is now occurring in numerous locations in Kayin
state, Kayah state, Chin state, Magway region and Saigaing region, triggering the
displacement of thousands of civilians. Even in this difficult situation, the National
Unity Government is trying its best to provide necessary assistance to people in
need, including women and girls in conflict areas.
22-007687/18

S/2022/38

In its resolution 1325 (2000) and subsequent resolutions on women and peace
and security, the Security Council emphasized the responsibility of all States to
end impunity and prosecute those responsible for atrocity crimes, including those
relating to sexual and other violence against women and girls. The Council also
expressed its readiness to take appropriate steps to address widespread or systematic
sexual violence in conflict situations. We have learned with satisfaction that when
the Security Council has employed its tools to ensure accountability for situations of
atrocity crimes, it has contributed to the long-term improvement of those situations.
We believe that addressing violence against women needs to start with ending
impunity and ensuring accountability and justice for past and present atrocity
crimes, especially sexual and gender-based ones.
In Myanmar, the perpetrators of massacres, rape and other forms of sexual
violence in conflict areas remain unaccountable. As the domestic justice system
has collapsed, a united response from the Security Council is urgently needed to
prevent further military atrocities against civilians, women and girls in Myanmar.
As such, on 17 July 2021, the National Unity Government made a declaration, under
article 12 (3) of the Rome Statute to the International Criminal Court, accepting the
jurisdiction of the court with a view to bringing the perpetrators to justice. There
is no protection of women’s participation when they are under constant threat and
when they are being violently attacked, arbitrarily detained and sexually abused in
detention just for exercising their fundamental rights. Ending impunity and ensuring
the rule of law will certainly help protect the participation of women in nationbuilding and the peace process, as well as in the transitional justice system.
In conclusion, we look to the Security Council to live up to its expressed
determination to address violence targeting women. At the same time, we also look
forward to the recommendations of the Secretary-General in his next report regarding
better protection of women, including appropriate measures that need to be taken to
ensure justice for them and accountability for the perpetrators of systematic and
widespread violence in situations such as that in Myanmar.
Accordingly, the people of Myanmar wish to witness effective, timely action
from the Security Council to protect people, including women and girls, from the
atrocities and heinous crimes committed by the Myanmar military.

8/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Annex V
Statement by the NATO Secretary General’s Special Representative
for Women, Peace and Security, Irene Fellin
I thank you, Madam President, for the opportunity to address the Security
Council on the occasion of this open debate on protecting the participation of women
in peace and security processes. The women and peace and security agenda remains
essential to all efforts to safeguard freedom and security — and therefore a crucial
aspect of all that NATO does. Our commitment to gender equality — shared by all
NATO allies and so many of our partners — is built on principle and must be realized
in practice. Participation is one of the pillars of the women and peace and security
agenda for good reason — we cannot expect sustainable peace and security if more
than half of our people are not involved. Women’s participation is paramount. And
when it comes to ensuring that women are able to contribute to peace and security,
we need not only for the principle to be in place — legally ensuring that women are
permitted to participate — but also to ensure that their participation is physically
possible and does not entail undue risks to them and their families.
We know that women are disproportionately affected by violence in situations
of conflict and instability. We are actively working to reduce the threats women
face in these contexts — this is why NATO has adopted policies on conflict-related
sexual violence, as well as sexual exploitation and abuse. But we also know that
women who seek to participate in political processes or contribute to peace and
security processes often face targeted violence. And we know that there are practical
ways of addressing this, including as part of the training we provide in support of our
partners. By recognizing the risks that women face, security providers can take steps
to ensure the immediate protections needed, for example during electoral processes.
We also need to keep in mind that the kinds of violence that impede women’s
participation in peace and security are not limited to physical violence and
intimidation, but are also rampant in cyberspace. Women are far more likely to be
the targets of online bullying.
In order to protect women’s participation, therefore, we need to understand the
risks women face and the value that their contributions adds to peace and security.
We can also take steps to address the underlying impediments to gender equality
through communications and education efforts. This makes an important difference
in not only enabling participation in the moment, but also in shifting momentum
over time. And for that reason, helping our partners build capacity, improving
the education and training we provide internally and to partners, and enhancing
communication around gender equality are all important elements in NATO’s new
action plan on women and peace and security.
Women are essential to sustainable peace and security, and we all have a
role to play in ensuring that they are able to participate fully in these processes
and in all the institutions on which our societies are built. NATO is committed to
working as part of the international community — with our allies and partners, with
the United Nations and with civil society — to ensure that women’s participation
in peace and security is protected and that we continue to move towards a more
gender-equal world.

22-007689/18

S/2022/38

`Annex VI
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Peru to the
United Nations, José Manuel Rodríguez Cuadros
[Original: Spanish]
At the outset, I would like to thank the Norwegian presidency of the
Security Council for the invitation, and especially Minister for Foreign Affairs
Anniken Huitfeldt for having taken the initiative to convene this meeting on the
theme “Protecting participation: addressing violence targeting women in peace and
security processes”, as such violence is a threat to the maintenance of peace and
every effort must be made to ensure the protection and full participation of women
in these processes.
Peru prioritizes the gender equality and women’s empowerment agenda
and the protection and defence of women’s rights as central elements of its
Government policy. Within this framework, we are committed to the United Nations
women and peace and security agenda, which includes women’s empowerment,
non-discrimination and combating violence against women, the unequal assignment
of roles and functions, and discriminatory sociocultural patterns.
For gender equality to be achieved, women must be able to participate fully
and meaningfully in the various decision-making bodies and processes at all levels
in our societies, both in the structure of the State and in the private sector, and
especially in all aspects related to peace, international security and the processes of
transition to sustainable development in areas that have previously been in conflict.
In particular, I reaffirm Peru’s ongoing commitment to complying with the
provisions of resolution 1325 (2000), of October 2000, which is a fundamental
milestone in that it recognizes women as relevant actors on an equal footing in
building international peace and security, in an environment that allows them to fully
exercise their rights and freedoms, without exclusion or discrimination of any kind.
In this regard, I endorse the Secretary-General’s proposals in his most recent
report on women and peace and security (S/2021/827), which assesses emerging
trends and issues, such as advancing gender equality and the meaningful participation
of women in peace processes and political transitions; advancing gender-responsive
peacekeeping and peace operations by promoting the participation and leadership
of women in their communities; protecting and promoting the human rights
and leadership of women in conflict settings and in the context of humanitarian
emergencies; increasing women’s participation in political life; their involvement
in economic recovery processes and access to resources in pandemic and conflict
settings; their participation in initiatives to ensure justice, whether as survivors,
activists or professionals; their integration into the agenda against violent extremism
and terrorism; and increasing their role in actions related to the environment and
climate change.
With regard to the protection and promotion of women’s human rights in
conflict settings, according to the aforementioned report of the Secretary-General,
I note with deep concern that in 2020 there were 2,500 cases of conflict-related
sexual violence across 18 countries and 35 cases of killings of women human rights
defenders, journalists and trade unionists in seven conflict-affected countries,
according to information from the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights. As an example, the report states that,

10/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

“In the Central African Republic, five times the incidents of conflict-related
sexual violence were recorded in the first quarter of 2021 than in the last
quarter of 2020.” (S/2021/827, para. 37)
The Government of Peru fully supports the actions being taken by the
Department of Peace Operations, in accordance with the Action for Peacekeeping
initiative and the women and peace and security agenda, to implement the uniformed
gender parity strategy 2018-2028 in all operations, which involves providing clear
and updated information on mechanisms to report and address cases of sexual
harassment; relevant awareness and guidance in missions; the establishment of focal
points to provide advice on women’s specific concerns and facilitate the creation
of networks of uniformed women in each mission; the introduction of mentoring
programmes by female officers; the assignment of at least two female officers at
mission team sites; and the improvement of housing conditions at sites to meet
women’s needs.
The importance of increasing the participation of women in peace operations
is clear, as their greater ability to connect with vulnerable populations and their
influence on the overall conduct of uniformed mission personnel have proven to be
highly effective in fulfilling mandates. However, we are aware that the objectives
of such an increase are undermined when acts of violence and intimidation continue
to be committed against women in places where our main objective should be to
achieve an orderly transition from conflict to peace.
Peru has reached 12.5 per cent female representation in its overall participation,
with 28.57 per cent of mission experts and 10.29 per cent of female participation in
military contingents — both above the United Nations targets of 18 per cent and
8 per cent respectively — and with 29 women assigned, out of a total of 232 Peruvian
military personnel, and deployed in the Central African Republic, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, South Sudan, Abyei and Lebanon, as of November 2021.
Likewise, in order to achieve an increase in the participation of women military
and/or police personnel, specific projects are under way aimed at ensuring a gradual
increase in the number of women in Peruvian contingents, taking into account the
need for measures necessary to ensure their protection.
Finally, I wish to emphasize Peru’s commitment to working jointly to
rigorously and transparently investigate cases of sexual violence and violations of
women’s rights perpetrated in a context of organized crime and terrorism in those
areas where peacekeeping missions operate. That means that trials must effectively
sanction those responsible. In parallel, professional support must be provided that
facilitates the rehabilitation and reintegration into society of the women concerned,
within the framework of strict respect for human rights and the rule of law.

22-0076811/18

S/2022/38

Annex VII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Qatar to the
United Nations, Alya Ahmed Saif Al-Thani
[Original: Arabic]
On behalf of Qatar, I wish to congratulate Norway on its assumption of the
Presidency of the Security Council this month. We commend you on steering the
work of the Council in an exemplary manner. We also welcome Her Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Norway, who is with us this morning. In addition,
I would like to congratulate the new members of the Security Council, Albania,
Brazil, Gabon, Ghana and the United Arab Emirates. I wish also to thank Ms.
Michelle Bachelet, the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, and
the briefers for their valuable contributions.
Qatar believes that the full participation of women in the political, economic
and social fields is vital, as evidenced by the country’s domestic and international
policies. As an active global leader in the peaceful settlement of conflicts and
disputes, Qatar maintains that the participation of women in peacemaking,
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and sustaining peace is crucial and a prerequisite for
the success of those endeavours. Not only is it important for women to participate
in peace processes, but preserving the rights of women and girls and promoting the
participation of women in society must be integral to the processes themselves.
On 20 January 2022, Qatar, in cooperation with Finland, Colombia and
a number of United Nations bodies and civil society organizations, will organize
the High-Level Global Conference on Comprehensive Peace Paths for Youth. The
Conference, which will be held virtually, will focus on an array of topics related to
the participation of young women in peace processes, thereby contributing to efforts
to promote broad participation by women in peacemaking.
In support of the peace process and peace in Afghanistan, Qatar facilitated the
participation of women in the peace talks hosted in Doha, devoting special attention
to preserving the gains achieved by the Afghan people, particularly women. Since
last August, Qatar has focused its efforts on supporting the rights of women and
girls and drawing international attention to the rights and voices of Afghan women,
in coordination with such international partners as the Group of Friends of Women
in Afghanistan. Qatar has led the way in helping to evacuate Afghan nationals and
others from Afghanistan, hosting thousands of evacuees in Doha, with a particular
focus on evacuating women and girls at risk. In addition, it has worked actively
to ensure that educational facilities in Afghanistan continue to operate and that
girls in the country continue to receive an education, and facilitated United Nations
humanitarian activities in Afghanistan aimed at improving the humanitarian
situation of Afghans, and that of Afghan women in particular.
Promoting the participation of women in peace processes and clearing a path
for them to do so will only be possible in a safe environment that is conducive to
women’s participation. It will not be possible to create such an environment as long
as women who participate in peace operations are being killed and subjected to
violence. Regrettably, such violations, which constitute some of the most serious
deprivations of women’s rights, continue to occur in many conflict situations and are
on the rise according to the most recent report of the Secretary-General on women
and peace and security (S/2021/827). Those grave violations must be condemned
in all their forms, wherever they occur under any pretext. The United Nations and
the international community must address those violations and work to combat and
prevent them.
12/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

In closing, Qatar will continue to partner with other States and international
organizations to advance the rights of women, protect the security of women and
promote their participation in all areas, particularly in peace and security processes.
The participation of women is a crucial factor in the success of those processes and
is, therefore, in the interest of all.

22-0076813/18

S/2022/38

Annex VIII
Statement by the Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Korea to the United Nations, Cho Hyun
The Republic of Korea aligns itself with the statement delivered by Canada
on behalf of the Group of Friends of Women, Peace and Security, as well as the joint
statement delivered by the representative of Switzerland on behalf of the Human
Rights/Conflict Prevention Caucus (see S/PV.8949). My delegation is pleased to
deliver its statement in our national capacity.
The Security Council has been highlighting the importance of the full, equal
and meaningful participation of women in all aspects of peace and security since
it adopted resolution 1325 (2000). To achieve that goal, it is imperative that women
in peace processes be protected from reprisals, intimidation and violence of any
sort, and be free from fear. Unfortunately, women peacebuilders and human rights
defenders have been repeatedly targeted by violence in many different parts of the
world, from Afghanistan to Myanmar.
That is why today’s open debate could not be more relevant. My delegation
would like to commend Norway for having convened this timely discussion on such
a crucial issue. Against that backdrop, let me highlight three points.
First, we must fully implement resolution 2493 (2019), which encouraged
Member States to create a safe and enabling environment for women peacebuilders,
human rights defenders and civil society, and to accelerate our efforts. It is vital that
all forms of violence against such women be addressed and prevented and that there
be accountability for perpetrators.
Secondly, we strongly condemn reprisals of all kinds against and intimidation
of women briefers. It is our responsibility to make sure that women briefers can
participate in various United Nations meetings without fear of attacks or threats.
It is important that women peacebuilders and civil-society members be heard more
often at the United Nations, particularly in the Security Council. My delegation
commends Norway for its attempts to expand civil-society engagement as President
of the Security Council.
Last but not least, peacekeeping operations can play a positive role in
protecting and promoting women’s participation in peace and security processes.
In that vein, my delegation highlights the role of gender advisers in peacekeeping
missions. As host of the 2021 Seoul United Nations Peacekeeping Ministerial, we
emphasized the need to advance the women and peace and security agenda, including
by strengthening the role of women in peacekeeping. We were also delighted to
see 23 Member States pledge, at the Ministerial, to increase the number of women
peacekeepers. My Government will continue to expand our efforts in that regard and
will also contribute to the Elsie Initiative Fund.
The Republic of Korea has always been a staunch advocate of the women and
peace and security agenda. Last year, it established the third national action plan to
implement resolution 1325 (2000) and held the third international conference as part
of its Action with Women and Peace initiative. It was particularly significant that
the third conference shed light on the role of women as active peacebuilding agents.
As a candidate for a non-permanent membership on the Security Council for the
term 2024-2025, we will continue to spare no effort in achieving the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women in peace processes while ensuring a safe and
enabling environment.

14/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Annex IX
Statement by the Chargé d’affaires of South Africa to the
United Nations, Xolisa Mabhongo
Allow me to begin by congratulating you, Madam President, on your
presidency of the Security Council for the month of January and also for having
convened this important debate related to the women and peace and security agenda.
I would like to thank the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
Michelle Bachelet, and the civil-society briefers for their statements. Additionally,
I would like to thank Ms. Anniken Huitfeldt, the Norwegian Minister for Foreign
Affairs, for her attendance and remarks during this important debate.
The importance of women’s participation in peace processes, conflict
prevention and peacebuilding is no longer a question but a necessity. Investing in
the participation of local women in peacebuilding and peacekeeping settings can
help address the barriers to women’s participation in such processes. Therefore,
addressing the violence, intimidation and reprisals against women in peace processes
is also crucial, which requires us to step up our efforts in that regard.
The protection of women peacebuilders, gender activists and human rights
defenders in all conflict situations is imperative, both in finding solutions to ending
violence and in ensuring a successful peace process.
In line with resolution 2493 (2019), which was adopted during South Africa’s
presidency of the Security Council, we continue to urge Member States and other
relevant stakeholders to create safe and enabling environments for civil society,
community women leaders and women peacebuilders and human rights defenders to
carry out their work in advancing the women and peace and security agenda without
threats or physical harm.
It is imperative that the protection of women in both armed and postconflict situations remains an area that requires enhanced efforts from all relevant
stakeholders.
The intimidation of women activists has, unfortunately, long been a feature
affecting the participation of women in the political and peacebuilding environments.
It is concerning to witness that in modern times, with the positive advances in
technology and connectivity and especially our reliance on virtual platforms during
the global coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, that intimidation and bullying
has moved into the cybersphere.
In May 2021, the President of South Africa signed the cybercrimes bill into
law, which will bring South Africa’s cybersecurity laws in line with international
standards. The act criminalizes a wide variety of cybercrimes, including crimes
specifically associated with cyberbullying, and is aimed at curbing cyberbullying
where there are direct consequences linked to sending electronic messages or
social media posts that incite or threaten individuals with violence or damage to
their property.
The adoption of internationally aligned domestic cybercrime laws is a concrete
example of how Member States can address the online intimidation, threats and
bullying faced by women participating in peace and peacebuilding processes and
human rights defenders and ensures that perpetrators are held accountable for their
actions. Such behaviour should not be tolerated and must be addressed with all the
necessary tools, including through the enacting of the requisite legislation.
The Peacebuilding Commission (PBC) plays a crucial and unique advisory
role in supporting post-conflict recovery and peacebuilding efforts in the countries
22-0076815/18

S/2022/38

affected. With the adoption of the Peacebuilding Commission Gender Strategy,
significant work has been done to advance the implementation of the women and
peace and security agenda in post-conflict settings. While efforts are continuing to
address the gaps identified in implementation efforts, it is concerning to note that
persistent violence against and the bullying and intimidation of women involved in
peace processes is an additional impediment to the crucial work they conduct at local
level. That requires concerted efforts by the PBC, the Security Council and other
partners to coordinate efforts to address that challenge.
We must also acknowledge the benefits that have resulted owing to the necessity
brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic of engaging on virtual platforms. In that
regard, there should be more investment in proper information and communications
technologies infrastructure and facilities that would allow the broader participation
of women in peace processes. However, such virtual interactions must not be used
to exclude women in physical interactions. Greater availability and access to use
virtual platforms has allowed for many more opportunities for greater interaction
on the women and peace and security agenda, particularly at the grass-roots level.
Allow me to conclude by paying tribute to all the women peacekeepers,
peacebuilders and activists and women involved in peace processes, negotiations
and mediation. Without those courageous women, those most affected by conflict —
women, girls and children — would be left unprotected and their voices unheard. We
must all commit to doing all we can to ensure that such women are able to carry out
their work without fear of threats, violence or intimidation.

16/18

22-00768

S/2022/38

Annex X
Statement by the First Deputy Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Ukraine, Emine Dzhaparova
Ukraine appreciates Norway’s initiative in holding this open debate, which
is timely and important for the United Nations membership in general and conflictaffected countries — including, unfortunately, my own — in particular.
While my delegation aligns itself with the statement delivered by the observer
of the European Union and by the representative of Canada on behalf of the Group of
Friends of Women, Peace and Security on this subject (see S/PV.8949), I would like
to make a number of points in my national capacity.
Ukraine fully condemns all forms of violence, including threats, harassment,
attacks and reprisals against women peacebuilders, human rights defenders and
gender-equality advocates. For Ukraine, this issue is of paramount importance
given the fact that for almost eight years it has been suffering from armed
aggression on the part of the Russian Federation, with devastating humanitarian and
gender-related consequences.
Women are often among the victims of war and hostages. Currently, 296 people,
including 30 women, are still being held hostage in the occupied areas of the Donetsk
and Luhansk oblasts. Natalia Shylo, a Ukrainian school teacher, is one of them. She
was detained in occupied Donetsk in July last year on suspicion of espionage. Owing
to Russia’s armed aggression, more than 900,000 women have been forced to flee
their homes. That number represents 60 per cent of the total number of internally
displaced persons — 1.5 million people, which puts Ukraine in ninth place in the
world in that respect.
The people living in the occupied territories, who should enjoy the protection
of international law, face intimidation, detention and ill-treatment, as well as
physical and sexual violence. The occupied territories have become a haven for
discriminatory practices and gender inequality.
As a party to the conflict, Russia has sought to destabilize Ukraine. At the
moment, having amassed troops on Ukraine’s borders, Russia is threatening to
attempt a fatal assault on Ukraine’s sovereignty.
Under circumstances involving intimidation and persecution, a large number
of women human rights defenders have been forced to leave temporarily occupied
Crimea and areas of the Donetsk and Luhansk regions.
Those who have chosen not to leave Crimea but to continue to stand up for
human rights are in a particularly vulnerable position. Their activities are constantly
hindered through the imposition of fines, citations and warnings. On 23 November,
10 women were detained upon their arrival in occupied Simferopol, where they had
come to greet lawyer Edem Semedlyaev following his release.
The families of political prisoners — the wives, mothers, daughters and
sons of those illegally detained — have been left alone and must deal with their
circumstances. They must keep on leaving and earn their daily bread on their own.
In some Crimean villages densely populated with Crimean Tatars, so-called
“women’s streets” have appeared. Many children need long-term psychological
rehabilitation because of the trauma inflicted during house searches and the arrests
of their fathers.

22-0076817/18

S/2022/38

Ukraine recognizes the importance of the full and equal participation of women
in all endeavours aimed at preventing and resolving conflicts, in peacebuilding and
in peacekeeping.
In that regard, my country is continuing its relentless efforts in the context of
the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), on women and peace and security, in
particular in the framework of the second national action plan for the years 2021-2025
adopted by the Government of Ukraine in 2020.
Ukraine’s second national action plan focuses on achieving the greater
participation of women in decision-making, in particular in the areas of national
security, defence and peacemaking. It also aims in particular to address genderbased and conflict-related sexual violence.
Despite its continuous wartime struggle, Ukraine has made strides in that
respect. One such indicator is Ukraine’s significantly improved standing in the
Women, Peace and Security Index, introduced in 2017, which ranks countries in
terms of women’s inclusion and access to justice as well as security aspects. Ukraine
is currently ranked number 66 out of 170.
I must emphasize that Russia’s aggression against my country was one of
the key factors in the greater involvement of women in peacemaking processes.
Many Ukrainian women have chosen to actively engage against armed aggression in
defence of their country and their loved ones.
Since 2014, the participation of women in Ukraine’s military has increased
significantly. Today women constitute 15 per cent of Ukraine’s armed forces. That
number has increased more than sixteenfold since 2008 — from 1,800 to more
than 31,000. Of those, 1,000 women are senior officers, including one who holds
the position of Deputy Minister of Defence of Ukraine. Of those in active duty on
the front defending Ukraine against Russia’s aggression, more than 10 per cent are
women. In addition, women volunteers provide substantial support on the front lines.
I would also like to highlight the fact that currently seven Ukrainian women
personnel are involved in international peacekeeping and security operations,
constituting 8.3 per cent of Ukraine’s total contribution.
Among the priorities of the Government of Ukraine is the reintegration of
veteran women because of the challenges that they face upon returning to a peaceful
life. The difficulties they face range from finding employment and obtaining free
medical care to overcoming negative stereotypes.
The Government of Ukraine is stepping up its efforts to ensure gender equality
and women’s empowerment and is focusing on providing appropriate support to
women who have suffered sexual violence in the context of the armed aggression.
Ukraine is fully committed to continuing its efforts to raise awareness of and
promote the implementation of the women and peace and security agenda.

18/18

22-00768
