United Nations

A/RES/55/152

General Assembly

Distr.: General
19 January 2001

Fifty-fifth session
Agenda item 159

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/55/609)]

55/152. Report of the International Law Commission on the work
of its fifty-second session
The General Assembly,
Having considered the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-second session, 1
Emphasizing the importance of furthering the codification and progressive
development of international law as a means of implementing the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter of the United Nations and in the Declaration on
Principles of International Law concerning Friendly Relations and Cooperation
among States in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, 2
Recognizing the desirability of referring legal and drafting questions to the
Sixth Committee, including topics that might be submitted to the International Law
Commission for closer examination, and of enabling the Sixth Committee and the
Commission to further enhance their contribution to the progressive development of
international law and its codification,
Recalling the need to keep under review those topics of international law
which, given their new or renewed interest for the international community, may be
suitable for the progressive development and codification of international law and
therefore may be included in the future programme of work of the International Law
Commission,
Welcoming the holding of the International Law Seminar, and noting with
appreciation the voluntary contributions made to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar,
Stressing the usefulness of structuring the debate on the report of the
International Law Commission in the Sixth Committee in such a manner that
conditions are provided for concentrated attention to each of the main topics dealt
with in the report,
Wishing to enhance further the interaction between the Sixth Committee as a
body of governmental representatives and the International Law Commission as a
1
2

00 56851

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fifth Session, Supplement No. 10 (A/55/10).
Resolution 2625 (XXV), annex.

A/RES/55/152

body of independent legal experts, with a view to improving the dialogue between
the two organs,
1.
Takes note of the report of the International Law Commission on the
work of its fifty-second session;1
2.
Expresses its appreciation to the International Law Commission for the
work accomplished at its fifty-second session, in particular with respect to the topic
“State responsibility”, and encourages the Commission to complete its work on this
topic during its fifty-third session, taking into account the views expressed by
Governments during the debates in the Sixth Committee at the fifty-fifth session of
the General Assembly, and any written comments that may be submitted by
31 January 2001;
3.
Draws the attention of Governments to the importance for the
International Law Commission of having their views on the various aspects involved
in the topics on the agenda of the Commission, in particular on all the specific issues
identified in chapter III of its report;
4.
Reiterates its invitation to Governments, within the context of
paragraph 3 above, to respond, to the extent possible, in writing by 28 February
2001 to the questionnaire and requests for materials on unilateral acts of States
circulated by the Secretariat to all Governments on 30 September 1999 and
2 October 2000;
5.
Also reiterates its invitation to Governments to submit the most relevant
national legislation, decisions of domestic courts and State practice relevant to
diplomatic protection in order to assist the International Law Commission in its
work on the topic “Diplomatic protection”;
6.
Recommends that, taking into account the comments and observations of
Governments, whether in writing or expressed orally in debates in the General
Assembly, the International Law Commission continue its work on the topics in its
current programme;
7.
Notes with appreciation the work done by the International Law
Commission at its fifty-second session on the topic “International liability for
injurious consequences arising out of acts not prohibited by international law”, and
requests the Commission to resume consideration of the liability aspects of the topic
as soon as the second reading of the draft articles on the prevention of
transboundary damage from hazardous activities is completed, bearing in mind the
interrelationship between the prevention and the liability aspects of the topic and
taking into account developments in international law and comments by
Governments;
8.
Takes note of paragraphs 726 to 733 of the report of the International
Law Commission with regard to its long-term programme of work, and the
syllabuses on new topics annexed to the report;
9.
Invites the International Law Commission to continue taking measures to
enhance its efficiency and productivity;
10. Takes note of paragraphs 734 and 735 of the report with regard to the
length, nature and place of future sessions of the International Law Commission, in
which specific recommendations are made to continue to increase the efficiency and

2

A/RES/55/152

productivity of its work, to facilitate the attendance by its members and to enhance
the relationship between the Commission and the Sixth Committee;
11. Also takes note of paragraph 736 of the report, and decides that the next
session of the International Law Commission shall be held at the United Nations
Office at Geneva from 23 April to 1 June and from 2 July to 10 August 2001;
12. Stresses the desirability of further enhancing the dialogue between the
International Law Commission and the Sixth Committee, and in this context
encourages, inter alia, the holding of informal discussions between the members of
the Sixth Committee and those members of the Commission attending the fifty-sixth
session of the General Assembly;
13. Reiterates its request in paragraph 11 of its resolution 54/111 of
9 December 1999, and emphasizes the need to implement cost-saving measures such
as those described in paragraph 639 of the report of the International Law
Commission on the work of its fifty-first session; 3
14. Requests the International Law Commission to continue to pay special
attention to indicating in its annual report, for each topic, any specific issues on
which expressions of views by Governments, either in the Sixth Committee or in
written form, would be of particular interest in providing effective guidance for the
Commission in its further work;
15. Also requests the International Law Commission to continue the
implementation of article 16, paragraph (e), and article 26, paragraphs 1 and 2, of its
statute in order to further strengthen cooperation between the Commission and other
bodies concerned with international law, having in mind the usefulness of such
cooperation, and in that regard takes note with appreciation of comments made by
the Commission in paragraphs 737 to 741 of its report;
16. Notes that consulting with national organizations and individual experts
concerned with international law may assist Governments in considering whether to
make comments and observations on drafts submitted by the International Law
Commission and in formulating their comments and observations;
17. Reaffirms its previous decisions concerning the role of the Codification
Division of the Office of Legal Affairs of the Secretariat and those concerning the
summary records and other documentation of the International Law Commission;
18. Notes with appreciation the inclusion of information about the work of
the International Law Commission on its web site; 4
19. Expresses the hope that the International Law Seminar will continue to be
held in connection with the sessions of the International Law Commission and that
an increasing number of participants, in particular from developing countries, will
be given the opportunity to attend the Seminar, and appeals to States to continue to
make urgently needed voluntary contributions to the United Nations Trust Fund for
the International Law Seminar;
20. Requests the Secretary-General to provide the International Law Seminar
with adequate services, including interpretation, as required, and encourages him to
continue considering ways to improve the structure and content of the Seminar;
3

Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifty-fourth Session, Supplement No. 10 and corrigenda
(A/54/10 and Corr.1 and 2).
4
The Internet address of the International Law Commission is www.un.org/law/ilc/index.htm.

3

A/RES/55/152

21. Also requests the Secretary-General to forward to the International Law
Commission, for its attention, the records of the debate on the report of the
Commission at the fifty-fifth session of the General Assembly, together with such
written statements as delegations may circulate in conjunction with their oral
statements, and to prepare and distribute a topical summary of the debate, following
established practice;
22. Requests the Secretariat to circulate to States, as soon as possible after
the conclusion of the session of the International Law Commission, chapter II of its
report containing a summary of the work of that session and the draft articles
adopted on either first or second reading by the Commission;
23. Recommends that the debate on the report of the International Law
Commission at the fifty-sixth session of the General Assembly commence on
29 October 2001.
84th plenary meeting
12 December 2000

4
