204

33/121.

General Assembly-Thirty-third Session

Investments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund in transnational corporations ami in developing eountries
A

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, in its resolution 31/197 of 22 December 1976, it requested the Secretary-General to
ensure that the resources which the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund holds invested in shares of
transnational corporations are invested on safe and
profitable terms and, to the greatest extent practicable,
in sound investments in developing countries,
Recalling also that, in its resolution 32/73 A of
9 December 1977, it requested the Secretary-General
to redouble his efforts, in pursuance of General Assembly resolution 31/197, to ensure that a larger
proportion of the investment of the resources of the
Fund is made in developing countries,
Recalling further the resolutions adopted by the
United Nations and other international bodies concerning the new international economic arder and
transnational corporations,
Reaffi,rming its belief, expressed in the third preambular paragraph of its resolution 31 / 197 and reiterated
in the fourth preambular paragraph of its resolution
32/73 A, that investments by the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund in shares of transnational
corporations might contradict the objectives and purposes of the organizations of the United Nations
system,
Having considered the report of the SecretaryGeneral on investments of the United Nations Joint
Staff Pension Fund with particular reference to developing countries,99
Observing that, following the adoption of General
Assembly resolution 31/197, investments by the United
Nations Joint Staff Pension Fund in transnational
corporations had amounted to $772 million in bonds
and equities on 31 March 1977, which declined to
$745 million on 31 March 1978, while investments
made directly in developing countries in bonds
amounted to just over $43 million on 30 June 1978,
l. Renews its request to the Secretary-General
that, in pursuance of General Assembly resolutions
31/197 and 32/73 A, he redouble his efforts, in
consultation with the Investments Committee, to ensure
that the resources which the United Nations Joint Staff
Pension Fund holds invested in shares of transnational
corporations are reinvested in developing countries to
the greatest extent practicable, subject to careful observance of the requirements of safety, profitability,
liquidity and convertibility, and in conformity with the
Regulations of the Joint Fund;
2. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its thirty-fourth session on the
implementation of the present resolution.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978

B
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 32/73 B of 9 December
1977,
so A/C.5/33/7.

Taking note of the results so far achieved by the
Secretary-General in his efforts to initiate negotiations
with financia! institutions in Africa with a view to
investing sorne of the portfolio of the United Nations
Joint Staff Pension Fund directly in Africa on safe
and profitable terms,
Requests the Secretary-General to intensify the contacts and inquiries with institutions and Governments
in Africa with a view to increasing substantially the
amount invested in Africa, on safe and profitable terms,
and to report on the matter to the General Assembly
at its thirty-fourth session.
88th plenary meeting
19 December 1978

33/142.

Administrative and buclgetary co-ordination of the United Nations with the
spedalized agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency
A

The General Assembly,
Concerned with the growing need far effective administrative and budgetary co-ordination within the
framework of the United Nations system,
Recalling its decision taken at its 2440th plenary
meeting, on 15 December 1975, to consider in depth
the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary coordination of the United Nations with the specialized
agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency"
normally in off-budget years, 100
Having considered with appreciation the report of
the Advisorv Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions on the administrative and budgetary
co-ordination of the United Nations with the specialized agencies and the International Atomic Energy
Agency, 101
l. Concurs with the observations and comments
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions as contained in its report;
2. Refers to the organizations con cerned the observations and comments contained in that report;
3. Requests the Secretary-General to refer to the
executive heads of the organizations of the United
Nations system, through the Administrative Committee
on Co-ordination, matters arising out of the report of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Ouestions which call for their attention and
necessary action;
4. Transmits the report of the Advisory Committee
on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the
Board of Auditors, the Panel of Externa! Auditors
and the Joint Inspection Unit far their information;
5. Requests the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to give greater emphasis in its future reports on administrative and
budgetary co-ordination to budgetary developments in
individual organizations which are of potential interest
to other organizations and to supplement those annual
100 O/ficial Records of the General Assembly, Thirtieth Session, Supplement No. 34 (A/10034 ), p. 146, item 98.
101 A/33/309 and Corr.1 and Add.1.

VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

reports with reports on specific problems common to
the United Nations system.
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
B

The General Assembly,
Taking note with satisfaction of the report of the
Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions on the administrative co-ordination of electronic data processing and information systems, 102
Concerned about the growing need for effective coordination of the activities of United Nations organizations in the field of information systems and with the
necessity to minimize duplication and to secure the
most effective use possible of all available resources,
1. Approves the conclusions and recommendations
of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and
Budgetary Questions as contained in its report; 103
2. Requests the Secretary-General to take such
remedia! action as may be necessary in the light of
those conclusions and recommendations;
3. Transmits the report of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions to the
Committee for Programme and Co-ordination, bearing
in mind the decision of that Committee to consider in
depth the question of information systems in the
United Nations at its nineteenth session in 1979.104
90th plenary meeting
20 December 1978
33/143.

Personnel questions

The General Assembly,
Having examined the reports of the SecretaryGeneral on the composition of the Secretariat105 and
on the implementation of personnel policy reforms, 106
Concerned that the reforms of personnel policy as
well as the implementation of the various resoluti~ns
on the composition of the Secretariat are proceedmg
too slowly and a coherent personnel policy has not
yet been realized,
Concerned about the urgent need to secure an improved representation of develop!ng c<;mntries at _sen~or
and policy-making levels and re1teratmg the obJective
of achieving adequate representation of hitherto unrepresented and under-represented countries,
Reafjirming that the paramount consideration in the
employment of staff at every level is the need for the
highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity and convinced that this is compatible with the
principies of equitable geographical distribution,
Taking note with appreciation of the reports of the
Joint Inspection Unit on the implementation of the
personnel policy reforms approved by the General
Assembly in 1974,1 º7 on women in the Professional
category and above in the United Nations system108
102 A/33/304.
10s I bid., sect. VIII.
104 Offi,cial Records of

the General Assembly, Thirty-third
Session, Supplement No. 38 (A/33/38), para. 41.
105 A/33/176.
100 A/C.5/33/2.
101 See A/33/228.
10s See A/33/105.

205

and on General Service staff of the United Nations and
Geneva-based specialized agencies, 109
W elcoming the intention of the Secretary-General
to launch a plan of action to improve the geographical
distribution of the Secretariat during 1979-1980,
Concerned about the need to improve the proportion
of women in the Secretariat within the context of
equitable geographical distribution,
Cal/ing upon the Secretary-General and all the
United Nations organizations to put an end to any
form of discrimination based on sex, as laid down in
Article 8 of the Charter of the United Nations, in conditions of employment, recruitment, promotion and
training and to ensure that the opportunities for employment and promotion of women in the United
Nations system are equal to those of men,

I
l. Requests the Secretary-General to adopt the
following measures and guidelines regarding recruitment of Professional staff:
(a) Bulletins containing a statement of all existing
vacancies as well as all those expected to arise in the
course of the following year should be issued every
six months, in order to facilitate the submission by
Member States of candidates for recruitment;
( b) Publicity should be given regarding recruitment of personnel in co-operation with Member States,
ínter alia through United Nations offices, universities
and professional organizations, including women's organizations whenever appropriate, to fulfil the recruitment policies outlined in the present resolution;
(e) Composition of the ros ter of candidates should
be improved, in order to make it more geographically
representative and make it better reflect the recruitment needs of the Secretariat among various occupational groups as well as to increase the number of
women on the roster, and, prior to filling a vacancy,
a thorough search should be made of the roster for
suitable candidates;
(d) Professional staff of the United Nations should
be encouraged to work at more than one duty station
and satisfactory performance during such tours of duty
should be considered an additional positive factor in
evaluating them for promotion;
(e) Information on the over-all results of the stafl
performance review should be made available to the
General Assembly;
(/) Definition of occupational groups together with
criteria for new definition of such groups should be
established and a list of occupational groups for
General Service and Professional categories along with
standards for entry. promotion and rotation of staff
should be drawn up;
(g) Movement of staff from the General Service
category to the Professional category should be limited
to the P-1 and P-2 levels and be permitted up to 30
per cent of the total posts available for appointment
at those levels and such recruitment should be conducted exclusively through competitive methods of
selection from General Service stafl with at least five
years' experience and post-secondary educational qualifications;
(h) Competitive methods of recruitment should
be used in consultation with the Govemments con109 See A/32/327.
