General Assembly-Forty-third Session

218

43/147. Assistance to refugees in Somalia
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 35/180 of 15 December 1980,

36/153 of 16 December 1981, 37/174 of 17 December
1982, 38/88 of 16 December 1983, 39/104 of 14 Novem­
ber 1984, 40/132 of 13 December 1985, 41/138 of
4 December 1986 and 42/127 of 7 December 1987 on the
question of assistance to refugees in Somalia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees in Somalia, 156
Deeply concerned about the heavy burden that has been
placed on the fragile economy of Somalia by the continu­
ing presence of large numbers of refugees,
Concerned about the need to ensure continuing and ade­
quate supplies of food in refugee camps in Somalia,
Conscious of the pressure that the refugee presence con­
tinues to impose on the public services, in particular edu­
cation, health, transport and communications, and water
supplies,
Noting with concern the deleterious effect of the refugee
presence on the environment, which has resulted in wide­
spread deforestation, soil erosion and the threat of de­
struction to an already fragile ecological balance,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General;
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
Somalia is taking to provide material and humanitarian
assistance to refugees, in spite of its own limited resources
and fragile economy;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, do­
nor countries and intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations for their efforts to assist the
refugees in Somalia;
4. Calls upon the High Commissioner to ensure, as ap­
propriate, that the care, maintenance and rehabilitation
needs of the refugees are adequately covered;
5. Appeals to Member States, international organiza­
tions and voluntary agencies to render maximum and
timely material, financial and technical assistance to en­
able the Government of Somalia to implement the projects
and activities identified in the report of the 1987 inter­
agency mission annexed to the report submitted by the
Secretary-General to the General Assembly at its forty­
second session 157 as the basis for a comprehensive pro­
gramme of action combining both refugee-related
humanitarian and developmental needs;
6. Calls upon the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme to assume the leading role, as required by the Sec­
ond International Conference on Assistance to Refugees
in Africa, 158 in the conceptualization, implementation and
monitoring of refugee-related projects, and to be involved
in the mobilization of the financial and technical means re­
quired, in close co-operation with the High Commissioner
and the World Bank;
7. Requests the pertinent organizations of the United
Nations system, namely the Food and Agriculture Organ­
ization of the United Nations, the International Labour
Organisation, the World Health Organization, the United
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
and the United Nations Children's Fund, as well as the
United Nations Environment Programme and the World
156 A/43/535
157 A/42/645.
l58 See A/39/402, annex

Food Programme, to prepare, in consultation with the
Government of Somalia, detailed project documentation
for the implementation of those projects and activities
identified in the report of the Secretary-GeneraJ l59 as pri­
ority endeavours for a comprehensive programme of ac­
tion;
8. Calls upon the United Nations Development Pro­
gramme, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office and the Food
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to
continue and expand their activities in Somalia, in co­
operation with the Government of Somalia, to protect and
rehabilitate its damaged environment;
9. Recognizes the important role that non­
governmental organizations are playing with regard to
programmes for the care, maintenance and rehabilitation
of refugees, particularly in activities related to small-scale
development projects, and in the fields of health and
agriculture;
10. Calls upon the international community to support
the activities of non-governmental organizations in Soma­
lia in the planning and implementation of refugee projects
and refugee-related development activities;
11. Requests the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the Administrator of the United Nations
Development Programme to apprise the Economic and
Social Council at its second regular session of 1989 of the
progress made in their respective fields of responsibility
with regard to those provisions of the present resolution
which concern them;
12. Requests the Secretary-General, in consultation
with the High Commissioner and United Nations Devel­
opment Programme, to submit to the General Assembly
at its forty-fourth session a report on the progress achieved
in the implementation of the present resolution.

75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/148. Assistance to refugees and displaced persons in
Malawi
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/132 of 7 December 1987 on

assistance to refugees and displaced persons in Malawi,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General
on assistance to refugees and displaced persons in
Malawi, 160 as well as on the report of the inter-agency mis­
sion on this subject, 16l

Having considered that part of the report of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees regarding the
situation of refugees and displaced persons in Malawi,87
Gravely concerned about the continuing serious social
and economic impact of the massive presence of refugees
and displaced persons, as well as its far-reaching conse­
quences for the country's long-term development process,
Appreciating the important measures that the Govern­
ment of Malawi is taking in order to provide shelter, pro­
tection, food, education and health and other
humanitarian services to thousands of refugees and dis­
placed persons,

15q A/42/645, paras. 'iS-66.
160 A/43/536.
161 Ibid .. paras. 7-13.

VI. Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Third Committee

Recognizing the heavy burden placed on the people and
Government of Malawi and the sacrifices they are making
in caring for the refugees and displaced persons, given the
country's limited social services and infrastructure, and
the need for adequate international assistance to enable
them to continue their efforts to provide assistance to the
refugees and displaced persons,
Expressing its appreciation for the assistance rendered by
Member States, the various organs of the United Nations,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees and international, intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations in support of the refugee pro­
gramme in Malawi,
Bearing in mind the findings and recommendations of
the inter-agency mission to Malawi, particularly on the
need to strengthen the country's socio-economic infra­
structure in order to enable it to provide for the immediate
humanitarian relief requirements of the refugees and dis­
placed persons as well as the long-term national develop­
ment needs of the country,
Recognizing the need to view refugee-related develop­
ment projects within local and national development
plans,
1. Takes note of the report of the Secretary-General on
assistance to refugees and displaced persons in Malawi,
particularly with regard to the findings and recommenda­
tions of the inter-agency mission;
2. Commends the measures that the Government of
Malawi is taking to provide material and humanitarian as­
sistance to refugees and displaced persons, in spite of the
serious economic situation it faces, and stresses the need
for additional resources to lessen the impact of the pres­
ence of refugees and displaced persons on the country's
long-term development process;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General,
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, do­
nor countries and intergovernmental and non­
governmental organizations for their efforts to assist the
refugees and displaced persons in Malawi;
4. Expresses grave concern at the serious and far­
reaching consequences of the massive presence of refugees
and displaced persons in the country and its implications
for the long-term socio-economic development of the
whole country;
5. Appeals to Member States, the appropriate organs,
organizations and bodies of the United Nations system, in­
tergovernmental and non-governmental organizations
and the international financial institutions to continue
providing the Government of Malawi with the necessary
resources for the implementation of development assist­
ance projects in regions affected by the presence of refu­
gees and displaced persons, as well as the development
programmes recommended by the inter-agency mission;
6. Requests the Secretary-General to continue his ef­
forts to mobilize the necessary financial and material as­
sistance for the full implementation of ongoing projects in
the areas affected by the presence of refugees and dis­
placed persons and programmes recommended in the re­
port of the inter-agency mission;
7. Requests the High Commissioner to continue co­
ordination with the appropriate specialized agencies in or­
der to consolidate and ensure the continuation of essential
services to the refugees and displaced persons in their set­
tlements;
8. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-fourth session, through the

219

Economic and Social Council, on the implementation of
the present resolution.

75th plenary meeting
8 December 1988
43/149. Assistance to student refugees in southern
Africa
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolution 42/138 of 7 December 1987, in
which it, inter alia, requested the United Nations High

Commissioner for Refugees, in co-operation with the Sec­
retary-General, to continue to organize and implement an
effective programme of educational and other appropriate
assistance for student refugees from South Africa and Na­
mibia who had been granted asylum in Botswana, Leso­
tho, Swaziland and Zambia,
Having considered the report of the Secretary­
General, 162
Noting with appreciation that some of the projects
recommended in the report on assistance to student refu­
gees in southern Africa continue to be successfully imple­
mented,
Noting with concern that the discriminatory and repres­
sive policies that continue to be applied in South Africa
and Namibia cause a continued and increasing infux of
student refugees into Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and
Zambia,
Conscious of the burden placed on the limited financial,
material and administrative resources of the host coun­
tries by the increasing number of student refugees,
Appreciating the efforts of the host countries to deal with
their student refugee populations, with the assistance of
the international community,
I. Takes note with satisfaction of the report of the Sec­
retary-General;
2. Expresses its appreciation to the Governments of
Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for granting
asylum and making educational and other facilities avail­
able to the student refugees, in spite of the pressure that
the continuing influx of those refugees exerts on facilities
in their countries;
3. Also expresses its appreciation to the Governments
of Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia for the co­
operation that they have extended to the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees on matters concerning
the welfare of the refugees;
4. Notes with appreciation the financial and material
support provided for the student refugees by Member
States, the Office of the United Nations High Commis­
sioner for Refugees, other bodies of the United Nations
system and intergovernmental and non-governmental or­
ganizations;
5. Requests the High Commissioner, in co-operation
with the Secretary-General, to continue to organize and
implement an effective programme of educational and
other appropriate assistance for student refugees from
South Africa and Namibia who have been granted asylum
in Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Zambia;
6. Urges all Member States and intergovernmental and
non-governmental organizations to continue contributing
generously to the assistance programme for student refu­
gees, through financial support of the regular programmes
lh2 A/4.1/'i94.
