OFFICIAL

RECORDS

THIRTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

244gth

MEETING:

NEW

27 MAY 1983

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2448)
Adoption of the agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .

1

. ... .. ... ... ... .. ... ... .. ... . ... ... ... ... .. .. ..

1

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of Mauritius to the
United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761) . . . . . . .

1

SjPV.2448

.

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . .) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the OfficiaI Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it
is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

f

2448th
Held
President: Mr. UMBA

MEETING

in New York on Friday,

di LUTETE

(Zaire).

Present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, Guyana, Jordan, Malta, Netherlands,
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Poland, Togo, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Zaire,
Zimbabwe.

27 May

1983, at 4 p.m.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and the other
members of the delegation took places at the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite Mr. Sam Nujoma, President of the South
West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), to take a
place at the Council table.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/Wg)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius
to the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
The meeting was called to order at 4.40 pm
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 12 May 1983 from the Permanent
Representative of Mauritius to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/15760);
Letter dated 13 May 1983 from the Permanent Representative of India to the United Nations addressed to
the President of the Security Council (S/15761)
1. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the representative of Mauritius to take a
place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President. Mr. Maudave (Mauritius) took a place at the Council table,
2. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with the decision taken at the 2439th meeting, I invite the President of the United Nations Council
for Namibia and the other members of the delegation of
the Council to take places at the Security Council table.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Nujoma
place at the Council table.

took a

4. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): In
accordance with decisions taken at previous meetings on
this item 12439th to 2444th. 2446th and 2447th meetings],
I invite the representatives of Afghanistan, Algeria,
Angola, Argentina, Australia, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Benin, Botswana, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czechoslovakia,
Democratic Yemen, Egypt,
Ethiopia, Gabon, the Gambia, the German Democratic
Republic, the Federal Republic of Germany, Guinea,
Hungary, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Liberia, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia,
Mali, Mexico, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
the
Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Qatar, Romania, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sri Lanka,
the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, the
United Republic of Tanzania, the Upper Volta, Venezuela, Viet Nam, Yugoslavia and Zambia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Za@(AfghaniStan), Mr. Hadj Azzout (Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo
(Angola), Mr. Mufiiz (Argentina), Mr. Joseph (Australia),
Mr. Hashim (Bangladesh), Mr. Moseley (Barbados). Mr.
Adjibade (Benin), Mr. Mogwe (Botswana). Mr. Tsvetkov
(Bulgaria), Mr. Pelletier (Canada), Mr. Trucco (Chile),
Mr. Malmierca (Cuba), Mr. Moushoutas (Cyprus). Mr.
Mr. AI-Ashtal
(Democratic
Suja (Czechoslovakia),
Yemen), Mr. Khalil (Egypt), Mr. Ibrahim (Ethiopia), Mr.
Davin (Gabon), Mr. Blain (Gambia), Mr. Ott (German
Democratic Republic), Mr. van Well (Federal Republic of
Germany), Mr. ‘Kaba (Guinea), Mr. Rdcz (Hungary), Mr.
Rao (India), Mr. Kusumaatmadja (Indonesia), Mr. Shearer
(Jamaica), Mr. Kuroda (Japan), Mr. Wabuge (Kenya), Mr.
Abufhassan (Kuwait), Mrs. Jones (Liberia), Mr. Burwin
(Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), Tan Sri Zainal Abidin (Malaysia), Mr, Traore (Mali), Mr. Marin Bosch (Mexico). Mr.
ErdenechuIuun (Mongolia), Mr. Mrani Zentar (Morocco).
Mr. Chissano (Mozambique), Mr. Oumarou (Niger), Mr.

.’..

Bolokor (Nigeria), Mr. Cabrera (Panama), Mr. Jamal
(Qatar) Mr. Marinescu (Romania), Mr. Niasse (Senegal),
Ms. Gonthier (Seychelles), Mr. Stevens (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Adan (Somalia). Mr. von Schimding (South Africa),
Mr. Fonseka (Sn’ Lanka), Mr. El-Fattal (Syrian Arab
Republic), Mr. Slim (Tunisia), Mr. Kirca (Turkey), Mr.
Owiny (Uganda), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. Basso/e (Upper Volta), Mr. Martini Urdaneta
(Venezuela), Mr. Le Kim Chung (Viet Nam), Mr. Mojsov
(Yugoslavia) and Mr. Goma (Zambia) took the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber.

guish under the tyranny of foreign occupation. Indeed,
despite the international consensus that has prevailed in
support of Namibia’s independence, freedom continues to
elude the people of Namibia. Thus the armed struggle
forced upon SWAPO, the representative of the Namibian
people, has had to be escalated as hopes for a negotiated
settlement have continued to dwindle. These hopes have
diminished, not for lack of a political framework for negotiations but because of the deliberate efforts of the South
African regime to obstruct the peaceful path. Regrettably,
this obstruction has also been made possible because of
the policies. and actions of some Members of the
Organization.

5. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the members of the Council that I
have received a letter from the representative of Grenada
in which he requests to be invited to take part in the
discussion of the item on the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual practice, I propose, with the consent
of the Council, to invite him to take part in the discussion
without the right to vote, under the relevant provisions of
the Charter and rule 37 of the provisional rules of
procedure.

10. This series of Council meetings on Namibia is taking place at a time when the efforts of the international
community to bring about a peaceful solution are at an
impasse. The Council has been convened precisely to
address itself to this impasse and how to overcome it.
11. The adoption in 1976 of Council resolution 385
(1976) was hailed as an important opportunity to stop
bloodshed in Namibia. To that end, SWAP0 and South
Africa were called upon to co-operate with the United
Nations in the implementation
of that resolution, which
would have enabled the Namibian people to determine
freely their own future through elections under the supervision and control of the United Nations. It is a matter of
public record that, while SWAP0 pledge its full support
for that resolution, South Africa not only refused to do
so but continued its repressive activities against the
people of Namibia and proceeded to create new faits
accomplis.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Taylor (Grenada)
took a pIace at the side of the Council chamber.
6. The PRESIDENT
(interpretation from French): The
first speaker is Mr. Salim Ahmed Salim, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Republic of Tanzania, to whom
I extend a welcome. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make a statement.
7. Mr. SALIM (United Republic of Tanzania): Mr.
President, I am grateful to you and your colleagues in the
Council for allowing us to participate in this important
series of meetings devoted to consideration of the question of Namibian independence. I wish to express to you
personally our sincere congratulations on your assumption of the high office of President of the Council for this
month. It is a matter of great satisfaction to us in Tanrania that a distinguished son of the sisterly and neighbourly State of Zaire should be President at a time when
the United Nations is once again addressing itself to a
problem of great importance to our continent and to the
international community as a whole.

12. The significance of resolution 385 (1976), inter alia,
lay in the fact that it inspired the initiatives which led to
the adoption by the Council of what is now known as the
United Nations plan for Namibia. The adoption of
Council resolution 435 (1978), containing the plan,
ushered in one of the busiest periods in the diplomatic
efforts on Namibia. If the closeness to independence of a
colonial Territory were measured in terms of the frequency of meetings and diplomatic shuttles and the
number of initiatives, Namibia was close to independence on the adoption of that resolution:Indeed,
Namibia should have been independent years ago.

8. On a more personal level, I am happy to see both the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zaire and the Permanent
Representative of Zaire occupying the position of President in the present deliberations of the Council. I am
confident that your rich diplomatic experience and your
recognized talents will be put to full use in steering the
current proceedings of the Council.

13. Unfortunately, it has also been a period of a succession of disappointments. For some of us who have been
involved in both private and public consultations leading
to and following the adoption of the plan, the experience
has been painful indeed. Initiated by countries closely
associated with South Africa and therefore with the most
leverage and capacity to ensure compliance by South
Africa, the plan, which was so detailed, could not but
have convinced the world community, as it did; that
there was now a serious intention to ensure the decoloniration of the international Territory of Namibia.

9. This is the sixty-eighth year of South African military
occupation of Namibia. It is the seventeenth year since the
General Assembly terminated South Africa’s Mandate
over the Territory and assumed direct responsibility [resolution 2145 (XX0 of 27 October 1966j. Yet, despite numerous resolutions of the General Assembly and the Council
calling for the withdrawal of the illegal occupying’ forces
of South Africa, the people of Namibia continue to lan-

14. Indeed, the history of the events-pursuant to the
adoption of the plan is too well known to the Council to
need detailed elaboration. At every crucial moment of
2

the negotiations when the international community was
given to believe that the implementation of the plan was
imminent, the South African rtgime invariably came up
with new demands and pretexts aimed at effectively
obstructing the way to the implementation
of the plan.
The result has been that we have been subjected to one
frustrating experience after .-another. Throughout these
frustrating experiences it has been SWAP0 and Africa
that have invariably been urged to be realistic and understanding with regard to the demands of the South African rkgime. Yet with every concession made by SWAPO,
supported by the African States, South Africa sought
more; and with every breakthrough that transpired, new
impediments were created. The Western Five are perfectly aware of this.

on Pretoria. The deputy of the then British Secretary of
State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs and leader
of the British delegation to the Geneva talks, Sir Ian Gilmour, told the House of Commons in London on 7 May:
“There is no question but that. the failure of the-conference in Geneva was the fault of the South African
Government.” South Africa not only torpedoed the meeting at Geneva, but also proceeded with unprovoked
attacks against Angola.

15. The examples are many. One is the pre-implementation meeting at Geneva in January 1981, On 19 September 1980, the Secretary-General wrote to the South
African authorities proposing that a United Nations mission should visit South Africa to resolve outstanding difficulties [S/Z4184J. This -mission spent a week in South
Africa at the end of October 1980.
16. Technical matters appeared to have been resolved
and the main obstacle, according to the South African
regime, was so-called lack of confidence. The SecrefaryGeneral therefore presented, on 24 November 1980, a
report [S/14264 to the Council proposing that he convene a pre-implementation
meeting to take place from 7 _
to 14 January 1981. According to the Secretary-General’s
report, only two outstanding matters were identified: lack
of confidence and the composition of the United Nations
Transition Assistance Group (UNTAG). The proposal
was acceptable to all parties and arrangements were made
for the pre-implementation
meeting to be convened at
Geneva.
17. That meeting was opened by the Secretary-General
on 7 January 1981. In welcoming the two delegations,
those of SWAP0 and of South Africa, the SecretaryGeneral stressed that the problems remaining related very
largely in one way or another to confidence, and especially to confidence in the future. He continued by referring to the settlement proposals and arrangements for a
cease-tire and confirmed that the main aim was to get
agreement to set that process in train, which would allow
for the achievement of Namibian independence before the
end of 1981. [See S/14333, para. 5.1

20. In the light of this defiance, the African States
turned to the Council. We did so conscious of the Council’s responsibilities and also in the hope that those
members of the Council that were the authors of the plan
would fulfil their responsibilities and support Council
action aimed at ensuring the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). When the Council met in April 1981, the
African countries did not fail to impress upon the three
Western permanent members of this body their own
responsibility in working for the scrupulous implementation of a plan of which they and their colleagues of Canada and the Federal Republic of Germany are the
authors. To our profound regret, the Council was prevented from taking appropriate action owing to the triple
veto of the three Western permanent members of the
Council.
21. These three major Western Powers chose, therefore, to protect South Africa at this crucial stage in the
struggle for Namibian independence. Inevitably, these
vetoes were interpreted by the apartheid regime as guaranteed protection for South Africa, irrespective of what
action it took over ,Namibia. The Pretoria regime
responded immediately. Plans were put into operation
for a major invasion of southern Angola. Initial attacks
took place in July 1981 and were followed by a full-scale
invasion of southern Angola on 23 August. Parts of
southern Angola have been under continuous occupation since then.
22. This invasion was not an isolated act. The SouthAfricans had invaded Angola before independence in
order to stop the coming to power of a Government
which was committed to the welfare of its own people
and to the liberation of southern Africa as a whole. On 4
May 1978, South African forces massacred over 700 Namibian refugees at Kassinga, within a few days of South
Africa’s agreeing to the United Nations plan. In January
1981, they launched a major attack against the Angolan
army at Cuamato, near the border with Namibia, timed
to coincide with the break-up of the Geneva preimplementation
meeting. The August 1981 invasion,
however, represented a major escalation of the apartheid
regime’s war against Angola and against Africa as a
whole. It can now be seen as an essential component in a
wider strategy of South Africa and some of its supporters
to deny the people of Namibia genuine independence and
to reverse other victories achieved by the forces of African freedom in the region in the previous decade.

18. The President of SWAPO, Mr. Sam Nujoma,
declared his readiness to sign a cease-tire and agreed to
the immediate implementation
of the United Nations
plan. But this was not to happen. The South African
Administrator-General
of Namibia announced on 13 January that they were not prepared to proceed with implementing the plan. The meeting broke up the following
day.
19. There was no mistaking the responsibility for the
failure of the Geneva talks. All the members of the contact group in one way or another put the blame squarely

23. All this was taking place during the advent of a new
Administration
in the United States. We were then ‘told
3

to be patient and exercise restraint while the new Administration was in the process of reviewing its policies on
the southern African situation. The substance of that
review was soon to be clear and official. On the one
hand, the United States had decided to open a new chapter of co-operation with the South African regime within
the context of the so-called constructive engagement,
and, on the other, there was to be a review of the United
Nations plan.

to a date for the beginning of the implementation
Council resolution 435 (1978).

of

28. On 25 October 1981, representatives of the Five
flew to Nigeria on the start of a tour of the front-line
States and South Africa to present the contact group’s
constitutional principles. These proposals were widely
interpreted as designed to minimize the influence of
SWAPO, however great its electoral strength. A key principle stated that “the future Constitution of an independent Namibia would have to be approved by a two-thirds
majority of the Constituent Assembly”. Another principle stated that “fair representation of the different political groups will be achieved” through an appropriate
electoral system.

24. Whatever the intention of the policy of constructive
engagement, the fact remains that the South African
Government has taken this not only as a certificate of
respectability for its policies but also as a means of reinforcing its defiance of world opinion, both in its internal
policies of aggression against the African people and in its
persistent acts of aggression and destabilization against
the African States.

29. This new initiative represented a deviation from the
sequence of events envisaged under the United Nations
plan. The United Nations plan envisaged that the Constitution for Namibia would be drawn up by a Constituent
Assembly to be elected under United Nations supervision
and control. Under this new proposal, however, South
Africa was in effect given an effective veto over the
framework of the principles of the Constitution for an
independent Namibia. Yet, characteristic of Africa’s
commitment to pursue a negotiated settlement, SWAPO,
supported by the rest of the independent States of Africa,
decided to respond constructively to the contact group’s
proposal.

25. With respect to the review of the United Nations
plan, the series of consultations among the members of
the five Western States produced notions such as that of
strengthening resolution 435 (1978). In their consultations
with us, we expressed our concern that such proposals
invited the danger of revising the plan. Such was the concern of the front-line States that, at the meeting of the
leaders of the front-line States held at Luanda, in April
1981, the summit expressed its apprehensions at the disquieting signals which suggested that there was an
attempt to reverse the sequence of the independence process agreed to in resolution 435 (1978). Conscious of the
fact that such an exercise would provide the Pretoria
regime with an excuse for more delay, the leaders of the
front-line States reaffied
their firm support for the plan
and underlined the urgent need to implement it without
further delay, prevarication, qualification or modification. At the same time, they stressed the responsibility of
the five Western States to ensure the implementation
of
the plan and underscored the latter’s special obligation to
exert the necessary pressure on South Africa to comply
with Council resolution 435 (1978).

30. A meeting of SWAP0 and the front-line States,
together with Nigeria and Kenya, held at Dar-es-Salaam
on 17 November 1981, prepared a detailed response
based on the contact group’s proposals. Our objective
was to facilitate a quick agreement. We did not, therefore, reject any of the controversial proposals such as
those relating to the two-thirds majority, “guarantees of
property and minority rights” and so forth. The Five,
however, on 17 December published their revised proposals and produced what SWAP0 described as a
“unique and undemocratic electoral system” based on a
principle of “one person, two votes”. In a memorandum
explaining this electoral procedure it was proposed that
each voter would cast two votes, one to be counted on
the level of a single national constituency and the other
one on the basis of the voter’s local constituency. Those
with knowledge of the demography of Namibia were convinced that this proposal was aimed at minimizing the
electoral influence of SWAP0 and at exaggerating the
electoral strength of both the white community and the
tribally-based “internal” elements.

26. In our consultations with the Western Five we made
it clear to them that they were addressing themselves to
the wrong issues. What was needed, we pointed out, was
not the strengthening of the United Nations plan but
rather its implementation.
We cautioned that South
Africa had one objective in mind, namely, the prevention
of free and fair .elections, which they knew SWAP0
would win. We pointed out that the Pretoria rtgime is a
past master in the game of prevarication and certainly did
not need any assistance from the Western Five.

31: The front-line States, Nigeria and SWAP0 firmly
rejected these electoral proposals during our meeting on
23 January 1982, and we called for a clear and simple
electoral process. The contact group, however, instead of
taking these reservations seriously, sent a delegation to
Angola in early April to propose that, as an alternative to
the *‘one person, two votes” system, there should be a
“one person, one vote, counted twice” type of system.
SWAP0 responded with a very detailed analysis, pointing out that the proposed electoral process was designed

27. Our apprehensions and reservations notwithstanding, the Western Five persistent in their approach. By
September 1981 they announced their new initiative. It
envisaged three phases. Phase one was designed to commit the parties concerned to a set of constitutional principles for the election of a constituent assembly. Phase two
was concerned with specific arrangements for the ceascfire, UNTAG and agreement on United Nations impartiality. Phase three was a public commitment by all parties
4

to deny it a two-thirds majority of the seats in the Constituent Assembly, which would enable Pretoria’s allies
to block the independence of Namibia by starting an
endless debate on the constitution of the Constituent
Assembly. The electoral process was designed, SWAP0
explained, “on the one hand, to ensure guaranteed
representation for the white minorities . . . . On the other
hand, the choice of such an electoral double standard is
aimed at giving Pretoria an opportunity to use and accentuate tribal or ethnic factors against SWAPO.” SWAPO’s statement went on to say that “the experience of the
last six months has shown that the phased approach to
the negotiations is being used to force SWAPO, step by
step, to make concessions; sometimes irreversible ones,
while South Africa is yielding practically nothing.”

ment could be reached rapidly on the choice of the electoral system, the deployment of UNTAG
and the
question of United Nations impartiality. It was claimed
that South Africa’was no longer raising obstacles. The
front-line States and SWAPO, therefore, responded positively at their summit meeting held at Dar-es-Salaam on
14 June and agreed to participate in the proximity talks.
Meetings -took place during most of July here in New
York.
36. From the very start of these proximity talks there
was a firm understanding among the contact group, the
front-line States, SWAP0 and Nigeria that these points
would not be considered outside the framework of resolution 435 (1978) and that therefore, in reality, there was
nothing particularly new in the subject-matter of the
negotiations.

32. It is pertinent to mention here that, when the Westem Five submitted their original constitutional proposals,
they suggested an electoralsystem based on one of three
options, namely, a single-member constituency, proportional representation or a combination system. SWAP0
accepted two of those systems, namely, proportional
representation or a single-member constituency. Yet the
Western Five insisted on a complex electoral process
using a combination system-which was, incidentally,
preferred also by South Africa.

37. South Africa, we were given to understand, wanted
to be reassured that when the elections commenced
SWAP0 would not be at an advantage as compared with
other’elements within Namibia. For that purpose, South
Africa insisted-we were told-that,
effective from the
time the Security Council adopted the resolution to
trigger the implementation
of the plan, the United
Nations and all bodies within the United Nations system
should refrain from providing any assistance to SWAP0
and that in their activities those bodies should equally
refrain from showing their support for SWAPO. Not to
leave any stone unturned, SWAP0 went to the extent of
making far-reaching concessions.

33. That, then, is the background to the meeting of the
Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the front-line States held
at Dar-es-Salaam on 4 May 1982, which endorsed the
rejection by SWAP0 of this complex voting system and
agreed that all outstanding issues should be discussed
together in a comprehensive manner in order to resolve
them as a package. “Such negotiations should take place
in a Geneva-type conference under the auspices of the
United Nations”, we proposed, “but other means of
achieving that objective are not excluded”. This firm
stand resulted in the contact group, abandoning its electoral proposals and suggesting that the matter be
deferred. But soon new obstacles were to emerge.

38. In this spirit, compromises were also made with
regard to the constitution and deployment of UNTAG as
well as to the logistics of the cease-fire. The Western Five
assured us, as the negotiations progressed, that the agreement of South Africa was obtained on the compromises..
It was therefore possible, at the conclusion of the negotiations, to visualize the quick implementation
of the
United Nations plan. This explains the enthusiasm which
was generated at that time in the world community.

34. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the five Westem States met in Luxembourg on 17 May 1982, a few
days after a lengthy meeting in Paris of the African directors of the contact group countries. It is widely assumed
that it was at these crucial meetings that agreement was
reached on a “summary of points” to be presented by the
contact group, to all the parties. Representatives of the
Western Five visited Africa from 7 to 12 June to present
those points. Most of the points concerned the items
which had previously been identified as needing to be
resolved, that is, the cease-fue, United Nations impartiality and UNTAG..These and no other points were later to
form the basis of the proximity talks.

39. Since then the world has waited anxiously to see the
Council meet and UNTAG go into Namibia. But instead
the world has been presented with a completely different
problem, entirely unrelated to Namibia. For now the
international
community
is aware that one of the
members of the Western Five inisists on holding the independence of Namibia hostage to the presence of Cuban
forces in Angola. Not only is this insistence on linkage of
breach of good faith with SWAP0 and all those who
helped achieve the compromises which SWAP0 has conceded to, but it is in fact in defiance of international law
and values because, the rights of the Namibian people
apart, the linkage is an attempt to interfere in the sovereign right of Angola to determine its friends and determine its security requirements.

35. These talks were initiated by the contact group in
response to the decision of the front-line States and
SWAP0 on 4 May 1982 to reject the phased approach to
the negotiations and also because, according to the British
Foreign Office briefing, “the Five have been encouraged
by signs of greater flexibility on the part of the South
Africans”. An impression was thus conveyed that agree-

40. The idea of linkage, like many other irrelevant
issues, came up soon after the meeting of the Ministers
for Foreign Affairs of the Five in May 1982, under the
heading of the so-called other regional issues. Right from
5

the start, this irrelevancy was rejected outright, not only
by SWAP0 and Angola but also by the front-line States.
Since then it has also been rejected and condemned by
the Organization of African Unity (OAU), the Seventh
Conference of Heads of State or Government of NonAligned Countries and the General Assembly. In fact,
except for the United States, the members of the contact
group themselves have made it clear that they do not
believe that the withdrawal of the Cuban forces can be
made a pre-condition for a Namibian settlement. An eloquent statement to this effect was made by the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of France when he addressed the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of
the Namibian People for Independence, in Paris,’ and a
similar position was taken here by the representative of
France when he addressed the Council this morning
[24472/r meeting’]. All in all, it is this extraneous issue
which has now fundamentally changed the course of the
negotiations and is responsible for the total impasse
which we now face.

national community is taken .against such a rkgime and,
worse still, if some Members of the Organization extend
any form of comfort to it, that dgime cannot be expected
to work for the efforts of the decolonization of Namibia
and the furtherance of any United Nations principles.
44. This history of negotiations is also in some ways an
indictment of some of the very authors of the plan for the
independence of Namibia. For one of the things we cannot fail to observe is that, whereas it was expected that
the members of the contact group should have demonstrated a sense of commitment and urgency, it has always
been necessary to remind them that they were the
authors of the plan and that it was their initiative which
created the momentum for a negotiated settlement. If
today we have to repeat this reminder,-it will not in any
way be for the first time. But what we have been getting
in response all along from the Western Five has been a
plea for flexibility, a plea for patience and a plea for
realism. Indeed, when the Council was forced to meet in
1981 under similar circumstances, that was the response
‘of the Western Five to our appeal.

41. If the background which I have related-the saga of
the tortuous history of the pursuit of a peaceful
settlement-is
of any use, it is, I believe, to confirm that
the people of Namibia, through their representative,
SWAPO, have left no stone unturned and have shown
that no serious request for flexibility and patience was
beyond their capacity for tolerance. SWAP0 has also
demonstrated. that it is not their preference to resort to
armed struggle, with its attendant destruction, if peaceful
means for the attainment of their independence are feasible. The Namibian people, under the leadership of
SWAPO, have therefore made every concession humanly
possible for a peaceful alternative. They have agreed to a
prior determination of their constitutional system; they
have accommodated a number of demands to be embodied in their constitutional principles. This is, in fact, a
determination of their socioeconomic system by external
parties. They have given the benefit of the doubt to the
apartheid r&me. South Africa demanded that provision
be made for so-called trust and confidence. Ridiculous as
the demand was, SWAP0 agreed to a pre-implementation meeting. South Africa demanded guarantees on a
number of issues; SWAP0 conceded to those demands.
South Africa prevaricated on the electoral system and
SWAP0 was willing to allow time for South Africa’s
latest decision.

45. If the Council is to make an important and relevant
contribution
to eliminating the present impasse, it is
important to bear in mind the historical facts. It is particularly important to separate fact from fiction. I should
therefore once again like to recapitulate the facts in brief.
46. First, since the adoption of‘ the United Nations
plan, the African States have done everything possible to
facilitate its implementation.
Secondly, throughout the
process of negotiations, the African States, in support of
SWAPO, have never been found wanting in flexibility
and compromise. Thirdly, as a result of the mature and
responsible approach adopted by SWAP0 and supported by the African States, through the front-line
States and Nigeria, the South African rtgime’s pretexts
for prevarication have been exhausted. Fourthly, with
the exhaustion of those pretexts the introduction of a
totally unrelated issue has given that r&me a completely
new excuse to defy the international community.
47. In this respect, it is important to stress that when
the Western Five were preparing’ their proposals for a
settlement, which .ultimately emerged as .the United
Nations plan, this preparation was done in intensive consultations with the South African Government. At no
point in the course of these consultations was the issue of
the Cuban presence in Angola raised. At any rate, on all
occasions when the Western Five had consultations with
us prior to the adoption of resolution 435 (1978), they
never raised the question of the Cuban presence in
Angola. Yet it is a matter of record that resolution 435
(1978) was adopted in 1978 and the Cuban forces had
been in Angola since the end of 1975. It is also significant
that for three years subsequent to the adoption of resolution 435 (1978) and, indeed, even at the Geneva preimplementation
.meetings, the South African rCgime
never raised the question of the Cuban presence in
Angola. We therefore wonder why, if the issue of Cuban
forces in Angola was such a vital one for the South Afii-

42. It must therefore be amply evident that, if a peaceful
settlement to the Namibian question is not feasible, the
burden of responsibility has absolutely nothing to do with
SWAPO. It must be placed squarely on somebody else. It
is also clearly evident that there is absolutely no legitimate
issue whatever pending to which the failure to implement
Council resolution 435 (1978) can be attributed.
43. It is, needless to say, obvious that the apartheid
rCgime of South Africa is primarily responsible for the
colonial situation in Namibia. The policies of South
Africa, well known and condemned by the world community, are by nature colonial, aggressive, racist and totally
incompatible with the ideals, values and principles of the
Organization. If no serious action on the part of the inter6

can regime, it was not raised in all the five years we have
referred to.
48. Africa and the Non-Aligned Movement have made
it very clear that the issue of the Cuban presence is a false
issue. It is immoral to hold the independence of Namibia
hostage to a matter which is entirely within the sovereign
right of an independent African State. We remain convinced that the insistence on linkage is not only counterproductive but inimical to the collective efforts made by
the world community, including those by the Western
Five, in an attempt to secure the implementation
of the
United Nations plan.
49. It is incorrect to,allege that South Africa has been
contmctive and co-operative in the efforts to ensure the
implementation
,of the plan for Namibia. Even today
South Africa does not accept that its occupation of that
Territory is illegal. From the statements made by the leaders of the apartheid regime it is obvious that they are not
interested in a genuinely free election; for how else can we
explain the tantrums they persistently throw in the face of
the possibility of an election victory by SWAPO?
50. There is one other element which I am obliged to
point out in my statement in view of the events of the past
few days. South Africa is facing increasing resistance to its
pohcies of aparzheid within the country. Its outward manifestation of the arrogance of power is in reality an expression of its vulnerability to the forces of resistance from
within South Africa. Those forces represent an irresistible
tide of history which cannot be stopped. Talk of nonaggression pacts in that context is therefore a lot of nonsense. For, as the President of the United Republic of
Tanzania succinctly put it in his address to the General
Assembly in 1970, “It is impossible for us to sign a nonaggression treaty with aggression itself’.2
51. The real threat against the South African regime
does not come from outside South Africa. The authorities
in Pretoria know that perfectly well. It is an accepted fact
that South Africa has the most powerful military machine
in our continent. No front-line State, no combination of
front-line States or, for that matter, of independent States
in southern Africa at present, poses a military threat to
South Africa. In any case, the struggle for freedom in
South Africa can and will be won by the people of South
Africa themselves. And in this context South Africa is
currently facing mounting opposition to its policies of
apartheid within the country itself’. Indeed, the uparrheid
regime is undergoing a security crisis caused by its own
anachronistic internal policies, which have made its own
perceived invincibility, and security as a military power
become vulnerable.
52. It is therefore pure fantasy for the apartheid regime
to claim that its criminal acts ofaggression and destabilization against Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique,
Seychelles, Zambia and Zimbabwe, are provoked by any
external threat. Indeed, if it were not for the tragedy
caused to thousands of innocent people by these acts of
aggression, as well as the havoc and destruction in which

such acts result, one would have laughed at South Africa’s
spurious claims. For how can one possibly rationalize the
claim that the small, proud, peaceful nation of Lesotho
could be such a threat to South Africa as to warrant the
carnage that that r&me .imposed on it last December?
And how can one possibly assert that the islands of Seychelles, which were the victim of a South African mercenary invasion constitute a threat to the security of South
Africa?
53. The arrogance and the threatening language to
which we were subjected in the Council by the representative of the apurrheid rkgime do not in any way alter the
basic fact of South Africa’s lawlessness in the regionlawlessness which was most recently manifested on 23
May in the criminal bombing of Maputo by the South
African Air Force. The history of the world is rich in
information on the fate of tyrants. The authorities in
South Africa will be deluding themselves if they believe
they can fare any better.
54. We have come to the Council because we are
seriously concerned at the present impasse on the Namibian question. We are particularly saddened by the
fact that what had appeared to be a great opportunity to
put an end to the bloodshed in that international Territory through a process of negotiation is tragically slipping away. We seek of the Council no more than a firm
commitment
to the implementation
of the United
Nations plan-a plan which the Council itself, in its wisdom, adopted some five years ago.
55. As the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Zambia, my
colleague, brother and friend, Mr. Lameck Goma, said a
few days. ago in the Council [244Orh meeting], we have
not come here to seek a confrontation with anyone. But
we do ask that the Council confront and overcome the
challenge with which the apartheid regime has faced the
international community. For the continued obstruction
of the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978) is an act
of defiance of the Council.
56. It is not just the credibility of the Council that is at
stake, not just the suffering of the people of Namibia,
but, indeed, the peace and security of the entire southern
African region. As the Secretary-General aptly observes
in his report, “the settlement of the Namibian question is
of overriding importance for the future peace and
prosperity of the entire region” {S/15776, para. 203.
57. At this iuncture I wish to register the appreciation
of my Gove’;nment for the efforts of the-SecretaryGeneral, to bring about the implementation
of the
United Nations plan. We are inspired by his commitment
and very impressed by the lucid and objective report
which he has submitted to the Council. As the intemational community intensifies its efforts to ensure the independence of Namibia, it is most reassuring to note the
firm and unequivocal commitment
of the SecretaryGeneral to that objective. My Government fully shares
and, indeed, endorsed the following assertion of the
Secretary-General in his report: “I regard the problem of

Governments-be
it individually, bilaterally or collectively-reaffirming
support for and expressing solidarity
with the liberation struggle waged by the gallant people of
Namibia under the wise and courageous leadership of
SWAPO, their sole and authentic representative.

Namibia as a special responsibility . . . in view of the
unique relationship between the United Nations and the
people of Namibia.” [ibid] Indeed, the very least that
the Council can do is to enhance his role by giving him
all possible support in his efforts towards the implementation of the United Nations plan.

63. All those activities and pronouncements by both
Governments and organizations are of course a source of
satisfaction and encouragement to all those who stand at
the side of the oppressed people of Namibia. Yes, there is
no gainsaying the fact that, as a direct result of these
efforts, the question of Namibia has been kept high on
the international agenda. Yes, people all over the world,
including the public in the Western countries are, as a
result, increasingly aware of and sympathetic to the cause
of the Namibian people. Moreover, material and tinancial assistance rendered by the international community
has enabled SWAP0 to sustain the armed struggle ever
since 1966. South Africa has also, by and large, been
isolated from the family of nations and at present has
hardly any contact with the overwhelming majority of
States.

58. My statement will not be complete if I do not pay
SWAP0 a tribute that it so much deserves. For let us not
forget that, but for the armed struggle of the Namibian
people, under the leadership of SWAPO, conditions would
not have been created for efforts to reach a negotiated
peaceful settlement. SWAP0 deserves every commendation, for the statesmanship it has demonstrated throughout
these negotiations, for the patience it has demonstrated and
for the extraordinary and indeed the utmost degree of flexibility and accommodation that it has been prepared to show
for the sake of a peaceful settlement in the interest of the
Namibian people. The United Nations in particular, whose
responsibility it is to free Namibia from South Africa, is
indebted to SWAPO.
(interpretation from French): The
59. The PRESIDENT
next speaker is the representative of Ethiopia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

64. Yet, the racist rbgime of South Africa survivesindeed, it thrives-and the people of Namibia still languish under its rule of oppression and exploitation.
Through fraudulent elections, unrepresentative institutions and, above all, the introduction of racist laws and
decrees, the aptirtheid rtgime continues in its attempts to
perpetuate and even legitimize its occupation of Namibia. Hand in glove with imperialist monopolies and in
open defiance of Decree No. 1 for the Protection of the
Natural Resources of Namibia, enacted by the United
Nations Council for Namibia3 and numerous other decisions, Pretoria exploits avariciously the human and natural resources of Namibia. While, through such exploitative and plundering activities, the racist r6gime and its
collaborators reap super-profits, the present generation
of Namibians is deprived of a fair return for its labour
and future generations are denied the benefit of their
natural heritage. Furthermore, Namibians both inside
and outside the Territory are not only denied their political freedom but are also deprived even of the basic right
to life and limb. Acts of aggression against Angola and
the other States in the region have become all too frequent, thus plunging the entire southern Africa in turmoil. The policy of illegal occupation has also been
extended from Namibia into the territory of Angola.

60. Mr. IBRAHIM
(Ethiopia): I am pleased to see this
important debate on Namibia presided over by you, Sir, a
distinguished son of Africa whose country’s struggle for
independence from colonial rule uniquely qualities it to
champion the cause of the Namibian people, namely, freedom and independence. We are confident that under your
presidency the Council will not only respond to the yeamings of Namibians for freedom and human dignity but
will also take meaningful steps to bring to an end the
intransigence of the racist oligarchy of South Africa.
61. Through its membership in the ,&eague of Nations,
the OAU and ‘the Non-Aligned Movement, my country,
Ethiopia, has a long-standing and very close association
with the question of Namibia. My delegation is therefore
participating in this debate to underline the great importance that we attach to the early independence of Namibia
and, at the same time, to discharge a responsibility
assigned to my country to represent the Non-Aligned
Movement in this ‘debate together with 30 other nonaligned States.

65. That Pretoria has been able to occupy Namibia this
long with impunity, in open defiance of the will of the
international community and in clear contravention of
the rules of international law, must seem rather intriguing at first glance. But to us in Africa the reason for this
seemingly curious situation is crystal clear. In two simple
but eloquent words, it is Western collaboration. Over the
past several decades, Pretoria has enjoyed a very close
co-operation with the Western countries. The West has
built itself a large stake in the South African economy
through direct investment and the provision of credits
and loans. Trade between the West and South Africa is
allowed to flourish while Western technology in its
entirety is put at Pretoria’s disposal. Moreover, South

62. -Since their very inception, the OAU and the NonAligned Movement have championed the cause of the Namibian people. The United Nations, on which the legal
responsibility for the Territory rests, has also contributed
in no small measure to the reaffirmation and universal
recognition of the inalienable right of the Namibian
people to freedom and independence. The role played in
this regard by both the principal and subsidiary organs of
the United Nations can hardly be underestimated. Numerous other intergovernmental
and non-governmental
organizations have also kept the issue in the forefront of
their preoccupations. Indeed, today hardly a week passes
without the issue of an official communique
by
8

Africa is considered in the West not merely as an active
business partner but as a political and military ally as
well, perhaps even as the last bastion of “Western civilization” on the African continent. As a result, it should
not be difficult to discern where the sympathy of much of
the West lies, its verbal condemnation of apartheid notwithstanding. That South Africa has both a strong industrial economy and a powerful military machine, with
both conventional and possibly even nuclear capabilities
the like of which can be found nowhere else in Africa,
cannot but be attributed to this long-standing and continuing Western collaboration. Ironically, it was because
of this close relationship
between the West and
Pretoria-and
not in spite of it--that SWAPO, Africa
and, indeed, the whole world in 1978 accepted the initiative of Canada, France, the Federal Republic of Germany, the United Kingdom and the United States of
America [S/126Xj ostensibly to lead Namibia to independence through free and fair elections under the supervision and control of the United Nations.

know, even today the United States is actively striving to
make the implementation
of the plan conditional upon
the realization of some of its strategic objectives in southem Africa, particularly the withdrawal of Cuban forces
from Angola. Again, we cannot help contrasting the
position currently held by the United States with the
position its representative took in the debate during the
ninth special session:
“Unlike Rhodesia, Namibia is a direct responsibility of the United Nations. It is our responsibility to
ensure that the people of Namibia achieve their independence. That is our primary task and it cannot be
subordinated to ideological differences”I repeat, “cannot
differences”-

be subordinated

to

ideological

“or to any special relationship which any of us may
hope to have with an independent Namibia.“s

66. Since that time, all peace-loving and freedom-loving
people everywhere have been working for the full and
speedy implementation of the plan which resulted from
that initiative, whereas the South African regime has left
no stone unturned to frustrate, at every stage and turn,
this laudable effort. In fact, all the elements in the plan
have at one stage or another been raised as thorny topics
for negotiation by Pretoria, with the deliberate intention
of delaying its implementation. -At a time when all the
elements have been clarified and agreed upon, Pretoria,
pursuing its policy of intransigence and prevarication,
now insists on introducing into the consideration of the
plan new and totally extraneous issues that have no bearing on the independence question.

70. At this juncture I cannot fail to register Ethiopia’s
deep regret at the present position and conduct of the
Western Five. To us, not only is the legitimate presence
of Cuban internationalist forces in Angola irrelevant to
the implementation
of the plan but to raise this issue is
nothing but an unwarranted and arrogant interference in
the domestic affairs of Angola as well as a breach of the
solemn commitment the Five had entered into during the
adootion of the ulan by the Council in resolution 435

71. The desire for peace and the flexibility and statesmanship of SWAPO, have allowed us to come this far
with the plan, but we must recognize that it is South
Africa’s intransigence and the lack of political will on the
part of the Western Five that is preventing us from moving forward with its implementation.
In fact, at this stage
we cannot be wrong if we conclude that neither Pretoria
nor the contact group has any interest in the implementation of the plan and that perhaps the negotiating process
itself is being deliberately used to delay further the very
independence of Namibia.

67. Since we had known all along that the racist regime
was not yet ready or willing to relinquish its hold over
Namibia, its delaying tactics do not come as a surprise‘to
us. What surprises us, however, is the singular lack of
commitment and political will on the part of the contact
group of the five Western countries which initiated the
plan and on whose political and economic leverage its
implementation
was predicated.
68. Not only have the Five failed to press South Africa
to co-operate with. the United Nations but they are
indeed, regrettably, collaborating with Pretoria in its
attempt to undermine and modify the United Nations
plan. In this connection we cannot help recalling what a
member of the contact group, in presenting the settlement proposal and speaking on behalf of all live States,
stated at the ninth special session of the General Assembly on 26 April 1978:

72. What must the international community do in the
circumstances? I submit we all know what has to be
done; it is only the will to do it that continues to elude
some of us. To most of us, the primary responsibility for
the implementation
of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia rests on its original sponsors,
namely, the’contact group of the five Western countries.
But as the Five have failed to discharge that responsibility we should all call upon the United Nations to
shoulder fully its legal and moral responsibilities to the
Namibian people. Furthermore, since we believe that the
contact group has outlived its usefulness and since there
is an imperative need for the United Nations to reassert
its central role in the matter, we urge the contact group to
consider seriously the desirability of disbanding itself and
joining the rest of the world in pursuit of the sacred goal
of Namibia’s genuine independence.

“The proposal must be seen as a balanced package,
the individual parts of which should neither be
changed nor burdened with new conditions so as not
to jeopardize the feasibility of the settlement as a
whole.“’
69. The extent to which the Five have failed to keep
their word since then is a matter of record. As we all
9

73. We also invite the Five and the other Western countries to weigh carefully their interest in southern Africa
from both the short-term and the long-term perspectives.
Inasmuch as Namibia’s independence is intimately linked
with the freedom and dignity of the rest of Africa, we
further invite them to evaluate their relations with Africa
on the one hand and the racist r&ime on the other. We
urge them also to examine their consciences to find out
whether it is the precepts of justice and legality or the
logic of the pocket-book that deserve primacy in the consideration of the national rights of the Namibian people.
We venture to hope, perhaps against hope, that the lofty
ideals of justice and human rights-which they so often
advocate-will
guide them to take the side of the
oppressed and dispossessed rather than that of the oppressor and exploiter in southern Africa.

Council for the invitation extended to my delegation to
participate in this most important debate. Your skilful
leadership and renowned ability displayed during this
crucial session of the Council on the fate of Namibia
should provide the Organization and the world community with an opportunity to achieve a breakthrough in
the present deadlock in the negotiations for a peaceful
Namibian settlement leading to the independence of
Namibia.
78. Through you, Mr. President, I wish also to express
to your predecessor, Mrs. Jeane Kirkpatrick, the representative of the United States, the satisfaction and commendation of my delegation in regard to her exemplary
conduct of the meetings of the Council in the month of
April.
79. Liberia’s decision to participate in this debate has
been motivated not by an impulse of blind solidarity but
by a sense of profound responsibility which dates back to
nearly 20 years ago when Liberia and Ethiopia instituted
proceedings against South Africa in the International
Court of Justice to free Namibia. We are participating in
this meeting with the serious commitment of the Govemment of Liberia to make its due contribution to the
achievement of Namibia’s independence, within the context of Council resolution 435 (1978), at the earliest possible date. It should be well noted that the convening of the
Council on the question of Namibia at the initiative of
the non-aligned countries at this time is most opportune.
The case of Namibia has brought an upsurge of sympathy for Namibia, the front-line States and the neighbouring African States. The assumption by South Africa
and its allies. that if independence were achieved for Namibia today the result would be anarchy has no sound
and justifiable precedent in the liberation struggles of the
African peoples for independence. The lesson has been
that too many extraneous conditions and too much interference tend to provoke anarchy, but there is overwhelming evidence that when the Africans have been left to
themselves the results have been relative peace and tranquillity after independence.

74. That direct and primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security ties with the
Security Council has now become a clichC, but according
to the Charter of the United Nations it still is an obvious
truth. Through its continued illegal occupation of the
international Territory of Namibia, the racist r&me in
Pretoria not only challenges the authority of the United
Nations but also threatens the peace of Africa in general
and that of southern Africa in particular. Its unprovoked
and all too frequent acts of aggression and destabilization
in the front-line States have breached the peace of the
entire area. Indeed, by its open and blatant aggression
against Angola and its illegal occupation of that country’s
southern province, the racist r&me continues to threaten
international peace and security. Are these not the very
acts referred to in Chapter VII, Article 39, of the Charter
: and which should form the basis for enforcement measures by the Council? Yes, they are indeed.
75. Ethiopia therefore believes that it is incumbent upon
the Council to consider measures against South Africa
under Chapter VII of the Charter sooner rather than
later, for later might be too late for many Namibians.
Those who fail to heed the law should be brought to
suffer its sanctions. The Council must act promptly and
decisively. If it fails to act in the clear-cut case of Namibia-a
Territory over which the legal authority and
responsibility of the United Nations are universally
recognised-very
few would expect it to discharge its
Charter responsibilities in other situations where the constituent elements are at once less clear and more disputable. If by its action, or rather, its inaction, the Council
abdicates its responsibilities, not only will its authority
continue to be eroded but indeed its very raison d&e will
be seriously brought into question. The independence of
Namibia, I submit, is the litmus test of both the effectiveness and the relevance of the Council. We in Ethiopia
trust and hope that it .will not be a test failed.

80. The international community has long real&d that
such smear tactics have been used to cast doubts on the
integrity of the Namibian people. The generous contributions and the effectiveness of the nationhood programmes hold promise that the results will not be as
stated. The excellent research and training programmes
carried out by the United Nations Institute for Namibia
at Lusaka are also significant contributions to bringing
about a peaceful Namibia after independence.

76. The PRESIDENT
(interpretationfrom
Fmnch): The
next speaker is the representative of Liberia, whom I
invite to take a place at the Council table and to make
her statement.

-81. My delegation would like to see the, settlement plan
for Namibia’s independence remain within the framework
of the United Nations. Therefore, without pressure on the
contact group and a new set of commitments from that
group to work more in harmony with the SecretaryGeneral the results would look grim indeed. That group
should be given the opportunity for reorientation.

77. Mrs. JONES (Liberia): Mr. President, I wish to
express my appreciation to you and the members of the

82. The Secretary-General deserves our commendation,
for he has demonstrated his good will and his capability
10

I

to bring about Namibia’s independerice if only his efforts
are not frustrated and sabotaged. It would indeed appear
from the evidence before us that progress was made
towards Namibia’s independence and that we were well
on our way to achieving our goal of Namibia’s independence when certain extraneous conditions were placed in
the way. The task that confronts us all is crucial but not
hopeless. Along with the present frustrations which ail
freedbm-loving peoples feel in regard to Namibia’s present fate, we also face more opportunities for the achievement of Namibia’s independence.
83. My delegation supports any-action which would give
the Secretary-General a mandate to continue to take the
leading role in the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978) and appeals to *each and, every Member of the
United Nations to give him full and unconditional
support.

There is also nostalgia, it seems, about letting go this last
of the African colonies, nostalgia at seeing the end of an
era at last.
87. The election, the Constitution and the linkage factors are said to be the remaining issues to be negotiated
for Namibia’s independence. Let us hope that this is the
case, for there may be other linkages in the making which
are at present kept hidden from the world. We appeal to.
South Africa and the contact group and assure them that
the world will be a happier and better place if the evil
system in southern Africa is put to rest and when Namibia becomes independent. The world is always a better
place when an evil system has run its course. The world
was a better place with the end of the slave trade, and
better still with the end of colonial rule. We envisage the
same happy prospect for a free and independent
Namibia.

84. The lines become more clearly drawn each .time the
question of Namibia comes up for debate. On one side are
the proponents of materialism, and on the other the proponents of humanism, each seeking to teach Jhe other the
value of its ideology. It is in this light that the sincerity of
the contact group may be questioned. The credibility of
these nations as genuine peace-brokers and freedombrokers will soon be cast into the dustbin of history unless
they can redeem their reputations as self-appointed
ombudsmen of the United Nations, as they have so far
only preserved the status quo.
85. The delay factor. has also become crucial in the
implementation
of resolution 435. (1978). In September
1978, the contact group made a proposal with the intention of breaking the impasse, in which we still find ourselves. They certainly stood to gain much in undertaking
that initiative. Jt may also be noted that their offer to
assist the Council was made because it was expedient for
them to do so. With few exceptions, they are also well
experienced in handling delicate colonial issues. Indeed,
almost ail the members of the contact group are experienced colonial midwives. If at this point in time they fail
to live up to their good intentions and credentials and the
impasse still exists, with the independence of Namibia still
uncertain, then it can certainly be concluded that the contact group ail along had ulterior motives, before 1978 and
up to the present time. They have not told us the full
story. The whole story will unfold before the world in
agonizing bits and pieces.. We have been told only what is
considered enough for the present condition and time.
What is quite clear is that the situation in Namibia is, by
far, bigger than Namibia itself and certainly the most chailengihg in the entire liberation struggle of Africa.
86. There are so many’stakes and risks,invoived in Namibia’s struggle to become like the rest of Africa. Indeed,
Namibia is a very special case. Namibia is undoubtedly
the richest African coiony.to light for its independence
and its riches and resources are vital for the preservation
and advancement of Western civiiization.
It would
indeed appear as if there is a master plan in which Namibia has been programmed to play a key and vital part.

88. What is needed today is encouragement for more
positive measures for the furtherance of the negotiations
on Namibia’s independence. The efforts of the SecretaryGeneral need to be further strengthened and his role and
prestigd further enhanced to enable him to fulfil speedily
and effectively the obligations of the Organization concerning the freedom of Namibia.
My delegation
expresses its appreciation to the Secretary-General for
his untiring efforts to make resolution 435 (1978) a living
reality.
89. The OAU and SWAP0 continue to demonstrate
restraint. Aggression should be restrained at this late and
crucial hour. SWAP0 has also indicated its readiness to
sign a cease-fire agreement and to accept a timetable for
the deployment of UNTAG in furtherance of the eiectorai process under the supervision of the United
Nations.
90. The intervention of the President of SWAP0 in this
debate [2439th meeting] also demonstrated restraint. His
agreement to consider the proposals for the electoral system and Constituent Assembly for Namibia is heartening. His further assurance that the white minority and
their property in a free Namibia will be protected should
allay many fears and doubts on this matter.
91. South Africa; too, has told us that it is capable of
self-restraint and good will and it will not accept the
charge that it is opposed to freedom for Namibia.
92. How long South Africa will indeed march with a
rhythm that is out of step with the rest of the world is
unknown. If, after more than 300 years, the whites of
South Africa have not learned the lesson of goodneighbourliness, when will they ever learn? They must
cease to be distrustful of the efforts of their own kind even
when the latter would persuade them that the earth is the
common heritage of ail mankind, where ail mankind,
including white South Africans, can find security and be
understood,
accepted, forgiven and loved. With honesty
\
to ourselves and the Namibian people, the political will,
moral courage and a determination on the part of the
11

entire membership of the United Nations,, it should be
possible for Namibia to achieve its independence in the
immediate future.
93. If Namibia is not free today it is because it is a pawn
on the international chessboard. Negotiations should proceed in good faith SO that distrust and suspicion give way
to the prospect of lasting good will and friendship in the
years ahead, with a free Namibia contributing it full share
to universal peace and brotherhood.
94. We must all work in harmony to put to rest the fears
and suspicions of South Africa. Friendship, however, cannot be cultivated at the point of a gun. The whites in
South Africa must also know that, while there may be a
diversity in the races of mankind, the one thing that they
all hold dear and in common is their love of freedom,
which even man’s Creator cannot take from him. The
love of freedom is universal. It is as vital to life as the
breath of life that man breathes. Man not only sheds his
blood for freedom; be gives it a place of immortality to
preserve it long after it has been achieved.
95. Mr. TROYANOVSKY
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretatioi from Russian): After a lengthy
interval, the Council has met once again-to consider the
question of Namibia and the situation concerning the
implementation
of the Council’s decisions regarding the
early achievement of independence by the people of that
country.
96. We welcome the participation in the meetings of the
Council of the ministers for foreign affairs of a large
number of African and other non-aligned States Members
of the United Nations.
97. We also welcome the presence, at these meetings of
the Council of Mr. Sam Nujoma, the President of
SWAPO, which for so many years has led the heroic
struggle on the part of the people of Namibia for their
national liberation. Mr. Nujoma set forth most clearly
and carefully the position of SWAP0 on the item under
discussion [ibid].
98. The convening of the Council at the present time has
been occasioned by profound concern on the part of African, but by no means only African, countries at the lack
of progress in resolving the problem of Namibia, and the
serious overall deterioration of the situation in the south
of Africa. I would go even further and say that the whole
of Africa is up in arms and furious about the situation
that now exists. The Soviet people share this anger and
indignation.
99. The report submitted to the Council by the
Secretary-General rightly expresses serious concern at
the delay in the implementation
of Council resolution
435 (1978). The report states that:
“the delay in implementing resolution 435 (1978) is
having a destructive impact not only on Namibia itself
but also on the prospect of a peaceful and prosperous
future for the region as a whole. The delay also has an

adverse effect on international relations in a wider
sphere, adding to the prevailing sense of frustration
and mistrust, with all that that implies for peace and
security in the region.” [S/15776, para. 16.1
100. In recent days the whole world has witnessed yet
another act of aggression: the barbarous raid by the
South African Air Force on Maputo. This is not a link in
any kind of cycle of violence, as certain speakers have
tried to present it here; no, it was an unprovoked attack
on a sovereign State: the sovereign State of Mozambique,
a Member of the United Nations. In the statement on this
event issued on 27 May by TASS, reference is made to
the solidarity of the Soviet Union with the people of
Mozambique and its unswerving and unfailing support
for the people of Mozambique in its unremitting struggle
against the forces of imperialism,
colonialism
and
racism.
101. I ,doubt that anyone would deny that Namibia’s
winning of independence and its liberation from the
colonial and racist yoke constitute today one of the most
urgent of international tasks. The development of the
situation, not only in southern Africa but far beyond the
confines of that region, will depend on the justice and
speed with which that task can be completed.
102. The United Nations bears a direct responsibility
for the political fate of Namibia, for its decolonization
and for its attainment of independence. Taken together,
United Nations decisions, including Council. resolution
435 (1978), set out the ways and means for ensuring Namibia’s transition to independence as well as the ‘role of
SWAP0 as the sole authentic representative of the Namibian people. These United Nations decisions and the
Organixation’s position cannot be diminished by any political intrigues.
103. In this regard, the Soviet delegation would like to
mention the great work done by the United Nations
Council for Namibia, presided over by the representative
of Zambia, Mr. Paul Lusaka. The Council for Namibia
has done a great deal to defend the interests of the Namibian people and to assist the noble cause of the liberation of Namibia.
104. One would have to be extremely ndive in political
affairs to believe that the Pretoria racist regime could
possibly have acted so provocatively as to have persisted
in its occupation of Namibia and in its aggressive actions
against neighbouring African States were it not for the
fact that it is aware of the direct and indirect military,
economic, political and diplomatic backing and protection of the United States and certain other countries
members of the North Atlantic ,Treaty Organization
(NATO). This has been often repeated, but the obvious
must be repeated because there is no getting away from
it. Nor can there be any doubt that; were it not for that
support, the representative of the Pretoria regime would
. not have dared to speak here in the Council in such a
provocative way, threatening African States with all
manner of reprisals.

105. But since that is the case, can one be surprised at
the fact that the so-called Western contact group-which
Mr. Nujoma referred to here as self-appointed-should
have finally succeeded after five years of effort in leading
the Namibian settlement process into a deadlock? Could
one really have expected any effective assistance in the
matter of liberating Namibia from those countries, which
‘are so closely linked with South Africa, which consider it
a long-standing ally and which themselves have an interest in seeing the continuation of the colonial economic
exploitation of Namibia?

aligned countries took the initiative of calling for the
convening of the Council. The United Nations-its Security Council and its General Assembly-have
given a
mandate to no one to take over their role and responsibility in the matter of bringing about a political settlement
of the problem of Namibia.
110. Every year we witness the growth and the broadening of international support for the just struggle of the
Namibian people to rid its homeland of the colonial
yoke. Striking testimony to this is found in the documents adopted recently by a number of international
conferences and meetings. The Seventh Conference of
Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held at New Delhi from 7 to 12 March this year,
adopted important decisions relating to the just struggle
of the people of Namibia [see S/15675 and Corr. 2 and 2,
annex, sect. I, paras. 40-S]. The Conference expressed
firm support for the demand for the granting of independence to Namibia and called for the elimination of the
apartheid r&me in South Africa. The Political Declaration adopted at that Conference condemns the lawlessness of the South African racists, their connivance with
Western Powers and demands the earliest possible implementation of Council resolutions on the granting of independence to Namibia. It confirms wholehearted solidarity with the oppressed people of South Africa and
demands a comprehensive boycott of South Africa and
condemns the support for Pretoria given by the United
States [ibid, paras. 52-591.

106. In the course of the five years that have elapsed
since the Council’s adoption of resolution 435 (1978), one
artificial obstacle after another has constantly been raised
to the implementation
of that resolution. In the beginning, as we know, the major obstacle to the independence
of Namibia was said to be the absence of guarantees for
the white minority. Then we had the question of the electoral system. Later we heard about the so-called problem
of the impartiality of the United Nations. Very recently a
new condition has emerged: linkage between the settlement for Namibia and the withdrawal of the Cuban military contingent from Angola, a contingent which is there
at the request of the Angolan Government and on the
basis of an agreement between Angola and Cuba. This
unlawful demand is aimed at a clear and obvious target:
blockage of a Namibian settlement. At the same time it
has a hidden purpose: to weaken Angola in the face of the
military threat from the South African aggressors.
Obviously, this is nothing but flagrant, inadmissible intervention in the internal affairs of the sovereign State of
Angola. In spite of the serious losses it has sustained,
Angola, which is at the very forefront of the struggle
against colonialism and racism, continues to defend the
cause of the freedom of peoples and peace in the African
continent. This has earned it great authority in and
beyond Africa. It is not for nothing that this notorious
linkage has been repudiated by the entire world community. It is not for nothing that, in this very chamber, one
speaker after another has rejected the linkage between the
question of Namibia and the withdrawal of the Cuban
military contingents from Angola.

111. Of great significance too was the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence, held in Paris this April6 The
decisions of the Conference and the statements made by
its participants demonstrated the determination of the
world community to put an end as soon as possible to the
colonial occupation of Namibia by the racist r&me and
to enable the people of Namibia to exercise their inalienable right to independence. The Conference unambiguously rejected the manoeuvres of the United States aimed
at linking the problem of Namibia with the withdrawal
of Cuban military personnel from Angola.

107. The auestion arises: What other rabbits are the
Western illu&onists going to pull out of the hat in order to
prevent a settlement of the Namibian problem?

112. The Soviet Union categorically condemns the continuing illegal occupation of Namibia by the racist
regime of Pretoria and favours the immediate granting of
genuine independence to Namibia, in accordance with
the decisions of the United Nations in their totality,
including Council resolution 435 (1978), which define the
basis for a peaceful settlement ,of the problem of
Namibia.

108. The representative of Western countries are continuing to express forced optimism and to give their assurances that, if they are given just a little more time, the
problem will be solved and everything will be fine. Even
now, at these meetings of the Council, we are hearing
once more the voices of the North Atlantic sirens repeating the same words of comfort and encouragement.

113. The Soviet Union favours the earliest nossible
exercise, by the Namibian people, of their ir&enable
right to self-determination and independence on the basis
of the preservation of the unity and territorial integrity of
Namibia, including Walvis Bay and the offshore islands
and favours the immediate and total withdrawal from
Namibia of the troops and administration
of South
Africa.

109. But SWAP0 and the States of Africa have learned
from their own bitter experience the real value of those
assurances and those promises. It was for good reason
that Mr. Nujoma stated here frankly that SWAP0
believes the role of the so-called contact group to be over.
It ti for this very reason that African States and non13

114. The Soviet Union favours the strengthening of the
role of the United Nations in a Namibian settlement by
means of ensuring effective control by the Council-and I
mean the Council and not some group of States-over the
implementation
of all aspects of the attainment by Namibia of genuine independence, including, of course, rnatters pertaining to the formation, composition, leadership,
deployment and activities of UNTAG, mentioned in paragraph 7 of the report of the.Secretary-General [S/ZS776J.
We believe it is necessary to lay down a clear-cut timeframe for carrying out further measures designed to
ensure independence for the people of Namibia.
115. It is the bounden duty of the Council to take all
necessary measures to see to it that as soon as possible
implementation
of its resolutions on the question of Namibia is secured.
116. In this regard, our own. country supports the
demands for the Council to impose comprehensive, mandatory sanctions on the Pretoria rQime,,in accordance
with Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations. It
is important to ensure that all States observe the embargo
decreed by the Council on arms deliveries to South Africa
[resalurion 418 (19791 and halt co-operation with South
Africa in the political, economic and military fields,
including the nuclear field. The Council must take measures to prevent accessby South Africa to the possession of
nuclear weapons.
117. Solidarity with the people struggling against the
vestiges of colonialism, racism and apartheid for the attainment of independence is one of the fundamental
principles of Soviet foreign policy. The Soviet Union has
given and will continue to give consistent support for the
just struggle of Namibia against colonial domination, a
struggle it has been waging, under the leadership of
SWAPO, its sole authentic and legitimate representative.
We have supported and will continue to support the.
front-line States in their efforts to bring about a Namibian
settlement on the basis of implementation of the decisions
of the United Nations on that subject.

indevendent Namibia and thus earn the recognition
and -ftiendship of eternal Africa.
119. The thrust of that statement and the clear-cut
nature of the choice proposed clearly reflect the very
great importance that the Togolese Government and its
leader, General Gnassingbe EyadCma, attach to the independence of Namibia.
120. We know, Sir, that that unwavering devotion of
the Togolese Government and people to the cause of
Namibia is also shared by the Government and people of
Zaire. You will therefore understand my delegation’s
satisfaction at seeing the worthy son of a great African
country presiding over the Council when it is once again
considering the question of Namibia. We are convinced
that under your wise guidance the Council, at the conclusion of this debate, will adopt the measures long awaited
by the immense majority of the international community
to hasten the long-delayed independence of Namibia.
121. Until the very last moment, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of Togo hoped to participate personally in these very important meetings of the
Council on the question of Namibia. However, events
beyond his control unfortunately prevented him from
being present here today. He asked me to convey to you,
Sir, to his colleagues who came here expressly to demonstrate the importance that Africa attaches to the settlement of the question of Namibia and to the members of
the Council his appreciation, encouragement .and best
wishes for success.
122. My delegation takes this opportunity to pay a welldeserved tribute to Mr. Sam Nujoma, the President of
SWAPO, for the political wisdom and great qualities he
has demonstrated in the quest for a just solution to the
Namibian question.
123. Inscribed on the agenda of the General Assembly
ever since the creation of the United Nations, the question
of Namibia is so well known to the members of our Council and the participants in this debate that there is no need
for any historical account to be given. The history of this
question has, moreover, been lucidly presented by the
United Nations Council for Namibia in its report to the
International Conference in Support of the Struggle of the
Namibian People for Independence, which was held in
Paris from 25 to 29 A~ril.~

118. Mr. AMEGA (Togo) (interpretation from French):
Two years ago, on 22 April 1981 12269th meeting],
addressing the Council on the question that remains
before it today, the question of Namibia, the Minister for
Foreign Affairs and Co-operation
of the Togolese
Republic, Mr. Anani Kuma Akakpo-Ahianyo,
de:
nounced the decline of moral values in our time which
enables the racist r6gime of Pretoria, with’ the undisguised support of certain States Members of the Organization, to continue with impunity its illegal occupation of
Namibia. Then, turning to the crux of the problem,
namely, the means of rapidly securing the independence
of Namibia, the Minister declared that South Africa’s
friends were facing a fundamental choice, namely, to
continue to seek satisfaction of their short-term interests
by supporting South Africa in its illegal occupation of
Namibia and thus to alienate the rest of Africa or, on
the other hand, to abandon this short-sighted and hopeless policy and contribute positively to the advent of an

124. However, my delegation would like briefly to present the situation in Namibia. On the one hand, there are
the Namibian ‘people, a people who love freedom and
peace, unfortunately driven to armed struggle for the exercise of their inalienable and sacred rights to freedom and
independence-rights
recognized for all peoples by. the
Charter of the United Nations and other international
legal instruments. On the other hand, there is the abject
apartheid @ime, condemned by the international community, continuing its illegal occupation of Namibia despite General Assembly resolution 1514 (XV) of 14
December 1960, containing the Declaration on the Grant-,
14
.

ing of Independence to Colonial ~Cbuntries and Peoples;
despite General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27
October 1966, which terminated the Mandate of South
Africa over Namibia and placed the Territory under the
direct responsibility of the United Nations; despite the
advisory opinion handed d-own in 1971 by the Intemational Court of Justice, declaring South Africa’s presence
in Namibia illegal and that that country was obliged to.
withdraw from Namibia;’ and, finally, despite numerous
resolutions of the General Assembly as well as of the
Security Council, which required South Africa to with:
draw from the Territory. That is the nature of the problem which is once again before the Council.
125. To resolve the problem that I have just described,
the Council, on 29 September 1978, in which it approved
the proposal for a settlement of the Namibian situation
[S/l2636J, urging the conclusion of a cease-tire agreement, the creation of a demilitarized zone, the deployment of UNTAG and the holding of free and fair
elections under United Nations supervision and control.
All of the interested parties accepted that resolution,
including South Africa, and the five member countries of
the contact group undertook the task of securing the
implementation
of that resolution from the parties
concerned.
\
126. The Council is once again seized of the question of
Namibia because, nearly five years after its adoption,
resolution 435 (1978) has not even begun to be implemented. In the view of my delegation, this resolution has
not been implemented for four reasons.
127. First, the so-called acceptance of this resolution by
South Africa was in reality merely a ruse to gain time so
that it could continue the racist r&me’s domination of
Namibia. How else can we explain the fact that, after.
having declared that it accepted the United Nations plan
for Namibia, the apurrheid r&ime sought to impose on
the Namibian people and upon the international community an alleged internal settlement, the objective of which
was to extend the shameful system of apartheid delinitively to the Territory7 How else can we explain the fact
that, despite its acceptance of resolution 435 (1978),
South Africa continued and stepped up its dilatory and
diversionary tactics, declaring, at the pre-implementation
meeting held at Geneva in January 1981, that it was
premature to discuss the implementation
of that plan,
when SWAP0 was prepared to negotiate .a cease-fire
agreement and to set a date for the holding of free and
fair elections?
128. Secondly, it is due to the insolent intransigence of
South Africa. That intransigence is demonstrated at the
internal level by relentless oppression, whose main features and methods I described in the statement I made at
the thirty-seventh session of the General Assembly.9
Externally, the intransigence and insoience of South
Africa may be seen in its repeated acts of aggression
against neighbouring countries, namely, Angola, Lesotho and Mozambique, in flagrant violation of the principles of the non-use of force in international relations and
respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of

States. The intransigence of South Africa would not be
possible without the extremely regrettable support that
country continues to receive from certain States
Members of the Organization.
129. Thirdly, it is due to the fact that not all the
members of the contact group have exerted all the pressure they could bring to bear ,on the Government of
Pretoria in view of the enormous influence they enjoy
with that Government and of their real weight in the international community.
130. Finally, the fourth reason is the linkage that has
been established between the independence of .Namibia
and the withdrawal of foreign forces which are present in
Angola at the express request of the Government of that
sovereign State. In order to establish that linkage, it was
first necessary to distort the question of Namibia. The
problem of Namibia-which
is, as we have demonstrated, a simple problem of decolonization-was
turned
into a complex ideological problem. This was followed
by a feigned ignorance of the fact that the foreign forces
are in Angola precisely because of the repeated acts of
aggression on the part of South Africa against that country. As I said in my statement to the General Assembly
on 14 December 1982:
“The question of the withdrawal of foreign troops in
Angola is a matter exclusively within the competence
of that country. The withdrawal of those foreign
troops, which is desired by’certain parties, would, in
fact, be greatly helped by South African military disengagement in Namibia and the granting of independence to that Territory. Eliminate the cause and the
effects disappear.“rO
131. My delegation thus deeply regrets the linkage that
has been established between the independence of Na-,
mibia and the withdrawal of foreign troops from Angola.
We address an urgent appeal to the allies of South Africa
to place the Namibiin problem back in its proper context.
The question of Namibia is a question of decolonization
and nothing else: It concerns the inalienable rights of a
people to self-determination, freedom and national independence.’ If we return the Namibian problem to its
proper context, we are obliged to recognize that resolution 435 (1978) provides an equitable basis for its solution. That is why, in ‘conformity
with the Paris
Declaration on Namibia and the Programme of Action
on Namibia, adopted by the International Conference in
Support of the Struggle, of the Namibian People for Independence,” and in conformity with the recommendations
of the Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries [see S/15675 and Con-. I
and 2, annex, sect. I, paw, 40-517, my delegation requests
-the Council to take the necessary steps to secure South
Africa’s immediate implementation
of resolution 435
(1978).
132. It is time that the Council remembered that the
question of Namibia is the direct responsibility of the
United Nations and that it is incumbent upon the Council

.

to use every means to prevail on South Africa to implement resolution 435 (1978). In so doing, the Council will
finally do justice to the oppressed people of Namibia, who
continue to place their trust in the United Nations.

cation for terminating foreign occupation of our land.
However, force prevents the exercise of our rights there,
as it does in southern Africa.
138. Fortunately, there is unanimity about the justice
of. the cause of the Namibian people-despite differences
concerning the way to redress the wrongs visited upon
them-and
I consider that to be real progress.

133. To conclude, my delegation wishes to reatl’irm the
complete support of the Government and people to Togo
for the heroic struggle being waged by the Namibian
people for their independence, under the wise and responsible leadership of SWAPO, its sole and authentic representative. My delegation wishes also to reiterate to the
Secretary-General and to the United Nations Council for
Namibia-so
effectively presided over by my colleague
and brother, Mr. Paul Lusaka-the
appreciation of the
Togolese Government for their tireless efforts to hasten
the advent of a free and independent Namibia.

139. We understand the political obstacles that block
the implementation
of the United Nations plan for the
independence of Namibia. Most of them are the result,
first, of the continuing South African occupation of Namibia and, secondly, of the strange political nature of the
South African system. These have spilled over into the
neighbouring region. South Africa’s prevarication concerning allowing the people of Namibia to exercise their
right to self-determination,
and its racist policy have
complicated the social and political problems in southern
Africa, and this has led to the emergence of a condition
of instability that has increased the level of extremism,
violence and resistance in the area.

134. Mr. SALAH (Jordan) (interpretation from Arabic):
I should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for this month and to
express’ our confidence that your experience and diplomatic talents in conducting the deiiberations will lead to
the results that we all desire.
135. I should also like to avail myself of this opportunity to welcome the ministers for foreign affairs who
have come here to participate in this important debate on
Namibia, despite the urgent political tasks awaiting them
in their countries. The presence in New York of this
impressive number of ministers for foreign affairs bears
witness to the critical nature and importance of the stage
which the question of Namibia has ‘reached. It also
emphasizes the need for the international community to
take effective and urgent action to ensure the implementation of Council resolution 435 (1978). which provides
for Namibia’s independence. It gives me pleasure also to
welcome Mr. Sam Nujoma among us during these deliberations and I should like to reaffh-m to him Jordan’s
solidarity with the people of Namibia in their struggle to
exercise their right to freedom and independence.

140. Hence, it is clear that tackling the question of Namibia first and that of southern Africa second will .iead to
an amelioration of the situation in the area and, as a
corollary, to some sort of stability. To consider the cause
as the effect will not help the advocates of realism, pragmatism and moderation. We believe in realism and moderation in dealing with international political problems,
provided this is preceded by an exact and realistic diagnosis of the principal cause. My delegation believes that
the circumstances which led to the emergence of the socalled linkage cannot be separated from the foreign occupation of the Territory of Namibia and the policies of
apartheid of the State responsible for that occupation.
We believe that, if the question of occupation is resolved
first and that of the policy of apartheid afterwards, the
concern that some feel about the matter of linkage may
automatically
be dispelled, because the circumstances
that led to it will have been eliminated.

136. The question of Namibia is one of a people under
foreign rule. That foreign domination has been perpetuated by the illegal hold on Namibia by South Africa,
which received a Mandate from the League of Nations to
help the Namibian people achieve sovereignty and independence within the framework of the full exercise of
their right to self-determination. The situation has been
complicated by the continuation of the policies of racial
segregation and discrimination of South Africa, so that
the Namibian people, together with other peoples of
southern Africa, are the victims of foreign occupation and
the policies of racial segregation and discrimination.

141. The adoption of Council resolution 435 (1978) was
a turning-point in the road leading to Namibia’s independence. In this respect, we note with satisfaction the convergence of views on the need to bring about the
implementation of resolution 435 (1978) as the only accep
table framework. We cannot fail to mention also the
important recommendations adopted by the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence, held recently in Paris.ri
142. My delegation welcomes the response of the frontline States and their co-operation with the Western contact group in the search for the best and most effective
way to ensure the implementation
of resolution 435
(1978). We pay particular tribute to the positive and realistic spirit shown by SWAPO, the sole legitimate representative of the people of Namibia, to facilitate the
implementation
of that resolution. We welcome its willingness to sign the cease-fire agreement and its commitment to co-operation with the Secretary-General and the

137. I shall not dwell at length on the ethical and legal
aspects that have been ignored by South Africa. I do not
think that there is any controversy within the Councit
over the justice of the cause of the Namibian people.
However, I realize that we live in a world in which having
rights and a just cause is not enough to check oppression
and deter aggression. I represent a country and belong to
a people which have legal instruments and ethical justifi16

United Nations machinery with a view to bringing about
a peaceful transition to independence.

149. Mr. MOGWE (Botswana): Even as delegations
from different parts of the globe were arriving in New
York to participate in the Council’s &bate on the situation
in Namibia, South African militq
aircraft were violating the territorial integrity of Motiique,
strafing innocent civilians and spreading death and destruction. The
raid was not the first one into Mozambique, nor is
Mozambique the only State in the rgion to have been so
brutalized. Such raids are undertaken to kill, maim, terrorize and destablize local populatiaas. They are undertaken in retaliation for acts of sabotage carried out in
South Africa by South African na!ionals. The raid into
Mozambique during the present de&e illustrates forcefully the danger to which States in the region are exposed
on account of South Africa’s intransigence and its contempt for resolutions calling for the dismantling of aparzheid and the granting of freedom to its oppressed
peoples. South Africa alleges that States in the region
harbour, train and arm the freedom fighters. This is quite
often the pretext for attacking refugee camps.

143. We avail ourselves of this opportunity to commend
the extent of the progress achieved among the various
parties through the Western contact group. However, the
prevarication of South Africa and its obstruction to the
process of the independence of Namibiaare evident; it has
introduced extraneous conditions that have not been part
of the negotiations concerning the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978) and have nothing whatsoever to do
with the resolution itself. As the Secretary-General stated
in his recent report:
“These issues now apparently constitute the main reason for the delay in the implementation of the United
Natioris plan. I am deeply concerned that factors tihich
lie outside the scope of resolution 435 (1978) should
hamper its implementation.”
[s/15776, para. 19.1
lti.
We share the Secretary-General’s concern over this
situation. We share his view that the essential issue of
Namibian independence should be dealt with speedily.
We believe that the settlement of the question of Namibia
would have a positive effect in lessening tension in the
area and creating circumstances conducive to reinforcing
the opportunities for stability and security in the area.

150. The economic circumstances of our countries are
such that they allow us to spend our limited resources
only on the development of our countries and not on
training and arming freedom fighters. We are not at war
with South Africa nor do we pose any danger to its security. SWAP0 is waging a liberation war and has long
declared its readiness to sign a cease-fire agreement with
South Africa; but rather than respond favourably’ to
SWAPO, South Africa wants non-aggression pacts
signed with countries with which it is not at war. South
Africa’s acts of aggression must be condemned.

145. My delegation wishes to commend the persistent
efforts of the Secretary-General in his attempt to accelerate the implementation of the plan for Namibia’s independence in accordance with resolution 435 (1978). The
Secretary-General has fulfilled his role with dedication, as
is clearly reflected in his report. We wish to express our
gratitude to the Secretariat, which has worked with efflciency and speed to launch IJNTAG and thus help to
implement the settlement plan.

151. The expldsion which took place in Pretoria last
week, resulting in suffering and serious loss of life,
should be a matter of profound concern to the international community as it vindicated equally forcefully the
fears which have been expressed by our leaders over a
long period but which have gone unheeded. The attack
was not an accident, an aberration or a hideous dream to
be wished away or ignored. It was a fact of the unfolding
tragic situation in southern Africa. It is regrettable that
the terrorism of apartheid and all it Stands for has driven
man to violence. It has taken 70 years to make this hard
choice.

146. More than ever before, the Council is required to
shoulder its responsibilities ‘for the implementation
of
resolution 435 (1978), especially in view of recent events
in the area which led to loss of life and material damage
and of the aggression to which Mozambique has been
subjected. All these may have grave implications for
security and safety in the area. -If the Council does not
deal effectively with the matter and discharge its responsibilities, the situation in southern Africa will deteriorate
beyond control.
‘.

152. Faced .with a similar
Cassius:

problem

Brutus said to

“We all stand up against the spirit of Caesar;

147. In conclusion, we are confident that the Namibian
people’s dream of independence and sovereignty under
the leadership of their sole legitimate representative,
SWAPO, will soon come true. However, the Council and
all concerned should contribute to hastening the coming
of that day so that the Namibiacan build and develop
their country and enjoy security and a better life.

That is our prayer too.

148. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretarion from French):
The next speakei is the’ Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Botswana, Mr. Archibald Mogwe, to whom I extend a
welcome. I invite him to take a place at the Council table
and to make his statement.

153. hlr. President, my delegation congratulates you on
your conduct of the proceedings of the Council. I have
had the privilege of knowing you and working with you
over a long period of time, and your impartiality has

And in the spirit of men there is no blood:
O! then that we could come by Caesar’s spirit,
And not dismember Caesar.”

17

never been called $tt question. That also goes for your
country, Zaire.
154. Contrary to.@rat Mr. von Schimding, the representative or South Aff&, said the other day, the purpose of
these meetings of-&e Council is to promote a peaceful
settlement of the question of Namibia. Almost five years
ago, the Council adopted resolution 435 (1978). Since
1978, the front-line States, the Secretary-General, the
Security Council, the General Assembly, the OAU, the
Non-Aligned Movement and, recently,’ the International
Conference in Support of the Struggle of the Namibian
People for Independence have all made every endeavour
to facilitate the implementation of the resolution, but to
no avail. Angry speeches and declarations, solidarity rallies, resolutions, programmes of action, contemplated
sanctions, negotiations and even more patient negotiations, supplicatory pilgrimages to Pretoria and Cape
Town and every mode of gentle persuasion-all
have
failed to induce South Africa’s co-operation in the implementation of a plan it accepted in 1978. The plan remains
unimplemented.
South Africa maintains its illegal and
unwanted presence in Namibia with defiant impunity.
155. The statement made before the Council by the
representative of South Africa [244&h meeting] was a brutal revelation of South Africa’s contempt for the United
Nations and its resolutions. The statement was depressing
and a source of much frustration. It harks back to the
Mandate of the League of Nations and underlines, .with
typical Boer frankness, South Africa’s non-acceptance of
the termination of its League of Nations Mandate and its
contemptuous refusal to recognize resolutions passed and
action taken consequent upon the advisory opinion of the
International Court of Justice.8 The statement gave a catalogue of allegations against the United Nations itself and
accused its officials of duplicity and partiality towards
SWAPO. The statement accused SWAP0 of embracing
Marxist principles, of deriving its inspiration from the
Cuban Revolution and of some mission to kill and to
impose itself by force on the people of Namibia. The statement was a display of the arrogance that is a common
attribute of the strong and powerful. The statement contains a fundamental contradiction, for, while South
Africa alleges that it accepts the right of all peoples to
self-determination, it says in the same breath that it will
“not tolerate the expansion of Soviet imperialism” on its
borders.

believe that the birth of independent Namibia, long
overdue, need not continue to be violent and as such to
be a source of international anxiety and concern. We are
satisfied that the United Nations plan for Namibia provies, in spirit and design, the right conditions for peaceful
change. Yet the plan has been sidetracked and rendered
ineffectual by insistence on the withdrawal of Cuban forces from. -Angola as a pre-condition for its phased
implementation.
li8. In January 1981, the Geneva pm-implementation
talks were held to advance the negotiations to a stage for
determining the date for the implementation
of resolution 435 (1978). The failure of the meeting to achieve its
objectives resulted from South Africa’s expressed distrust
of the United Nations, and progress towards the implementation of the resolution could only follow the restoration-of mutual trust and confidence among the parties.
No other reason was given, not even the presence of
Cuban forces in Angola. The challenge and the defiance
had to be met and obstacles and impediments to the
solution of the Namibia problem removed. Principles to
be inscribed in the independence Constitution of Namibia were formulated and, after careful and deliberate consideration, accepted by SWAPO. We were close
to an agreement on the implementation
of the United
Nations plan-a fact Mr. Bush, Vice-President of the
United States, acknowledged at Nairobi in November
1982.
159. Having progressed so far, it is not only surprising
but distressing that South ‘Africa should do precisely
what it accuses the United Nations of doing, that is,
return to the threadbare afguments of the past. South
Africa still seeks “firm and concrete signs” that the
United Nations has terminated -what it regards as bias in
favour of SWAPO. The United Nations, through the
report of its Secretary-General [S/1577(% has demonstrated its seriousness of purpose in advancing the peaceful solution of the problem. The United Nations, by
giving some measures of recognition to-the role played
by the Western contact group in the settlement process
and by going along with the constitutional principles formulated by the group [S&5287& has demonstrated its
desire to dispel any of.South Africa’s concerns that might
hinder peaceful negotiations. .Our presence here and the
large number of meetings held on this one subject also
provide-firm and concrete proof, not merely a sign of our
concern for the people of Namibia.

156. I have already stated that the objective of this
series of meetings is to remove such obstacles as impede
the way to a peaceful settlement of the question of Namibia. We have come here because we remain steadfast
in our commitment to the implementation of resolution
435 (1978). We have come here because INamibia continues to be a candidate for General Assembly resolution
1514 (XV) of 14 December 1960 and because the Territory is a direct responsibility of the United Nations in
accordance with General Assembly resolution 2145
(XXI).

160. Resolution 435 (1978) is not being implemented
yet-not because there are any major outstanding issues
still to be resolved but because the United States and
South Africa have decided to subordinate Namibia’s progress to freedom and independence ,to the removal of
Cuban forces from Angola.
161. The representative ‘of South Africa, having
recounted what, in the view of his Government, were the
reasons for the non-implementation
of the resolution,
added:
:
“In the meantime, another threat to the stability and
the process of self-determination in South West Africa

157. We continue to proclaim our devotion to the efflcacy of peaceful change. We have come because we
18

. ; . is casting its ominous shadowacross our subcontinent, yet another peril for the peace of southern Africa
which is growing with each passing month and which
has not been of South Africa’s making. I refer to the
increasing and threatening presence of the surrogate
forces of an expansionist . . . super-Power in our
region.** [244Oth meeting, para. 81.1

means reverse the situation they helped to create?
Thirdly, South Africa’s act of aggression against Angola
was condemned by Council resolution 387 (1976). South
Africa must have felt betrayed by its allies, including the
United States, because, instead of opposing the resolution outright or using their power of veto, the United
States and others opted for .abstention. Would it be
wrong therefore to assume that the United States insistence on linkage is atonement for that seeming betrayal
and an attempt to restore mutual confidence?

162. “In the meantime*’ South Africa says. Yet the
Cuban forces have been in Angola for the past eight
years. South Africa says: “another threat**, “another
peril”, “not of South Africa’s making”. SWAP0 is waging the war of liberation and the people of Namibia are
struggling fortheir independence because South Africa as
the then administering
Power resolutely refused to
comply with Article 77 of the Charter of the United
Nations to place South West Africa,‘a non-self-governing
Territory, under the trusteeship system; refused to transmit information on its administration of the Territory;
refused to take due account of the political aspirations of
the people and to assist in the progressive development of
their free political institutions.
South Africa says:
“another threat”, “another peril”, “not of South Africa’s
making”.

166. United States officials tell the world of some
empirical relationship existing between the removal of
South Africa’s occupation army from southern Angola,
its forces from Namibia and the withdrawal of Cuban
forces from Angola. We are told that the introduction of
Cuban forces in the area “has torn the fabric of reciprocal restraint between the United States and the Soviet
Union”. We are told that the dissident National Union
for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA) movement is an entity to bear in mind in the search for a
peaceful settlement. East-West ideological rivalry is the
altar on which the people of Namibia are being
sacrificed.

163. In a major speech in Nairobi last year, the VicePresident of the United States declared that: “The withdrawal of Cuban forces from Angola in a parallel
framework with South Africa’s departure from Namibia
is the key to the settlement we all desire.** The implication
of this statement is that the withdrawal of South African
troops from Namibia, as scheduled in the United Nations
plan, must take place at the same time as the withdrawal
of Cuban forces from Angola. The condition vitiates the
United Nations plan accepted by both South Africa and
the United States and has been responsible for the present
impasse and for the continuing loss of human life in
Namibia.

167. We reject the view that Namibia’s concerns are
subordinate to those of South Africa and that the latter’s
preoccupations must be considered so overriding that the
former’s must be compromised, sacrificed or reduced to
the level of a mere cold-war issue. The presence of Cuban
troops in Angola is irrelevant to the search for a solution
to the Namibian problem. Their future stay in Angola is
a matter to be decided solely by the Governments of
Angola and Cuba.
168. Namibia is a United Nations Territory. Resolution
435 (1978) approves a plan to be implemented under the
authority of the Council. We cannot over-emphasize the
role of the Secretary-General in this regard. As he himself rightly points out in his report, he regards “the problem of Namibia as a special responsibility of the
Secretary-General in view of the unique relationship
between the United Nations and the people of Namibia’*
[S/15776, para. 201. We support the Secretary-General in
the discharge of that responsibility.

164. Repeat assurances by Angola that the Cuban presence in Angola implies no offensive designs against any
States have failed to dissuade the United States and South
Africa from their obstructive role. Cuban forces in
Angola are seen as a threat to South Africa’s security
despite the fact that they have neither invaded Namibia
nor, to our knowledge, have they at any time ever
engaged the South African occupying forces. Reasons for
the United States/South African obstructive collaboration, known euphemistically as constructive engagement,
should therefore be sought elsewhere.

169. Botswana recognizes that, contrary to accusations
of gross interference often levelled against them, the
involvement of the members of the contact group in the
Namibia question is in compliance with the role Africa
has long envisaged for them as friends of South Africa.
We recognize that their role can only be ancillary to that
of the Council and the Secretary-General. Their private
national interests should not be allowed to delay or
divert the course of Namibian independence.

165. First, the independence of Namibia is seen as a
decisive step in the encroachment of African nationalism
into areas hitherto preserves for white domination and
racism. The question to be asked is: Would it be far
wrong to ,assume that South Africa is playing for time
until, in its opinion, SWAP0 will have lost the support
of the electorate? Secondly, Cuban forces were invited
into Angola ‘because of South Africa’s invasion of that
territory. This was done with the knowledge and tacit
suppurt of the United States. May we not therefore surmise that the UnitedStates considers it its bounden obligation to get the Cubanforces out of Angola and by that

170. We are here to seek peaceful ways of facilitating the
implementation of the plan for Namibia. As the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Zambia stated the other day: “We
are not seeking a confrontation with any country or
group of countries . . ? [244Oth meeting, para, 5Oj. Our
mission is a limited one. It is to promote the peaceful
19

settlement of the Namibia question through the implementation of resolution 435 (1978) and to require the
Council and the Secretary-General to assume fully the
responsibilities laid down for them.
171. Our political responsibilities, however, compel us
to register our opposition to what we seriously consider to
be a determined effort by the authors of the linkage and
parallelism problems to subvert resolution 435 (1978),
employing it to serve purposes and interests at variance
with the objectives of the resolution. Resolution 435
(1978) is not a comprehensive plan for the solution of
South Africa’s regional problems or an excuse to serve
United States global strategy. It is a United Nations plan
for the settlement of the Namibian question. We therefore
urge the United States and South Africa to co-operate
fully with the international community in the settlement
of the issue.
172. This is our modest contribution to this debate. We
cannot brandish arms to instil fear in the hearts of those
who obstruct the progress of Namibia to independence,
for we do not have any. What we have is the moral courage to speak out against injustice.
173. The PRESIDENT (Werprerarion from French): The
next speaker is the representative of Malaysia. I invite him
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

that the Non-Aligned Movement attaches to this question. It should be sufficiently clear that the issue of Namibia is becoming more ,and more intolerable to the
members of the international community, irrespective of
their political :persuasion or their stature. It is in this
regard that my delegation would like to appeal to the
Council to be more alive to and conscious of its inherent
responsibility to the people of Namibia in their struggle
for freedom and dignity.
177. It is quite obvious that the Namibian question is
one of the most urgent questions confronting the United
Nations. It is a problem in which the Council bears direct
responsibility. In this context, my delegation welcomes
the report of the Secretary-General [S/Z577aJ and appreciates the interest being shown by him in trying to resolve
the problem. He has accorded the Namibian question a
high priority, as is shown by the visits he has undertaken
to all the front-line States and the contacts he has made
with the parties involved. While the Secretary-General
and his team have exerted considerable constructive
efforts, there seems to be a lack of political will and a
reluctance on the part of some members of the Council to
co-operate in the necessary speeding-up of the process of
independence for Namibia. Such an attitude is indeed
regrettable as it will only contribute to perpetuating the
misery and frustration of the people there and will further
aggravate the security situation in the region.
178. It must be noted with concern that since the adoption in 1978 of resolution 435 (1978), the credibility of the
Council has been undermined, as the Council has been
utterly ineffective in implementing its own recommendations, although we are constantly told that discussions
outside the framework of the United Nations are continually being held. These discussions, initiated by the Western contact group, could have complemented efforts by
the United Nations to seek a negotiated settlement of the
Namibian
problem. Unfortunately,
issues that are
extraneous to the United Nations plan have been introduced into these discussions, and this has only served to
prolong the domination of South Africa over Namibia.
As the prospect of independence through the process of
negotiation becomes increasingly dim, the frustrations
and anger in Namibia become more marked. The level of
tension in the region has heightened, and we can envisage
greater bloodshed and difficulties for
j_ the people in the
area in the days to come.

174. ZAINAL
ARIDIN
(Malaysia): At the outset, I
should like to congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption
of the presidency of the Council for the month of May.
We are pleased to see in the Chair a person of your stature, experience and ability. My delegation is confident
that, under your able guidance, the Council will achieve
constructive and positive results. At the same time, I
should like to take this opportunity to express my sincere
appreciation to you, and through you to the other
members of the Council, for giving me the opportunity to
participate in these important deliberations.
175. The Council is ‘meeting at a very crucial time. As
everyone is aware, the situation in and around Namibia
today has been greatly aggravated, basically because of
South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of that Territory and its belligerent policy, which threatens the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the front&line States. It is
not an exaggeration to say that the atmosphere in southem Africa is charged and tense and that it poses a serious
threat to regional and world peace. If Namibian independence does not become a reality soon, the consequences
may be too frightful to contemplate. It is therefore the
solemn duty of all of us here, in particular the members of
the Council, to facilitate the termination of South Africa’s
horrifying policy of violence, which undermines the foundations of peace in that region, and to put an end to
South Africa’s persistent and blatant disregard of the
inalienable right of the Namibian people to independence.

179. For the past two decades, SWAP0 has borne the
burden of fighting for the inalienable right of the Namibian people to fredom and independence. Since its
inception in April 1960, SWAP0 has become a truly
nation-wide movement, representing ail sectors of Namibian society and incorporating
the various anticolonial forces in Namibia. From a humble beginning,
SWAP0 has today become the embodiment of the Namibian struggle for freedom and independence. The
United Nations recognition of SWAP0 as a national liberation movement and the representative of the Namibian people reflects the extensive support and
confidence SWAP0 now enjoys.

176. The presence of an impressive number of ministers
for foreign affairs from non-aligned countries, who have
come to address the Council, underscores the importance
20

180. My Government wholly identifies itself with the
struggle of SWAP0 against oppression and for the liberation of its land. We believe that no nation, in any circumstances, notwithstanding its size and power, should
interfere in the affairs of other States. It is clear that peace
can be preserved only if nations steadfastly abide by the
ideals and principles of the Charter of the United Nations.

tion of the high of&e of President of the Council. Well
acquainted as-we are with your outstanding professional
and human qualities, we are confident that, under your
able guidance, the present discussions of this body will be
crowned with great success.
186. Almost 17 years have elapsed since the General
Assembly, in its resolution 2145 (XXI) of 27 October
1966, terminated South Africa’s Mandate over the Territory of Namibia and decided that henceforth the Territory would become under the direct responsibility of the
United Nations; on 19 May 1967, by its resolution 2248
(S-V), it established the United Nations Council for Namibia as the sole legal Administering Authority to guide
the people of the Territory towards the achievement of
full independence.

181. We cannot deny the fact that South Africa has been
somewhat emboldened in its continued intiansigence on
the question of Namibia by the wilful and flagrant violation by some countries of the mandatory arms embargo
imposed under resolution 418 (1977). Such disregard and
the collaboration of these States with South Africa have
only served to bolster that country’s war machine and
dampen the incentive to resolve the Namibian question. It
is thus imperative for the Council to ensure scrupulous
compliance with the mandatory arms embargo and to
take measures to prevent any such violations. In addition,
any links that may exist, particularly in the realm of commerce and industry, between some States or their transnational corporations and the Pretoria &me
should be
severed in order to exert greater pressure on and isolate
South Africa.

187. In the face of the arrogant defiance of the occupying Power, namely, the racist r&ime of South Africa, an
advisory opinion was sought from the International
Court of Justice to verify whether or not the United
Nations was legally and politically authorized to assume
direct responsibility for the Territory by terminating
South Africa’s Mandate conferred upon that country by
the League of Nations. The International Court of Justice, in its advisory opinion of 21 June 1971,* stated in
unambiguous terms that the decisions of the General
Assembly in its resolution 2145 (XXI) and its resolution
2248 (S-V) were in full conformity with the principles of
the international legal system.

182, The policy of’ my Government on the question of
Namibia is well known. We view developments there with
grave concern and attach considerable urgency to the
resolution of the problem. The Council therefore must
live up to its responsibility and ensure the implementation
of its resolutions forthwith. My Government has extended
and will continue to extend its fullest support to the
people of Namibia in their valiant struggle to free themselves from the yoke of South Africa’s oppression and
domination. We shall continue scrupulously to observe
the mandatory arms embargo, the oil embargo and all
voluntary sanctions and boycotts against South Africa.
We shall continue to condemn South Africa’s policy in
Namibia and its acts of defiance of the will of the international community. South Africa cannot and should not be
allowed to procrastinate and to entertain the illusion of
perpetual domination of a land and people that do not
rightfully and legally belong to it.

188. While the repeated calls of the international community went unheeded, the South African authorities
lost no time in tightening their grip on Namibia. The
abhorrent faces of colonial occupation and racist oppression manifested themselves in the most blatant manner.
The plunder of the human and natural resources of the
Territory by the occupying Power and by transnational
corporations of its allies assumed an ever-increasing
pace, in open defiance of Decree No. 1 for the Protection
of the Natural Resources of Namibia,3 enacted by the
United Nations Council for Namibia, on 27 September
1974.

183. We are convinced that the irresistible forces of
nationalism that dismantled the great colonial empires of
the past will prevail again, in Namibia. In this regard, the
Government and the people of Malaysia wish to reaffirm
their unequivocal supportfor SWAPO, the sole legitimate
representative of the Namibian people themselves, in their
firm and courageous struggle to achieve freedom and
independence. We are confident their sacrifice, dedication
and devotion will not fail them. The inevitability of Namibian independence is beyond doubt.

189. To suppress the struggle of the Namibian people
the racist r&me of South Africa embarked upon the
path of heavy militarization of the Territory in a manner
that could also serve its aggressive and hegemonic
designs in the whole of southern Africa. Thanks to these
plans, the racist r&me is capable of launching piratical
attacks against the sovereign and independent States of
Angola, Botswana and Zambia, with a view to intimidating those countries and to stopping the support they
render the national liberation struggle of the people of
Namibia.

184. The PRESIDENT
(inrerpretation from French):
The next speaker is the representative of Afghanistan. I
invite him to take a place at the Council-table and to
make his statement.

190. These acts, coupled with repeated acts of aggression against other neighbouring States, such as Lesotho,
Mozambique,
Seychelles and Zimbabwe, apart from
their immediate consequences, constitute a grave threat
not only to the African continent but to the security of
the entire world.

185. Mr. ZARIF (Afghanistan): I should like at the
outset, Sir, to congratulate you warmly on your assump21

19 1. At times we wonder how it is possible for an outlawed r4gime to fly in the face of the overwhelming majority of mankind and act in total defiance of the verdict of
the international community. Afghanistan believes that
this would not have been possible had it not been for the
political, economic and military co-operation extended to
the racist regime by certain Western States, first and foremost, the United States. Only with the assistance of these
countries was the apartheid rkgime able to build its monstrous, oppressive, warmongering machine.
192. Council resolution 418 (1977) on a mandatory
arms embargo against South Africa is being consistently
violated by some of the very same countries that voted in
favour of that resolution in the Council. There are persistent reports of the existence of secret military and security
arrangements between the Government of South Africa
and some Members of the United Nations, which run
counter to the obligations assumed by those countries
under the Charter of the United Nations.
193. The collaboration of the Zionist rCgime of Israel
and the Govemmens of some other count&s in the fultilment of the nuclear ambitions of the apartheid r&me
has given rise to legitimately grave concern over the security of Africa and of the world at large. The dangers of
arming the arrogant regime of South Africa with the
atomic bomb will no doubt go beyond the limits set by
the wishful thinking of the partners of that r&me.

197. There are certain elements which lie at the core of
this unfortunate problem. I should like to underline these
elements here.
198. First, the question of Namibia is, in the full sense
of the word, a decolonization problem. To portray it in
the context of East-West confrontation would be a futile
attempt to diminish the importance of the right of all
nations to selfdetermination
and independence.
199. Secondly, on the basis of the Definition of Aggression contained in General Assembly resolution 3314
(XXIX) of 14 December 1974, the continued occupation
of Namibia by the racist South African forces constitutes
a clear act of aggression. The people of Namibia are thus
entitled to all forms of struggle, including armed struggle
to rid their Territory of the forces of occupation. At the
same time, all patriots who have been captured in the
course of this struggle by the racist occupying Power
must enjoy the status of prisoners of war in conformity
with the Geneva Convention Relative to the Treatment
of Prisoners of War of 12 August 1949.12
200. Thirdly, SWAP0 is the sole legitimate and authentic representative of the people of Namibia and the vanguard of their struggle for total independence. Thus, any
attempt to gain recognition or legitimacy for the puppet
subservient local authorities in Windhoek or to establish
the so-called council for constitutional
development
totally violates the provisions of Council resolutions 385
(1976) and 435 (1978).

194. Facts have also surfaced concerning the continued
attempts by the United States and certain other countries
to establish a “South Atlantic treaty organization” that
would include the racist regime of South Africa and have
the task of defending imperialist interests in the southern
hemisphere. Were this plan to material&
the threat
posed by the South African regime to the security of the
whole area would acquire a new and far-reaching dimension that would inevitably result in the serious deterioration of the international security climate.

201. Fourthiy, Council resolution 435 (1978) constitutes the only basis for the settlement of the Namibian
problem. Any attempt by the so-called contact group or
from any other quarter to sidetrack the issue from its
original course is a violation of Council resolutions. The
United States and South Africa’s designs to tie the withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola to the Namibian
settlement is therefore aimed at injecting extraneous and
irrelevant issues with a view to prolonging the search for
a solution to the problem.

195. Some rather recent developments have already
served as obstacles in the way of reaching a settlement on
the question of Namibia. The United States Administration’s policy of so-called constructive engagement with
the Government of,South Africa has given enough political support to that r&ime for it to resist the pressure of
the international community for a speedy settlement of
the problem. The decision of members of the European
Community to extend economic assistance to the oeeupying Power in Namibia and the International Monetary
Fund’s loan of over $1 billion to the racist regime of
South Africa would not only help the overwhelming
majority of South Africans and Namibians but would logically result in the diversion of greater amounts of resources to the further militarization:of
the apartheid r&me.

203. Sixthly, under Council resolution 432 (1978) and
General Assembly resolution S-9/2 of 3 May 1978, the
territorial integrity and unity of Namibia unquestionably
imply the inclusion of Walvis Bay, Penguin Island and
other offshore islands. Any attempt to secede those areas
from mainland Namibia are thus null and void.

196. If the present trend is not stopped, the international
community will ultimately have- to face a situation where
the achievement of a settlement will be far less possible
than it may appear to be today.

204. Seventhly, since the Government of South Africa
has consistently defied the resolutions of the Security
Council and those of the General Assembly and has thus
violated the obhgations it assumed under the Charter of

202.. Fifthly, the United Nations Council for Namibia is
the sole legal Administering Authority of Namibia, and
thus the issue of Namibia is an issue between the South
African racist rEgime on the one hand and the international community on the other. This fact belies South
Africa’s attempt to portray the question of Namibia as a
regional issue.

22

the United Nations, the Council should, in our view,
adopt without any further delay comprehensive and
mandatory sanctions against that Government under
Chapter VII of the Charter and set its own timetable for
the implementation
of the United Nations plan for Namibia.

sake of world peace, the,United Nations is duty-bound to
carry out faithfully its sacred responsibility in occupied
Namibia.
212. We, the oppressed, exploited and dispossessed
peoples, whether in occupied Namibia, Palestine or colonized Azania, regard the United Nations as an organization committed to upholding the inalienable right of
dispossessed peoples and, more important, of righting
the wrongs committed against peoples. We believe that
the overwhelming majority of the Members of the United
Nations are firmly committed to the lofty principles of
the Organization. For instance, speaker after speaker has
declared that he fervently upholds the right of the people
of Namibia to genuine independence; and yet the realization of that overwhelming wish does not appear to be
imminent. It is incumbent upon us to investigate why.

205. The Government of Afghanistan believes that the
international community should allow no further time for
the dilatory tactics of the racist regime of South Africa
and its imperialist collaborators. All-round co-operation
and assistance should be extended to SWAP0 and to the
front-line States with a view to enabling them to intensify
their struggle against racist occupation and subjugation
and to resist acts of aggression and destabilization.
206. In conclusion, I should like to express our gratitude
to the Secretary-General for the lucid and comprehensive
report which he submitted to the Council, as well as for
his extensive endeavours on behalf of finding a speedy
solution to the problem. Our thanks and appreciation
also go to the United Nations Council for Namibia which,
under the able presidency of Mr. Paul Lusaka of Zambia,
has been discharging its responsibilities successfully.
Finally, Sir, I should like to thank you and, through you,
the Council, for the time you have given my delegation to
express our views on the issue before us.

213. The naked truth is that a mere handful of
r&imes-out
of greed, out of expansionist tendency and
out of blind pursuance of racist policies-have been flagrantly violating all the principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations, all internationally accepted
norms of behaviour and all resolutions adopted by international organizations. The most guilty in this respect
have been the racist regime of South Africa and the Zionists in occupied Palestine. It is also a fact that successive
United States Administrations
have encouraged those
racist entities in their acts of aggression, expansion and
intransigence.

207. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
last speaker is Mr. Lesaoana S. Makhanda, to whom the
Council extended an invitation at the 2447th meeting. I
invite him to take a place at the Council table and. to
make his statement.

214. Given these realities, one is tempted to ask: What
wisdom prevailed that led to asking the so-called contact
group, which includes and is invariably led by the United
States, to act as an “honest broker” when the collusion
and collaboration between racist South Africa and successive United States Administrations are so well known?

208. Mr. MAKHANDA:
First and foremost, Sir, allow
our delegation warmly to congratulate you for the second
time on your assumption of the presidency of this important body for the month of May. We are confident that
under your able leadership the Council will make a valuable contribution to the cause of justice and peace. Allow
me also to thank you and the members of the Council
sincerely for giving the Pan Africa&t Congress of Azania
(PAC) this opportunity to address the Council.

215. Today we acknowledge an impasse in the Namibian independence issue. However, the nature of this
impasse too is no secret. It is the introduction of an
extraneous and totally unrelated issue of the internal
affairs of Angola, namely, the presence of Cuban forces
in Angola.

209. It is said that where there is a will; there is a way. In
the opinion of PAC, the custodian of the legitimate aspirations of the oppressed, exploited and dispossessed people
of Azania, these urgent meetings of the Council have been
called to ascertain that will.

216. The introduction of this totally unrelated issue is a
grave and gross misuse of the Namibian cause to promote super-Power rivalry and extension of the socalled
spheres of influence. Consequently, the introduction of
this totally unrelated issue has not only led to the holding
of the Namibian people hostage in the cold-war game but
also to manipulation of the United Nations in this game.

210. As far back as 1966, the United Nations correctly
terminated South Africa’s Mandate in Namibia [Generd
AssemGIy resolution 214.5 @TX4 of 27 October 1966-J and
thereafter considered racist South Africa’s presence in the
Territory illegal. Since 1966, what has been required is
that the United Nations should exercise full responsibility
for the Territory and lead the people of Namibia to
genuine independence. However, because the United
Nations failed to live up to the responsibility entrusted to
it, we are meeting here today.

217. The Council must make it abundantly clear to all
that the United Nations will not shirk the responsibility
entrusted to it in respect of the people of Namibia and,
more important, will not allow any Power to hijack the
Namibian issue to further its global ambitions. This categorical declaration is important both for the credibility
of the United Nations itself and for the continued faith
placed in it by the peoples of the world, especially the
oppressed, exploited and dispossessed peoples. Such a

211. Namibia is a United Nations responsibility and, for
the sake of its own credibility and effectiveness, for. the
23

resolution would also clear the mist that now hovers over
the Namibian issue. The Council must give practical
effect to this will and do so urgently.
218. As a national liberation movement committed to
the complete overthrow of the Fascist, colonial, apartheid
system in South Africa itself, we of PAC cannot help but
draw parallels. There exists evidence galore of racist
South Africa’s persistent insincerity and obvious reluctance to end its illegal occupation of Namibia. The racists
have openly flouted every international resolution and
appeal. The overwhelming consensus here is that racist
South Africa is intransigent.
219. The existing state of affairs poses very pertinent
questions. What should the United Nations, especially the
Council, do in the face of this blatant intransigence?
Should it capitulate or should it firmly meet this challenge? We of PAC do not believe this particular point is
debatable or even negotiable.
220. The Council has no alternative but to meet this
intransigence firmly and squarely. Moreover, it has the
power and the instrument which can be most effectively
used to end racist South Africa’s illegal occupation of
Namibia. The power is the collective will of all the
members of the Council, especially the five permanent
members. However, it is incumbent upon us to draw the
attention of the Council to the fact that one of its permanent members, the United States, has a very special role in
giving the Council a decisive collective will in the Namibian issue. The instrument is the imposition of mandatory and comprehensive sanctions under the provisions of
the Charter. This is the sole, the most effective path open
to the Council to bring a speedy end to this fundamental
problem which has been before this world body for over
two decades. For the sake of the continued credibility of
the United Nations, for the sake of justice, for the sake of
world peace and in the name of humanity, the Council
must unanimously decide, at the end of this crucial and
timely debate, to put an end decisively to racist South
Africa’s intransigence, its war of aggression and deliberate
delaying tactics and forthwith implement resolution 435
(1978)-the only legitimate basis for leading the people of
Namibia to genuine independence. The Council must act
decisively now because time is running out.
221. However, we feel duty-bound to remind Council
members, especially the United States, that, should the
Coundil fail to take this decisive action and unduly prolong racist South Africa’s continued illegal occupation of
Namibia, or introduce the already discredited bantustantype policy or extraneous and irrelevant issues into the
question of Namibia’s independence, the people of Namibia, acting through their national liberation movement,
SWAPO, will leave no stone unturned to regain their
usurped motherland and inalienable rights. About this
there should be no doubt. Moreover, independent Africa
and progressive and peace.-loving peoples the world over
will render every possible assistance to the people of Namibia in their just struggle. About this also there should
be no doubt.

222. The era of colonialism is over. The growth of the
United Nations in the past two decades is living testimony to that fact. The fact that you, Mr. President,
distinguished representative of once-colonized Zaire, are
presiding over the highest United Nations organ for
peace and security testifies to that fact. Only recently, the
heroic people of Zimbabwe convincingly demonstrated,
in a difficult situation which duplicated present-day
racist South Africa, that seemingly innocuous statements
about the orderly transfer of power, or the linkage issue
in the case of Namibia, are, in fact, excuses for holding
on to power for the benefit of colonialist or imperialist
nations; that, in fact, no obstacles can suppress the will of
a people to be free; that delays only prolong suffering.
223. Nevertheless, there are those who kill live in the
past, and those who simply refuse to change with time.
These are the moribund forces of history. The Council
has a singular responsibility to drum sense and reality
into them in order to avert a repetition of the grave tragedies of the past and so that the future may be viewed with
a sense of security and justice. The Council, moreover,
must act decisively against these moribund forces and
firmly implement the provisions of the Charter, so as to
build a world based on justice and respect for human
dignity and the right of peoples to live as free men,
women and children. Although the topic is Namibia, the
issue is whether the United Nations, and especially the
Council,. has the will to uphold and implement its
declared principles. We sincerely hope the Council will
not fail, because the alternative would be war. And, if the
moribund forces believe that through such a war they
could perpetuate their occupation, oppression and naked
exploitation, they are very much mistaken.
The meeting rose a? 8.05 p.m.

NOTES
’ See Report of the Ztt~ernationai
Conference
gle of the Namibian
People for Independence,

(A/CONF.120/13),

in Support of the StrugParis, 25-29 April 1983

annex II, sect. A. 3.

2 Oficial
Records of the General Assembly.
Twenty$fth
Session,
Plenary Meetings,
1867th meeting, para. 52.
’ Zbid., Thirty-fifth
Session, Supplement
No. 24, vol. I, annex II.
4 Ibid.. Ninth Special Session, Plenary Meetings,
5th meeting, para.

103.
J Ibid.,

14th meeting, para. 140.

6 See Report of the International
Conference
gle of the Namibian Peopie for Independence.

in Support of the StrugParis, 25-29 April 1983

(AKONF. 120/l 3).
’ A/CONF.120/11.
8 Legal Consequences for States of the Continued Presence of South
Africa in Namibia (South West Africa) notwithstanding
Security Council
Resolution
276 (1970), Advisory
Opinion, Z. C.J. Reports, 1971. p. 16.
9 OfJcial Records of the General Assembly, Thirty-seventh
Session.
Plenary Meetings,
104th meeting.
‘@ Ibid., para. 147.
‘I See Report
of the International
Conference in Support of the Struggie of the Namibian
People for Independence.
Paris, 25-29 April 1983

(AKONF.120/13),
part three.
I2 United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, No. 972.

24

I

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United Nations publications
may be obtained from bookstores and distributors
throughout
the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. Sales Section. Neu York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES PUBLICATIONS

DES NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations Unies sent en vente dans,les librairies et les agences depoaitaireh
du monde entier. Informez-vous
aupres de votre libratre ou adressez-vous
a : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes, New York ou Gentve.
KAK

HOJIYYHTb

H3AAHMR

OPIAHM3AHMM

OBbEjIMHEHHblX

HAUMH

Hatteri MOXCHO Ky"ttTb
B tCHHXCHblX
~lara31lHa~
H arewrcraax
BO Bcex paRoHax Mnpa. Hasonwe
Cnpaaxu 06 twtatiriax
B Batuelrt
~;HII~HOV
h4aramHe
mm nmttme
no anpecy:
OpraHmaunn
OBbemiHeHiibtx
Haunti,
Cekuttn
no

ki3LlaHM

OpraH&i3aUWt

nponame

u3naHlttt,

Otk.eLMHeHHblX

Hbto-kiopn:

HJW

XeHeBa.

COMO
CONSEGUIR
PUBLICACIONES
DE LAS NACIONES
UNIDAS
Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas estan en venta en librerias y casas distribuidoras
en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirijase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidn de Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Litho

in United Nations,

New York

00400

90-6020%April

1991-2,050
