82

General A1eembly-Twenty-seeond Seaion

semination and Wider Appreciation of International
Law, which are contained in that report,
Emphasizing that, in ensuring the execution of the
Programme, the United Nations should bear in mind
the need to continue its efforts to encourage and coordinate the activities of the States and international
organizations concerned in assisting the promotion of
the teaching, study, dissemination and wider appreciation of international law,
Considering that in the conduct of the Programme
it is desirable to use as far as possible the resources and
facilities which may be made available by the international organizations concerned, Member States and
others, in accordance with the procedures and rules
of United Nations technical assistance programmes
or other relevant rules and consistent with the purposes and direction of the Programme,

Considering that in the organization and conduct of
regional seminars and training and refresher courses
due regard should be paid to reflecting United Nations
efforts towards the codification and progressive development of international law and, in so far as appropriate, the legal thinking of the principal legal
systems of the world,
1. Authorizl's the Secretary-General to carry out in
1968 the activities specified in his report, and in particular the provision of :
(a) Fifteen fellowships at the request of Governments of developing countries;

( b) The advisory services of experts, if requested
by developing countries, within the framework of existing technical assistance programmes or from such
voluntary contributions as may be received for that
purpose;
(c) A set of United Nations legal publications to
up to twenty institutions in developing countries;
2. N ates with thanks the offer of Ecuador to provide facilities for the regional seminar to be held
in Latin America in 1968 ;
3. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization for its
participation in the United Nations Programme of
Assistance in the Teaching, Study, Dissemination and
Wider Appreciation of International 4w, in particular for its co-operation in the conduct of the regional
training and refresher course held in Africa in 1967;
4. Expresses its appreciation to the United Nations
Institute for Training and Research for its activities
in the field of international law, in particular for its
decision to conduct regional seminars in international
law, beginning with a regional seminar to be held in
Latin America in 1968, and for undertaking to conduct studies relating to the codification and progressive
development of international law within the framework
of the United Nations;

5. Reiterates its invitation to Member States, interested bodies and individuals to make voluntary contributions towards the financing of the Programme
and expresses its appreciation to those Member States
which have made voluntary contributions for this
purpose;
6. Approves in principle, subject to further consideration by the Advisory Committee on the United

Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study, Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law before the twenty-third session of the
General Asse1J1bly, the Secretary-General's recommendations regarding the execution of the Programme
after 1968;
7. Requests the Secretary-General to report to the
General Assembly at its twenty-third session on the
implementation of the Programme during 1968 and,
following consultations with the Advisory Committee,
to submit recommendations regarding the execution of
the Programme in 1969;
8. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of
its twenty-third session an item entitled "United
Nations Programme of Assistance in the Teaching,
Study. Dissemination and Wider Appreciation of International Law".
1631st plenary m.eeting.
14 December 1967.
2323 (XXU). Installation of mechanical mean•
of voting: amendments to rules 89 and 128
of the rules of procedure of the General
Assembly

The General Assembly,
Noting that the introduction of voting by mechanical
means makes desirable certain amendments to its rules
of procedure,
Decides, with effect from 1 January 1%8, but without prejudging the question of the installation of
mechanical means of voting in the committee rooms, to
amend rules 89 and 128 of its rules of procedure as
follows:
(a) In rule 89:
(i) Designate the ex1stmg text as paragraph (a);
(ii) Add a new paragraph ( b) as follows:
" ( b) When the General Assembly votes
by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote
shall replace a vote by show of hands or by
standing and a recorded vote shall replace a
roll-call vote. Any representative may request a recorded vote. In the case of a
recorded vote, the General Assembly shall,
unless a representative requests otherwise,
dispense with the procedure of calling out
the names of the Members; nevertheless, the
result of the voting shall be inserted in the
record in the same manner as that of a roll-call
vote."
(b) In rule 128:
(i) Designate the existing text as paragraph (a);
(ii) Add a new paragraph (b) as follows:
" ( b) When the committee votes by mechanical means, a non-recorded vote shall replace
a vote by show of har:ds or by standing and a
recorded vote shall replace a roll-call vote. Any
representative may request a recorded vote.
In the case of a recorded vote, the committee
shall, unless a representative requests otherwise, dispense with the procedure of calling
out the names of the members; nevertheless,
the result of the voting shall be inserted in
the record in the same manner as that of
a roll-call vote."
1635th plenary meeting,
16 December 1967.
