S15th

United Nations

PLENARY MEETING

GENERAL
ASSEMBLY
FIFTH SESSION .,

Flushing Meadow, New· York

Official Record3
CONTENTS

Page

Palestine: (b) assistance to Palestine refugees. Report of the Direct.or of
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugeee in
the Near East:~ report of the Ad Hoc Political' Committee .(A/1566) ...• 529
Treatment of people of Indian origin in the Union of South Africa: report
of the Ad Hoc Political C;ommittee (A/1548) ..•.••..••..•.••...... 529
1'-orm2r Ita!iancolonies: (d) report of the United Nations Commission for
Eritrea and (e) report of the Interim Committee of the General Assembly
on the report of the United Nations Commission for Eritrea =. reports of
the Ad Hoc Political Committee (A/1561 and Add.I) and the Fifth
,
,- .. ,_ ..• ,
534Committee (A/1574) ..•..•...••... '
President: Mr. Nasrollah ENTEZAM (Iran).

f

.
:

PaIestine~

(b) 88sietance to Palestine refugees.
Report of the Director of the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the N.ear East: r~port. of the Ad Hoc
. Politieal·CoDUtlittee (A/1566)
[Agenda ·item 20]
The draft resolution contained in thereporl of thfl
Ad Ho~ Political Committee (A/1566) was adopted b:y
46 votes to none, with 6 abstentions.

Treatment of people of lndi8110rigin in the Union
of South Africa: repol1 of the Ad Hoc Political Conunittee (A/l548)
[Agenda item 57]
1. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Yesterday [313th meeting] the General Assembly
decided unanimously net to hold a debate on the Ad
Hoc Political Cotnmittee's report on this item. The delegation of the· Union of South Africa has informed me
that it voted in error for the proposal that no discussion
should be held; it asked me to make this statement for
the record.
2.. . I call upon the representative of the Union ot South
Africa, who wishes to e.."'CplaiiJ. his vote.
3. Mr. DONGES (Union of South Africa): The
President has been so kind as to place on record the
circumstances which oblige me to make this statement.
He has also placed on record the fact that the South
African delegation objected to the decision not to have

a, .debate on the present. item in this Assembly.
The President's courtesy in this matter is indeed,
.
appreciatecL
4. Perhaps I may be allowed, before 'I explain 111Y'
vote, to refer very briefly to the reasons why the South
African delega.tionhas been deprived· of an opportunity
of endeavouring, at theappro?riate time, to reopen a
discussion on the draft resolution before the General
Assembly on a matter which is of the most vital importance, not only to South Africa but also to the Or...
ganization as a whole.
5. As you. are aware, the Ad Hoc Political Committee, which had originally dealt with the matter,! was
in session at the time when the General Assembly decided against the discussion. We therefore had every
reason to believe that no aspect of this item would be
dealt with in the General Assembly without prior warning to us. That we were justified in holding 'this view is
strengthened by the fact that, when on. Thursday last,
30 November, a representative inquired of the Chairman. of the Fourth Committee, at its 191st meeting,
whether there was any danger of Fourth Committee
items being dealt with in the Assembly while the Cam..
tnittee was still in session, the representative in ques..
tion was assured that sufficient warning would be glven,
and that the Committee would be adjourned in order to
enable representatives to attend the plenary meetings of
the General Assembly.
.1 See..Official Rec~r.ds of. the f!enwal AsstfHb.":/, Pifth SI$-o.
$Ion, Ad Hoc Political Comnnt:ee, 41st to 48th meetings
, inclusive.

529

530

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetings

6.. I am obliged, with the greatest deference to the
President, to express my great regret that, due to these
unfortunate and unforeseen circumstances, the South
African delegation has been deprived of an opportunity
of seeking the reopening of the debate in order to resist
the adoption of the draft resolution before .:he General
Assembly.
7. Perhaps I may be allowed to state very briefly the
views of my delegation on the draft resolution. I do not
propose to repeat my legal argument on the question of
the competency of the Organization to deal with the
matter in the light of Article 2, paragraph 7 of the
Charter. I have dealt with that very fully, and I think I
can say with fairness that the argument has emerged
from the Ad H QC Political Committee unscathed and
only half-heartedly challenged on legal grounds.
8. The first reason why my delegation objects to this
draft resolution is because of its flagrant violation of
Article 2, paragn.'ph 7 of the Charter. The pattern of
intervention envisaged in this draft resolution which is
now before the Assembly has become more clearly defined in the cour~e of the discussions and is evidenced
by the very nature of the draft itself. What was implidt before 1S now explicit, namely, that the interference extends to the general internal policy of a country
and includes interference with domestic legislation, even
though it does not discriminate against any particular
race or group but is equally applicable to an.
9. It should be clear by now that the real implications
of this draft resolution are wider than the question of
the position of Indians in South Africa, wider than the
issue of discrirr..ination, wider than the question of
minorities in any countrrJ. The precedent set by this
draft resolution and the legal arguments advanced to
sustain it cover intervention in the internal policy of
any country in the economic, cultural or social sphere as
well. Whenever the .Charter in any Article speaks of
human rights, it speaks in the same breath of economic,
social and culo4ral matte.rs, as reference to Articles 1,
paragraph 3, 13, paragraph 1 b" 55, 62, 68 and 76 will
show. Consequfntly, if the Organization has jurisdiction
in respect of human rights in spite of Article 2, paragraph 7, it must alsc, have jurisdiction in re~rd to unsatisfactory economics social and cultural conditions in
any cotmtry. If Artide 2$ paragraph 7 was a broken
reed to curb interference in the' domestic affairs of
South Africa in this case, how Ct1U it ever be invoked
with success to hold inviolate a nation's economic or
social policy, its form of government or its methods
of administration? If we sell this pass, if we surrender
this bastion, the way is open to every invader of our
sovereign power. That is the point that I wanted to impress on the General Assembly as the necessary implication of passing a resolution of this nature.
10. By allowing this kind of interference in the domestic affairs of a. cot\Otry, the Organization is sowing the
seeds of its own dissolution. It violates its own constitution. It makes membership intolerable, and it forfeits the
r~ a-ttd confidence it ought to inspire.
11. A vote for th1s draft resolution is a vote for intecference in the most n~\ked form in the internal policies
and domestic legislation of a Member State. It is a
Tote for the violation of what has been described as one
of the corner-stones of the Charter, namely, Article 2,
o

•

paragraph 7. It is a vote for a flagrant breach of faith,
against those who signed the Charter at San Francisco
on the strength of assurances given by its authors. It is
a vote to make false the representations by which many
nations were induced to subscribe to the Charter. My
government cannot acquiesce in a political interpretation of the Charter. We take our stand on the, sanctity
and inviolability of Article 2, paragraph 7, which we
refuse to regard as a scrap of paper to be tom up on
grounds of political expediency. By that we stand, and
that is one of the reasons why we cannot support this
draft resolution now before the General Assembly.
12. But apart from that question, the draft resolution
as a whole is an objectiunable text, the most objectionable that one can imagine. It is a draft resolution which
by its very terms makes it incapable of bein~ carried
out. In the first place, it is significant for what it omits
to say. When I charged the Indian Government, in the
Committee, with having pursued a policy of provoking
my government to withdraw from the conference, so
that India could put the" hlame on us, I put certain pertinent questions" to which no reply has been Wven. I
pointed out that if India was prepared to hold a round
table conference in February, in spite of existing legislation and the declared policy of my government, it was
frivolous and irresponsible :for it to withdraw from the
conference by reason only of the passage of the Group
Areas Act.
13. To demonstrate this, I should like the General
Assembly to recall the picture painted last year I by the
representative of India, tc. comoare it with that presented this ye~as. :md to ask in what respect the current
picture is worse than last year's edition. If the 1949
edition did not deter India from the conference, how
then ~an the 1950 edition have such an effect? ';Vhy
should Pakistan have been agreeable to continue with
the conference? But if one looks at the draft resolution,
one fails to find a single word of condemnation for this
irresponsible conduct on the part of India.
14. In its operative part, too, the draft resolution is
unacceptable, whether regarded as a whole or in its individual provisions. On 17 November I indicated, at the
end of my speech in the Committee, the only basis on
which the proposed round table conference could J.'~Id
out a reasonable hope of success. I said that i1.~ uny
opi11ion the wiser course in the troubled time!: :11 which
we were living would be for India to withdraw its C\'lmplaint and proceed to hold the round table conferen~.
the door to which was still open.
IS. That is the royal road to a resumption of talks,
without prejudice to either side either on the ,merits or
on the views they might hold on domestic jurisdiction.
If India persists, as it is apparently doing, however, the
Assembly should, on the assumption-which I do not
admit-that it is competent to do so, content itself
merely with an expression of regret that the conference
has broken down and ask the parties to consider the
holding of a conference on the basis decided at the preliminary talks;" and unshackled by any further conditions
on either party. To do more, as this draft resolution
dce~ now, would be to require one of the parties to
enter thecOfiference on a footing of inequality and with
the dice heavily loaded against it. It would, in effect, be
2 See Official Records of. the General Assembly,' Third $e$don, Part Il, First Committee. 263rd and 267th meetngs.

315th MeetiDg-2 December 1950

------------------

a violation of paragraph 3 of the draft J,"esolution now
before the General Assembly, even before it was passed.
It would be strangled at birth.
16. I have done my duty as a representative of my
country, but I also have a duty to dischar~e as the
represeutative of a Member of this Organization, and
I should be failing in that duty if I did not warn the
General Assembly, with all the strength at my command, that it must not make it impossible for a Member
State to move in the'direCtion which it might desire by
requiring of that Member State something ~nconsistent
with its national self-respect. That is not statesmanship,
but mischievous and irresponsible conduct which bodes
no good for the future of the Organization or for good
relations among Member States.
17. For these reasonsl we are wholeheartedly opposed
to the draft resolutIon now before the General
Assembly.
18. Mrs. PANDIT (India) : I should' not have asked
for permission leo stand before this Assembly today
but for the remalks of the previous speaker. I am aware
that many impof,tant decisions face the General Assembly and it is not right that its valuable' time should be
wasted.
19. I merely want to point out that the address of the
representative of the Union of South Africa was hardly
an. explanation of a vote. He raised points which should
be answered but which I believe have been so well
thrashed out during the last few days in the Committee
and during the last few years, both in the Committee
and in the General Assembly, that it would be almost
futile again to answer the same questions in the same
manner. Therefore, although there are many points
which I might have raised in answer to the questions he
has already put, I would prefer to abide by the decision
taken yesterday by the General Assembly that no
speeches should be made. I shall be content to leave the
decision to the conscience of the General Assembly.
20. Mr. AL-JAMALI (Iraq): I am going to vote in
favour of the draft resolution. I shall do so on two
assumptions.
21~ In the first place, I believe that the question involved is not a local but a world-wide one of great
international significanc~he question of racial discrimination in the world today is a burning issue with
relation to international peace and harmony.
22. In the second place, my delegation believes that
this General Assembly must do its best in all circumstances to tear down all walls existing among men,
whether they be political, religious, racial or economic.
We must haw~ one world. We must have one human
brotherhood. Let us tear down these walls.®
23. Mr. PRICE-MARS (Haiti) (translated from
French) : The delegation of Haiti will vote in favour
of the draft resolution under discussion because it is
entirely in accordance with the traditional policy of my
government and my people in respect of one of the most
odious forms of racial discrimination, wherever such a
shameful phenomenon exists.
24. Mr. TANGE (Australia): I should like to explain
why the Australian delegation will find it necessary
to vote against the draft resolution before the Assembly. The attitude of the Australian delegation was indi..

SSl

cated throughout the debate in the Ad Hoc Politie:at
Committee which preceded the submission of this draft
to the General Assembly. The Australian delegation expressed the view from the outset that action on this
matter by the Assembly would represep,tan infringement of Article 2, paragraph 7 of the Charter" and was
therefore outside the competence of the General
Assembly.
25. The Australian ,je!egation has expressed no
opinion on the substanc,e of the complaint made by the
delegation of India. It f~as based its attitude on the
opinion that the Assembly has been called upon to make
recommendati.ons which constitute interference with
matters essentially within the domestic jurisdiction 01
the Government of the Union of South Africa.
26. I should like, at this time, to state that had the
draft resolution submitted to the Ad Hoc Political Committee by the delegations of Bolivia, Brazil, Denmark,
Norway and Sweden come to the vote in the Committee
in its original form, the Australian delegation-while
maintaining its attitude on the question of competence
-would not have opposed the adoption of that draft
resolution by the General Assembly. In the view of the
Australian delegation, that joint draft resolution represented a reasoned and constructive attempt to settle the
question with the least. possible friction. I should like,
on behalf of my delegation, to pay tribute to the representatives of the sponsoring Powers, and particularly
to the representatives of Bolivia and Brazil, for their
efforts to find' a satisfactory settlement for this conten..
tious issue. However, before that draft resolution came
to the final vote in the Committee, it was amended, particularly in respect of paragraphs 2 and 3. In our view
the amendments carried the draft far beyond the contpetence of the General Assembly.
27. The draft resolution is therefore unacceptable to
the Australian delegation and we accordingly propose
.
.
to vote against it.
28. I would move that the draft should be voted upon
in parts; that the first three paragraphs of the preamble
should be taken together, so that the fourth paragraph
of the preamble can be voted upon separately, and subsequently that each paragraph of the operative part
should be voted upon separately.
.
29. Mr. S~~NTA CRUZ (Chile) (transl~tetl from
Spanish) : My delegation. will vote in favour of the
draft resolution presented by the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, for the reasons already explained in detail
in that Committee.
.
30. My delegation considers that,. in this time of great
uncertainty and anxiety for all, it is the duty of the
United Nations to reaffirm the principles of the Charter
and to endeavour, by all possible means, to make the
ideals for which the United Nations is fighting clear to
the peoples of Hie world.
.
31. If the United Nations applies different policies in
similar situations, considering only theintemational
position of the country concerned, it will lose all its
moral authority to act on other occasions. The United
Nations has proclaimed, on many occasions p that the
defence of fundamental human rights is 011K; of its primary duties and obligations. It has also repeatedly af.. "
firmed that concern for the observance of fundamental
human rights in a country does not mean interference

General Assembly-Fifth Sealion-Plenlry Meetioge
iu the domestic affairs of that country. That is all the
more true when the infringement of human rights is
causing friction or enmity between two countries, as
in the present case.
32. My delegation, as I have said, will vote for the
draft resolution of the Ad Hoc Political Committee; it
is morally entitled to do so because it has consistently
championed, in the United Nations, the theory and the
'principles to which I have just referred. It hopes that
the final part of the proposed resolution will produce
the desired effect and lead to a friendly agreement
between India and the Union of South Africa. It also
once more draws attention to the fact that persistence
in racial discrimination, such as that referred to in the
draft resolution, jeopardizes the cause of democracy,
and that iiol a serio 1,s matter in times like these.
33. Mr. ANZE MATIENZO (Boli'da) (translated
from Spanish) : My delegation had the honor of being
associated with the del~gations of Brazil, Denmark,
Norway and Sweden in an attempt at conciliation, rep..
resented by a text which we submitted for the consideration of the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
34. The Bolivian delegation abstained f;om voting on
that draft resolution after amendments had been
.adopted which in fact nullified the attempt at conciliation. Nevertheless, it will vote in favour of the draft
resolution presented to the General Assembly by the
Ad Hoc Political Committee, because it wishes to reaffirm its views concerning respect for human rights and
its firm attitude towards discriminatory measures. Bolivia condemns such measures, in accordance with the
principles enunciated in the document which is the
corner-stone of the United Nations, namely, the
Charter.
35. Mr. ICHASO (Cuba) (translated from Spanish): The Cuban delegation wishes briefly to explain
why it will vote in favour of the draft resolution ap..
proved by the Ad Hoc Political Committee on the item
now before us.
36. My delegation considers that the racial discr.dl1"
ination practised in the Union of South Africa f. not
only' an offence against the dignity of the human .. ~rson,
but also a grave danger to democratic principles and
world peace. At a time when we are striving hard to
defend democratic principles and our civilization against
the most serious threat it has ever faced, it seems very
unfortunate that some countries represented here, countries with a democratic system of government, should
give the bad example of segregatinr • one race from
another, placing one under the subjection of another,
.:md thus i eopardizing the sacred principle of equality.
37. Cuba is proud of having taken an actitve part in
the discussion on this question and of having contributed an amendment to the draft now before 'the
Assembly. In that amendment it is stated unequivocally, and as a matter of priXlciple, that the policy of
racial segregation (Apartheid) practised in the Union
of South Africa is necessarily based on doctrines of
racial discrimination.
l

38•. ~rr. THORS (Iceland): The item now before
, the Geil~ral Assembly, narrtely, "Treatm~nt of people of
Indian ,(jrigin in the UniC'ri of South Africa," is, if I
may say so, an old acquaintance of the United Nations,

as it has been befol"~ us every year since 1946. It is now
about time that some solution should be reached so that
4his item should not become a _permanent problem before the United Nations. The Icelandic delegation has
always considered the complaints of the Indian delega..
tion in this matter with great sympathy. We shall now
confirm our stand of previous years and vote for each
and every paragraph of the draft resolution. We think
humanity will behest served if the parties concerned
solve this matter themselves, once and for all.
39. The PRESIDENT (translat,a from Fr,nch):
We shall now proceed to vote on the draft resolution.
Certain delegat10ns have requested a vote by division,
that is, that the preamble should be put to the vote first,
and then the operative part, paragraph by paragraph.
40. In addition, the French delegation has requested a
vote by division on paragraph 3 of the operative part.
41. If there are no objections, we shall follow that
procedure.
42. The delegation of the Union of South Africa has
requested a roll-call vote on e~ch paragraph. A roll..
call is in order.
43. Th~ Australian del~gation informs me that it had
requested a s.epCir;1,t~ vote on the first three paragraphs
of the pr.camble.
44. 1 therttfore put those three paragraphs to the
vote.
A 'lJ(}t~ was taken by roll-call.
Iran , having been drawn by lot by th, President, was
called upon to "Jote first.
.
In favour: Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia,
Mexico, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Sweden, S;yria, Thailand, Turkey,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia,
Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
Rica, Cuba, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia.
Against: Luxembourg, Union of South Africa, Belgium.
Abstaining: Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru, Poland, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of
Soviet Soci8.list Republics, Australia, Byelorussian Sovid SociaHst Republic, Czechoslovakia, Greece.
.
The first three paragraphs of the preamble we"
adopted by 46 votes to 3, with 10 abstentions.
45. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
now Pt;~ to the vote the fourth paragraph of the
preamble.
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Denmark, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called up,on to vote first.
In favvur: . Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala,
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Pakistan, Panama,
Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bolivia. Burma,
Chile, China, Cuba.

315th Meeting--2 December 1950

538

-~,---------====-==~~..::.....::...:...--_---------Paragraph 2 was adopted by 39 votes to 7, with 14
Against: Greece, Luxembourg, Union of South
Africa, Australia, Belgium.
abstentions.
Abstaining: Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecua48. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
CJ'or, France, Israel, Netherlands, New Zealand, NorWe come now to paragraph 3 of the operative part. I
way, Para~ay, Peru, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian
put to the vote the first part, which reads: "Calls upon
Soviet SOCIalist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist
the governments concem~d t.o refrain from taking aD:Y
Republics, United Kmgdom of Great Britain and Northsteps which would prejUdICe the success of theIr
ern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay,
negot la
• t'Ions . . ." .
Venezuela, Argentina, Brazil, Byelorussian Soviet SoA vote was taken by roll-call.
cialist Republic, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, CzechoEcuador, having been drawn by lot by the President,
slovakia.
was called upon to vote first.
The fourth paragraph of the prea'f1l,ble was adopted
In favour: Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia,
by 29 'Votes to S, with 25 abstentions.
France, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India,
46. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, New
We come noW' to the vote on the operative part of the
Zealand, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paradraft resolution. I put paragraph 1 of the operative part
guay, Philippines, Poland, Saudi Arabia, Sweden,
to the vote.
Syria, Thai1and~ Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland,
The Dominican Republic, having been drawn by lot
United
States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
by the President, was called upon to vote first.
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bolivia, Brazil,
In fa'IJ02tr: Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Burma, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada,
Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Guatemala, Haiti, HonChile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Denduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
mark, Dominican Republic.
Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Against: Luxembourg, Union of South Africa, AusNorway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines,
tralia,
Belgium.
Saudi Arabia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, Turkey,
Abstaining: Greece, Israel, Netherlands, Peru, ArUnited Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Iregentina, Costa Rica.
land, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Argentina, Bolivia,
The first part of paragraph 3 of the operative part
Brazil, Burma, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa
was adopted by 50 votes to 4, with 6 abstentions.
Rica, Cuba, Denmark.
49. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Against: Luxembourg, Union of South Africa, BelI put to the vote the second part of paragraph 3 of the
gium.
operative part.
Abstaining: Greece, Netherlands, Peru, Poland,
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
France, having been drawn by lot by the President,
Socialist Republics, Australia, Byelorussian Soviet Sowas
called upon to vote first.
cialist Republic, Czechoslovakia.
In favour: Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland,
Paragraph 1 of the operative part was adopted by
India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico,
48 votes to 3, with 9 abstentions.
Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Poland,
47. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Ukrainian Soviet Sonow put paragraph 2 of the operative part to the vote.
cialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Uruguay, Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bolivia,
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Burma,
Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Chile,
Peru, having been drawn by lot by the President, was
China,
Cuba, Czechoslovakia, Ecuador, Egypt,
called upon to vote first.
Ethiopia.
In favour: Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria, ThaiAgainst: France, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
land, Turkey, United States of America, Uruguay,
Paraguay, Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bolivia, Brazil, BurGreat Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
ma, Chile, China, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
America, Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, DoEgypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, France, Guatemala,
minican Republic.
Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq,
Abstaining: Israel, New Zealand, Norway, Peru,
Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway,
Sweden,
Turkey, Venezuela, Canada, Colombia, Costa
Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay.
Rica, Denmark, El Salvador.
Against: Union of South Africa, United Kingdom of
The second part of paragraph 3 of the operative part
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, Australia, Belwas
adopted by 35 votes to 13, with 12 abstentions.
gium, Greece, Luxembourg, Netherlands.
50. The PRESIDENT (translated from French):
Abstaining: Peru, Poland, Sweden, Ukrainian Soviet
I put to the vote paragraph 4 of the operative part.
Socialist Republic, Union of So,iet Socialist RepubA vote was taken by roll-call.
lics, Vf"ne~uela, Argentina, Byelorussian Soviet
Sodali~t Republic, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Turkey, having been drawn by lot by the PresiCzechoslovakia, Denmark, New Zealand.
dent, was called upon to fIOte first.

------------------

General Assembly-Fifth Session-Plenary Meetinga

18 fat/MW: United States of America, Uruguay,
Yemen, Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, Bolivia, Brazil, Bur
ma, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt) El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Haiti, HonduraS, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Philippines, Saudi Arabia,
Syria, Thailand.
Against: Union of South Africa, Australia, Belgium,
Greece, Luxembourg.
Abstaining: Turkey, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northem Ireland, Venezuela, Argentina, Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia, Dominican
Republic, France, Netherlands, New Zealand, Peru,
.......
Poland, Sweden.
Paragraph 4 of the operative part was adopted by 38
votes to 5~ with 17 abstentions.
51. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
put to the vote the draft resolution as a whole [AI
M

1548].
A vote was taken by roll-call.
Australia, having been drawn by lot by the President,
was called upon to vote first.

la favour: Bolivia, Bunna, Chile, China, Cuba, Ecua

M

dor, Egypt, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Israel,
Lebanon, Liberia, Mexico, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Panama, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, United
States of America, Uruguay, Yemen, Yugoslavia,
Mgbanistan.
Against: Australia, Belgium, Greece, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Union of South Africa.
Abstaini1lg: Brazil) Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic, Canada, Cole?nbia, Costa Rica, Czechoslovakia,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, France, New Zealand,
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Sweden, Turkey,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vel1ezuela, Argentint.
The draft resolution as a whole was adopted by 33
votes to 6, with 21 abstentions.

Former Italian colonies: (d) report of the United
Nations Commission for Eritrea and (e) report
of the Interim Committee of the General Assembly on the report of the Vnited Nations Commission for Eritrea: reports of the A.d Hoc
Political Committee (A/156I and Add.I) and
the Fifth Committee (AjI574)
[Agenda item 21]
52. The PRESIDENT (translated from French): I
shall put to the vote the two draft resolutions submitted
by the Ad Hoc Political Committee [Aj1561 and
Adcl.1]. Then I shall put to the vote the draft resolutions. submitted by the delegations of Poland [A/1564
and Corr.1] and the Soviet Union [A/1570].
53. Although the draft resolution submitted by the
Polish delegation is dated 29 November and hence
should be put to the vote first, the Polish delegation

has informed me that it is agreeable to having the
USSR draft resolution. which wa!S submitted· at a later
date, put to the vote first.
54. Mr. AKLILOU (Ethiop;:,~) (translated from
Ff'"ench) : I asked to speak in order to give you a short
explanation of the vote of the Ethiopian delegation. In
view of the serious events that are taking place. it
behoves us all to express our views as briefly as possible and to show a real spirit of conciliation in our discussions and observations. In that spirit I shall simply
explain our vote, endeavouring thus to facilitate the
work of the Assembly. although the question of Eritrea
is of vital interest to my country and concerns it to the
utmost degree.
55. I shall be obligee! to refer to my previous statements in the Ad Hoc Political Committee. 8 In the
course of those observations, I had occasion to recnll
once again that the findings of the two commissions of
inquiry sent to Eritrea fully confirmed my country's
assertion that the wishes of the great majority of the
population, as well as economic factors and considerations of peace and security in East Africa, indicated that
that territory should be reunited with its mother country, Ethiopia. Consequently the compromise formula
submitted to the Ad Hoc Political Committee by fourteen delegations, and contained in that Committee's
draft resolution, does not, in our opinion, entirely meet
the aspirations of the majority of the population or my
country's claims; it is a formula of conciliation between
the divergent wishes of the majority and the minority
of the population. Assuredly the serious events which
are now taking place call upon us all to show a spirit
of conciliation, whatever the questions with which we
are dealing.
56. As t have already said in the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, Ethiopia has the interests and well-being of
the population of Eritrea too much at heart to a~ree that
the problem should be left unsolved by this Assembly,
particularly after three years of diSCUSSIOn in the United
Natiolls. Although the compromise formula does not
fully satisfy either the aspirations of the majority of the
population or my country's claims, the Ethiopian delegation accepts it as being the only solution which, in the
present circumstances, could obtain the requisite majority to ensure its adoption by the United Nations.
57. If, therefore, this formula is adopted in its present
wording, Ethiopia will scrupulously respect it and will
make very effort to see that it ;s put into effect.
58. I here repeat that my government willingly gives
the guarantee needed to allay the anxieties of all indigenous and foreign minorities. Steps will be taken to
ensure absolute respect for the rights and privileges of
the Moslem minority in Eritrea; the members of that
minority will be eligible, in the same way as everyone
else, to fill any posts both in Eritrea and in Ethiopia,
where they will enjoy all civil and political rights.
59. Moreover, the ~olitical position adopted by the
various groups in Erltrea will expose them neither to
retaliatory nor to discriminatory measures. The essential thing is that the Eritreans are indeed our brothers;
8 For the discussion on this lubj~~ ~n the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, see 0 flicial Records of 'h, Gmeral AssemblYI Fifth
Session, Ad Hoc Political Committee, 37th to 40th and 48th
to 56th meetings inclusive.

815th MeeUng-2 December 1950
they are the brothers of the Ethiopian people; they will
find brotherly love and enjoy its blessings at every
point in their association with Ethiopia; that love will
render our relations with our Eritrean brothers permanently fruitful, regardless of whether they are U1Uonists or members of the Moslem League, great or small,
Moslem or Christian.
60. With regard to the Italian minority, I have the
honour and the pleasure to reaffirm that the Italians in
Eritrea will continue to enjoy all their rights and privileges as in the past and that they will, moreover, be
considered as friends, since the way is now open for
sincere and loyal co-operation between former enemies.
61. In short, there will be neither majority nor minority, neither Moslems nor Christians, neither former
political opponents n~r former enemi~s; there 'Yill be
only Eritreans and frIends who were once enemIes, all
co-operating with us, the Ethiopians, to write a new
chapter of history which will bring to an end a long
era of exile and SUffering and show in these critical
hours the deep truth and justice on which the work of
the United Nations is founded.
62. The PRESIDENT (translate.." from French):
This is the first time that I have listened with pleasure
to an explanation of a vote that was rerhaps not absolutely in accordance with the rules 0 procedure. But
we have all been deeply moved by the assurances that
have just been given us by the representative of Ethiopia; if, in this case, I did not wish to call attention to the
rule, it was because I believed that on such occasions
it would not be fitting to attach undue importance to
its literal application.
63. Sir Frank SOSKICE (United Kingdom): I
should like to say just a very few words in explanation
of the vote which my delegation will cast.
64. May I begin by expressing with the President the
great pleasure which we had in listening to the statement just made by the representative of Ethiopia.
65. The future of Eritrea, as this Assembl:;r well
knows, has been exhaustively discussed here, and the
draft resolution was considered at great length by the
Ad Hoc Political Committee. I therefore do not think
it necessary to comment any further on the proposals
approved by the Committee. I should only like to say..
on .behalf of my delegation) how glad we are that it
proved possible to arrive at a solution of the problem
in the Committee and to express the hope that the
General Assembly will in turn give its approval to the
proposals embodied in the draft resolution.
66. On behalf of my delegation, I should like here in
this Assembly to renew the pledge which I ~ave in
the Committee ~ that my government will do its best, in
so far as it lies with it, to implement the proposals
for a federation between Ethiopia and Eritr~a.
We are glad that these proposals are acceptable
to the Ethiopian Government. We are glad also
that the Italian Governmel11t is prepared loyally
to abide by the proposals if they are adopted by this
Assembly. It is the hope-and, inde~d, the earnest wish
-of my government that the acc~ptance of these proposals and their implementation in due course not only
will -:ontribute to the happiness and well-bein~ of Erltrea, ~,utalso may open a new chapter for that part of
Africa which we are considering. We hope that they
ma:r· lead to real reconciliation ana fruitful collaboration

53S
PI',

between former enemies, and that they may lay the
foundations of an understanding among Italians. Eri..
treans and Ethiopians.
67. We, for our part, intend to recognize and.. so far
as possible, reconcile the interests of all those con"
cerned. We recognize the desire of many Eritreans to
be reunited with Ethiopia. We recognize also the fundamental rights of those Italians duly established there
to continue to live and work in Eritrea. We intend to do
our utmost to safeguard all these rights. We realizeand I am sure we are not alone in this-the contribution which Italian skill and enterprise has made and is
m~ddng to the well-being of Eritrea. It is obviously
right, in the view of my .deleg:.ltion.. that conditions
should be such that this contribution may continue.
68. I should like further to take' this opportunity of
repeating once again that, whatever may be the difficul...
ties in store for Eritrea, we intend to do our best to see
that justice is done there and that, as a res~lt.. past
conflicts are forgotten and a new era of co-ope:,!tion is
inaugurated.
69. My delegation hopes, therefore, that the General
Assembly will approve by a large m~Ljority the draft
resolution submitted to it by the Ad Hoc Political Committee. We shall vote in favour of that draft and against
the USSR and Polish draft resolutions.
70. Mrs. FIGUEROA (Chile) (translated from
Spanish) : The delegation of Chile wishes very briefly
to explain how it will vote on the draft resolution pro...
viding for the federation of Eritrea with Ethiopia which
was originally submitted by fourteen countries in the
Ad Hoc Political Committee.
71. During the discussion of this question in the In...
terim Committee· and later in the Ad Hoc Political
Committee, my country advocated independence for the
Eritrean people as a matter of fundamental principle.
We advocated it because of our respect for, and our
faith in, the self-determination of peoples, the high moral
principles of the Charter and the principles of freedom
which are fundamental to the life of the Latin..Ameri.
can countries. Nevertheless.. in view of the complexity,
gravity and urgency of the problem.. my delegation was
always prepared to .. consider a compromise solution,
both in the Interim Committee and during the meetings
and discussions of the Ad Hoc Political Committee.
72. But although we were perfectly wiltinK to envisage a compromise solution.. and although we were
prepared to consider federation as such a compromise
solution, it must be emphasized that my delegation has
always taken the view that federation must be a consequence of the establishment of independence, not of
annexation. For that reason, we consider that the plan
for a federation which is now before us does not ade...
quately safeguard the rights of the Eritrean people. .
73. We expressed our critieismsand, entered our
reservations on this point during the di~cussions in
the Ad Hoc Political Committee. Since the Chilean
delegation did not approve of the plan for a federation,
it abstained from voting on it. It abstained, as I then
said, for two reasons: because it was necessary to treat
this problem as a matter of .grave urgency, and because
my delegation felt that an unsatisfactory solution such
as the present one was better than no solution at all.
4 See drJcuments )./AC.18/SR.39 to AIAC.18/SR.45 induaive.

586

General Assembly-Fifih Session-Plenary Meetings

74. l'Iowever, at the present time, the position of my
delegation is as follows. We feel that today the peace

and security of the world are gravel1 threatened, and

that it is the responsibility of all Members of the
United Nations to avoid, by all possible means, the
emergence, in any part of the world, of potential or
actual sources of friction. To avoid such a· possibility,
we feel that we must give the greatest possible moral
support to the resolutions approved by the majority of
the Members of the Unitec. Nations.
75. In the Ad Hoc P()litical Committee, the draft
resolution providing for federation obtained a substantial majority. That is why we feel that we must vote for
it in order to give it the moral support required to
ensure that the inhabitants of Eritrea do not seriously
oppose its implementation.
,
76. The fact that we vote for t!tis draft resolution does
not mean that we are ahanJoning our principles; it
does not mean that we are not maintaining our principles. We are maintaining them and we have undiminished faith in the principle of self-determination, but we
believe that we must vote in favour of the draft resolution in order to strengthen the moral support which the
Assembly has already given it.
77. We hope, 'however, that the constitution of Eritrea,
for which the United Nations will be largely responsible, will provide the inhabitants of Eritrea with the
necessary safeguards and will ensure the observance of
their rights.
78. .We believe that the first phase of the problem will
be settled if the United Nations approves this solution;
but we do not believe that the whole problem will thus
be disposed of. There will still be the second phase,
namely, the carrying out of this solution in actual
practice. In that connexion I must state that my
delegation listened with deep emotion and respect to
the statement just made by the representative of
Ethiopia. We believe in the good faith of Ethiopia, in
the good will of the Government of Ethiopia, and in
the light of that statement my delegation is confident
that the federation will work for the good of the people
of Eritrea.
79. Nevertheless, I must also state that this confidence
will not prevent us from paying. close attention to the
course of future developments and to the opportunities
the people of Eritrea are given to attain complete
autonomy; we hope, too, that the rights of the inhabitants of that region will b~ fully safeguarded.
80. Mr. ARUTIUNIAN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian): The USSR
delegation would like to explain its vote on the various
draft resolutions. Three draft resolutions have been
submitted to the General Assembly on the question of
Eritrea: a draft resolution Submitted by the Soviet
Union [A/1570] , providing that Eritrea should be
granted independence immediately, a draft resolution
submitted by Poland [A/1564 and Corr.1], providing
that Eritrea should be granted independence after three
years, and a draft resolution submitted by the A d Hoc
Political Committee, providing that Eritrea should hi;
fed~rated with Ethiopia.
.
81. The USSR has consistently supported the proposal that Erltrea should be granted independence and
has continued to do so at the current session. We base

our argument on the fact that all peoples have a right to
self·determination and national independence.
\
82. The national liberation struggle of the colonial and
dependent J?eoples for their independence and freedom
has grown 1n strength as a result of the Second World
War. The colonial system is going through an acute
crisis. Accordingly, in considering the fate of Eritrea
-one of the former Italian colonies-the United
Nations must take a decision which will satisfy the
longing of the Eritrean people for independence and
freedom from national oppression. The General Assembly cannot tolerate a deal by the colonial Powers at the
expense of the population of Eritrea.
83. In the circumstances, the only just solution to the
problem of the future of Eritrea is to grant it independence. And here it should be noted that the continuation
of British administration for any period whatsoever
would be fatal to the normal development of Eritrea.
84. The situation in Eritrea has considerably deteriorated during the period of British administration. Significant facts testifying to this are given in the report of
the United Nations Commission for Eritrea,G in the
memorandum submitted by the delegations of Guatemala and Pakistan. In that memorandum the following
conclusion is drawn from the examination and analysis
of those facts: "During the last decade.nothing has been
done towards the economic improvement of the territory, whereas much has been done to the contrary",
that is to say, towards worsening the situation.
85. Eritrea must not be left for any further period
under the administration of thf~ United Kingdom, which
is pursuing a policy clearly designed to worsen the
situation in Eritrea. Any further deterioration of the
situation in Eritrea can be prevented by the immediate
grant of independence, which a large part of the
population of Eritrea itself is demanding. The memorandum to which I have already referred states that:
"The great majority of the. inhabitants of the eastern
and western lowlands, and groups of varying importance in the plateau, were in favour of immediate
independence". 6
86. The arguments used against the proposal that
Eritrea should be granted immediate independence are
those habitually adducecl in defence of the colonial
system. It is alleged, for instance, that Eritrea is a
backward country and is not. ready for independence,
that an independent Erit.rea would not be able to ensure
its own independent economic development and, as the
United Kingdom reprf~sentative said at the meetings
of the Ad Hoc Political Committee, that to grant
independence to Eritrt.~a would lead to political chaos.
Thus we see that the usual arguments which are
advanced to defend the colonial system are being used
here.
87. I know of no fsingle instance in history where a
colonial country has won its independence without
being con(ronted by the allegation that it was not ready
for independence.
88. The General Assembl1 cannot attach impO);tance
to arguments of this kind. On the contrary, it should
reject them once a.nd for all, and decide to grant Eritrea

-See-Official Records of the General Assembly, Fiftlt
I)

Session, Suppleme11t No. 8, page 32.
6 Ibid., page 30.

...... ,.

31Sth Meeting~'a Deeemoor 1950

537

,
96. Thus the United States has become the dominant
independence immediately. Furthermore, the British
Power which directs the colonial subjugation and
occupation forces should be withdrawn within three
exploitation of the African peoples, and the prop?sa1
months of the day on which the General Assembly
for federation, which was put forward by the Umted
decision to grant Eritrea independence is adopted. The
States delegation, reflects the interests of the colonial
continued retention of United Kingdom occupation
forces in Eritrea is absolutely unjustified, and is inPowers, headed by the United States.
compatible both with the national interests of Eritrea
97. The USSR delegation cannot therefore support
itself and with the fundamental principles and purposes
the proposal for federation, which is the outcome of the
of the United Nations.
struggle among the colonial Powers for a new partition
89. It is clear from the foregoing that the USSR of the former Italian colonies.
delegation objects to the proposal for the federation of
98. The USSR delegation appeals to all the other
Eritrea with another State, as such a federation would
delegations to vote in favour of Eritrean independence,
disregard the right of the Eritrean people to selfwhich is the equitable solution to this problem. An
determination by preventing the Eritreans from exercisindependent Eritrea would have the right to decide all
ing that right. The delegation of the Soviet Union bases
questions concerning its relations with neighbouring
its position on the fact that such a decision is being
States.
imposed on the Eritrean people without its consent
99. With regard to Ethiopia's just daim for access
and, hence, in violation of the fundamental principle of
to the sea, both the draft resolution of the Soviet Union
the right of self-determination of peoples.
delegation and the draft resolution of the PoHsh delega90. A number of speakers here have referred to
tion provide for the ceding to Ethiopia of Eritrean terrifederation as a compromise solution. The USSR delegatory which is essential to Ethiopia for access to the sea
tion considers that if federation is indeed a compromise
through the port of Assab.
solution, it represents a compromise among the colonial
100. In the light of all these considerations, the USSR
Powers. It is be~ng imposed on the Eritrean people and,
delegation continues to urge that a decision should be
in effect, on Ethiopia also, and it will be equally
taken to grant Eritrea immediate independence, to
unsatisfactory to Ethiopia.
withdraw the British occupation troops from Eritrea
within three months and to give Ethiopia access to the
91. In reality, this solution is not the kind of compromise which should be proposed by the General Assemsea through the port of Assab.
bly. In the first place, how can one speak of a
101. These are the principles by which the delegation
compromise if it h~ been adopted without the p~rticipa~
of the Soviet Union will be guided in votin~ on tI-,e
tion of the peoples concerned, that is, without the
three draft resolutions submitted to us on the question
participation of Eritrea? Furthermore, it has been
of the future of Eritrea.
adopted, notwithstanding the Eritrean people's wishes,
102. Mr. GAJEWSKI (Poland) (translated fr01fl
against their interests and in violation of their most
French):
The Polish delegation has maintained a
vital, fundamental right-the right of self-determination.
constructive attitude with regard to the future of
92. Federation cannot therefore be called a comproEritrea ever since this question was brou~ht before
mise solution. In reality, it is the outcome of the contest
the United Nations. My delegation has also shown a
among the colonial Powers for a new partition of the
spirit of broad understanding in the matter of seeking
former Italian colonies.
a I;ompromise solution, on condition that such a solution
should be just and in keeping with the United Nations
93. We are told that a part of the population of
Charter. It has continued to demonstra.te the same
Eritrea desires federation. Even if that were so, the
spirit during the present session and will express it
question should be decided by the Eritrean people
when .we come to the vote.
themselves, and not by some international or~anization.
In any case, it cannot be settled by an agreement among
103. We consider that in a decision concerning the
the colonial Powers. The federal solution has in fact
fate of a people, the General Assembly should act in
been put forward by the colonial Powers, under the
accordance with the principles which form tht'\ very
guidance of the United States.
foundation of the United Nations Charter, namely, the
principles of equal rights and self-determination as
94. This idea of a federation was submitted by the
stated in Article 1 of the Charter.
United States at the last session of the General Assembly. That fact in itself proves that the. problem is not
104. After studying closely all the arguments adduced
now being settled in the interests of the Eritrean people.
during the discussion on the disposal of Eritrea, my
In recent times, the United States has become the
delegation considers that the draft resolution presented
dominating Power in Africa, and determines the
by the delegation of the Soviet Union. [A/15701 procolonial policy of the various States in that continent.
poses the fairest solution 'of the problem. This draft
95. This is what an American newspaper says about
r~solution, which is based upon the principle of selfthe colonial interests of the United States in Africa.
determination and which provides for the immediate
The Sunday Compass of 19 November 1950 says:
independence of Eritrea, envisages the fulfilment of
"Though it possesses no colonies in Africa, the United
those conditions without which neither the independStates is today the dominant Power in Africa. And it is . ence nor the free self-determination of the Eritrean
using its power, not to promote and support antipeople is conceivable, one of those tonditions being the
colonialism in Africa, but to strengthen and extend the
prompt withdrawal of the British occupation forces. In
old colonial pattern. Such changes as it has brought
the opinion of my delegation, this is the solution which
about are changes which divert profits from London
best answef,:\ the 3_spirations of the Eritrean people and
and Paris to New York."
the requirements of peace and security in &st Africa.

I~
.

I
!

1

I
r

!

105. My delegation has given sympathetic: consideration to the. tlaims put forward by Ethiop'ia, and con..
~iders that such of them as are justified wdl be satisfied
by the USSR draft f1esolution, which would grant
Ethiopia that part ol th~ territory of Eritrea which is
necessary to secure Ethiopia'~ access to the sea through
the port of Assab. 1v1y delegation will accordingly vote
for that draft resolution.
106. On the other hand, after carefully examining the
draft resolution of the fourteen Powers submitteCl by
the Ad H QC Political Committee, my deleRation considers it to be in flagrant opposition to the principles
proclaimed in Article 1 of the Charter. This draft
resolution decides the future of a people without considering its aspirations, although they have been voiced
and brought to the notice of the United Nations. It
dispos~s of this people as if they were so much inanimate

matter. Under the name of federation, it provides for
nothing less than annexation.
10? It is impossible, however, to creatt' a federation
without the tonsent of thepartiea eonc~rned. In the
case of Eritrea, one of the parties concerned, namely,
the Eritrean people, has not been consulted. Tlie
Eritrean people have been given no chance to ex.tJress
their will, although even when they were under a
colonial regime they. never ceased to demand independence. Such a resolution would ignore the' aspirations
and wen..being of the inhabitants of Entrea and the
opinions expressed by the majority of the populat!on.
It could not satisfy the requirements of peace and
securi~ in· East Africa. For these reasons, my delega..
don wtll vote against that draft resolution.

Th' Milling rO$' af 1.5 /MH.

--,~-----------------------""-_---_--------~

Pdntedin U.S.A.

A-404M-]anuary 1951--3,600
