SECURITY COUNCIL
OFFICIAL

RECORDS

FORTIETH

Y”EAR

260f!Sth
MEETING:

‘

26 SEPTEMBER 1985

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2608)

... ... ... .. ... ... ... .. ... ... .... ... ..

1

Adoption of the agenda . . . . . . . . . . . . ..*.................................

1

United Nations for a better world and the responsibility of the Security Council in
maintaining international peace and security . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

ZYPV.2608

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined
with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations
document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/ . . . ) are normally published in
quarterly Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the
document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about
it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
/
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

2608th MEETING
Held in New York on Thursday,
President: Sir Geoffrey HOWE (United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland).
Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
India, Madagascar, Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago,
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
Provisional agenda (WAgendaI2608)
1. Adoption

of the agenda

2. United Nations for a better world and the responsibility of the Security Council in maintaining intemational peace and security
The meeting was called to order at 3.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda

1. The PRESIDENT:
Members of the Council will recall
that the date and agenda for this commemorative meeting
of the Council were agreed upon in consultations held last
month. In accordance with that consensus, the provisional
agenda for this meeting is before the Council in document
S/Agenda/2608. Unless I hear any objection, I shall consider the agenda adopted.
i’2e agenda was adopted.
United Nations for a better world and the responsibility of
the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security

2. The PRESIDENT:
I have been informed by the
Secre,tary-General that at this commemorative meeting of
the Security Council the following members of the Council
are represented by their Minister for Foreign Affairs: Australia, Burkina Faso, China, Denmark, Egypt, France,
Peru, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, the Soviet Union, the United
Kingdom and the United States. India is represented by
the Minister of State for Commerce, who has been duly
accredited by his Government. Madagascar is represented
by its Permanent Representative to the United Nations.
3. The spirit of co-operation demonstrated by all those
present here, which has made this very important meeting
possible, is greatly appreciated by all of us.

26 September

1985, at 3 p.m.

4. The fact that just before we started our business an
unheralded item on the agenda consisted of a storm warning is, I emphasize, unheralded. The fact that upstairs they
are closing the windows against the storm is all the more
reason for us down here to be opening the windows for
peace.
5. The Council will now begin its consideration of the
item on its agenda. I call on the Secretary-General.
6. The Secretary-General (interpretation from Spanish): I
agree with you, Mr. President, that the tempestuous
threats from outside are tempered by the tranquillity of
our meeting here today.
7. At the inaugural meeting of the’ Security Council, the
first President, who was from Australia, said in his opening remarks that the Council would perform a function
which was unique in the history of international
organizations-the
direction of collective action for the
maintenance of peace, justice and the rule of law.
8. That assertion by the first President-and
I may say
how fitting it is that on this commemorative occasion a
Minister of the Australian Government is once again present at the Council table-was totally in keeping with the
conviction and hope the founding nations placed .in the
concept of a representative, multilateral body, responsible
for the maintenance of peace and security among the sovereign States of the international community. In the course
of 4@years, we have seen the difficulties entailed in fully
realizing the anticipated benefits of this concept. I have
myself felt compelled to warn that the Security Council is
not fully achieving the goals set for it in the Charter of the
United Nations. But, even now, I would agree with that
first Piesident of the Council. The Council is an historically unique organ, with a purpose and responsibility
which is not and cannot be shown by any other entity.
9. The Security Council has remained in essentially permanent session for almost 40 years. Its members have
always been on call to consider action to be taken in the
face of threats to peace and security. Effective measures
have been taken on numerous occasions that demonstrate
the capacity of a multilateral body empowered to act for
the preservation of peace on behalf of all nations. Governments have consistently sent representatives of high ability
to represent them in the Council, and their talent, conviction and hard work over the years have given a further
dimension to the unique quality of this body.

10. As we judge the first 40 years of the United Nations,
-we have to take full account of the nature of the world in
which it operates, and of which, I believe, it is now an
irreplaceable part. This is especially true of the Security
Council, with its central responsibility forthe maintenance
of peace. The world, when seen as a whole over these 40
years, has achieved extraordinary progress in meeting,
through technological and social advances, basic human
needs. The United Nations has been a major catalyst and
instrument in these changes, and it must continue to be so
as we deal with the enormous needs which remain. Neither
the United Nations, however, nor those changes to which
it has contributed have as yet eliminated the political divisions within the international community. Some have
grown in depth and intensity. The divisions have their
roots in conflicting ideologies, in competing national
claims and ambitions, in territorial disputes and in structural changes in the global society.
1
, ’
Il.
I see these divisions not as something new but as a
very old disease afflicting our era, as it has afllicted those
of the past. Among its visible and frequently destructive
symptoms today am fear .and suspicion, terrorism, the
devotion of enormous and irrational quantities of resources to arms and, all too frequently, the.outbreak of conflict. The fact that, despite these divisions, 15 nations
representing all regions and very divergent political orientations remain in continuing contact in this body in connection with major political issues is further confirmation
of the unique character of the Security Council. It has long
been apparent, however, that these divisions have come to
affect adversely the capacity of the ‘Council to fulfil the
function described by the first President of directing collective action for the maintenance of peace.

the iudicious use. bv a unanimous Council. of the measu&available
to it in the Charter. It seems to me that there
are questions where the views of all members converge to a
surprising degree. I believe that the constructive resolution
of such problems would do much to reassure the membership of the United Nations, and the world community as a
whole, of the effectiveness of the Council.
15. If, as many have concluded in the course of the
Council’s consultations, crises have frequently been
brought before the Council too late for preventive action,
it would seem to follow that the Council might well establish a procedure to keep the world under continuing survey
in order to detect nascent causes of tension. In this same
context, there would seem to be substantial benefit to be
derived from an agreed procedure for fact-finding which
could be easily and quickly implemented where instances
of potential conflict are detected.
16. If, as has also been widely noted in the Council’s
consultations, peace-keeping forces have proved a highly
useful means in the past of preventing the recurrence of
conflict, then there would seem to be value, in terms of the
future, in considering ways in which these forces might be
used to discourage recourse to arms.
17. Forty years of experience has given the Council a
firm basis both for reflection and for future action. No one
can be in any doubt of the objective, or of its importance.
Rather, our doubts concern the relationships among the
members and the corporate capacity of the Council to take
the necessary decisions and action in the prevailing political conditions.
18. I have had occasion to state that the deep political
divisions within the international community, especially
among the States members of the Security Council, have
frequently inhibited the Council’s effectiveness over the
past 40 years. The conclusion should not be drawn, however, that since the divisions may well long persist, the
Council’s effectiveness will, of necessity, be equally inhibited in the future. Profound political differences among
Council members have not always prevented effective
Security Council action in dealing with crises in the past.

12. I do not believe that the Securitv Council can cure
the disease of political divisions. It must act in spite of
them. The Council’s main task, as I see it, is to limit and
reduce the adverse effects of those divisions. One of the
speakers at the first Council meeting commented that the
responsibility of the Security Council Was not to create the
conditions for peace, which was the competence of other
bodies of the United Nations system. The responsibility of
the Council was to see that peace was .kept in fact. This
remains today the contribution required from the Security
Council .for a better world.

19. The instances of success in truly collective action for
the preservation of peace sould be studied for the guidance
they can provide to the Council in its future activity. At the
same time, the failures of the past should be viewed in the
perspective of a world which in the future may be even
more heavily armed, and tension even more acute. An
ineffective Security Council can, in such a world, be in the
interest of no nation. A fully effective Council, pursuing
collectively the aims defined in the Charter, would however serve the interests of all.

13. Since 1983, the Council itself has been engaged in
consultations on means of enhancing its effectiveness in
this task. This process can now be seen as an important
element in the assessments being made in this fortieth anniversary year, both within and outside of Governments, of
the performance of the United Nations. Much can be, and
has been, learned from both the past achievements and the
reverses of this performance, including those of the Security Council. But this will be of pragmatic value in terms of
world peace only if what has been learned from the past is
applied to the future.

20. If this view is shared by the Governments represented .
here, they may wish to consider individually, bilaterally
and multilaterally how and to what extent the collective
endeavours of the Council in the interest of ‘peace can be
insulated from the differences and disputes that may exist
between them. In very immediate terms, there could be

14. I very much hope that out of the fortieth anniversary
commemoration
will come, among other things, a new
determination to resolve issues that could be resolved by
2

value in includiug this question on the agendas of meetings
among national leaders that will take place here in New
York in connection with the fortieth session of the General
Assembly.
21. On this auspicious occasion I wish to express the
hope that this commemorative meeting will serve to consolidate and renew the authority and prestige of the Council. It is easy to criticize and find fault with political
institutions. What is important-indeed
essential-for
humanity is to have in the Security Council a just, effective
and determined guardian of the peace, which it can respect
and rely on. The presence of distinguished Ministers in this
room today is proof of the importance of the responsibility
of the Council and of the Council itself. Members of the
United Nations have agreed that the Security Council, in
discharging its responsibilities .for the maintenance of
peace, is acting on their behalf. I express the hope that this
meeting will mark the beginning of a new spirit and Of
renewed dedication in the Security Council.
22. The PRESIDENT:
1 call ou the first speaker, the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, Mr. Eduard Shevardnadze.
23. Mr. SHEVARDNADZE
(Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (interpretation from Russian): The anniversary
of the United Nations is a good occasion, with due regard
for the lessons of the past, to assessthe present and look to
the future.
24. Our representative gathering has before it the concrete task of enhancing the role of the United Nations in
building a better world and augmenting the effectiveness
of the Security Council, which is entrusted with the primary responsibility for maintaining peace and security.
25. The urgency of this task is due above all to the complexity of the international situation. We have already had
an opportunity at a meeting of the General Assembly to
indicate the reasons for the present tensions. Now I wish
only to stress once again that the blame rests with those
who persist in their unwillingness to reckon with the realities of our time, who count on obtaining military superiority and seek to dictate their will to others.
26. The world finds itself at a crossroads of sorts. Either
the present dangerous trend fraught with catastrophic consequences for mankind will continue to develop, or it will
prove possible by joint efforts to avert the threat of war,
put an end to the arms race and release funds for solving
urgent economic and social problems.
27. It is only by uniting the efforts of all States that
mankind can be saved today from the danger hanging over
it. This is attested to also by the experience of the antiHitlerite coalition, and indeed, by the very fact of the
establishment of the United Nations, which is inseparably
linked with the great victory of the freedom-loving
peoples.

28. The indisputability of this conclusion is particularly
obvious in the nuclear and space age.’ Strict compliance by
States with the Charter of the United Nations requirement
to live in peace with each other as good neighbours-and
this, as we see it, is, precisely what peaceful coexistence
means-is the only rational alternative to a nuclear
I
tragedy.
29. Indeed, the very, name of this organization-the
United Nations-is. ,pronounced with such hope and
respect in all languages precisely because it embodies the
idea of uniting the efforts of States for the sake of a peaceful future.
3..
30. History demonstrates that whenever Members of the
United Nations have been able to rise above their ideological, political and other differences for the sake of their
common interests, this has produced real results in the
strengthening of peace. On those occasions, the Organization has lived up to-its role as an effective mechanism for
fruitful international co-operation.
3 1. A realistic and ‘responsible approach to international
affairs requires overcoming the present tensions, reviving
detente and making concrete efforts to build a better
world.
L
32. Were people on any continent, in any country, asked
what a better world means for them, it can be safely
asserted that, despite ‘differences in their world outlook,
ideology and national or cultural traditions, they would be
of one mind primarily, in that a better world is a world
without fear of a nuclear catastrophe, a world free of
weapons, whether m&ear-missile, chemical, or any other.
Today there are already so many means of warfare in the
arsenals of States that they-are sufficient to destroy all life
on earth. Nevertheless, their accumulation and qualitative
build-up continue. Furthermore, in addition to the, so to
speak, earthly weapons, there are plans for acquiring space
arms, including weapons that can practically instantaneously strike any target,‘wherever located-on land, at sea,
in the air or in space itself.
-c
33. The Soviet Union has stated that it will not be the
first to step into outer space with arms. But let no one hope
that it will not be able to take necessary countermeasures
should anyone else take such a step.
34. The genius of man should be directed not at inventing ever more sophisticated means of self-destruction but
at attaining new heights in scientific and technological progress in order to improve the life of people. That is precisely what the Soviet Union is doing. Our country was the
first to place an artificial satellite in orbit around the earth.
A citizen of the Soviet Union, Yuri Alexeyevich Gagarin,
was the world’s first cosmonaut. Soviet engineers were pioneers in building a nuclear-power station and a nuclearpowered ice-breaker.
35. Pursuing its invariable, principled course, the Soviet
Union has submitted for the consideration of the current

General Assembly session a proposal on’developing international co-operation in the peaceful exploitation of outer
space under conditions of its non-militarization.’
We are in
favour of preventing the appearance of arms in space and
of opening it up for the joint constructive endeavours of
States. A decision to this effect should be adopted without
delay, before the arms race breaks out into space.

42. A better world is also a world free from oppression of
the peoples and suppression of the individual, a world in
which exploitation of man by man has been eliminated,
where complete equality of nations and ethnicities has
been achieved-a genuine democracy where access to a
wide range of social benefits, cultural values and the
heights of knowledge is guaranteed.

36. In accordance with the Charter, all Members of the
Organization should contribute to the achievement of disarmament. Of course, that applies above all to the nuclearweapon States, particularly since all of them are
permanent members of the Security Council.

43. The United Nations should continue to uphold
firmly true human rights and freedoms, without distinction as to race, sex, language or religion, and to support all
those who are struggling against the vestiges of colonialism, racial discrimination and genocide.

37. The Soviet Union has unilaterally ceased nuclear
explosions. In view of the presence in this Chamber of the
representatives of the other nuclear Powers, we once again
urge them, particularly the United States, to consider that
initiative most seriously and to follow our example. As for
verification, that problem is raised artificially. Today a
nuclear explosion cannot be concealed, and those who
make assertions to the contrary are also well aware of that.

44. A better world cannot be built unless all States
renounce the use of economic and financial levers as a
means of political coercion. It cannot be built without
eliminating discrimination in international economic relations- and restructuring them on a just and democratic
basis.
45. Constructive co-operation between States in expanding mutually beneficial trade and scientific and technological ties and in solving such global problems as those of the
elimination of hunger and backwardness, the protection of
the environment and the exploration of the world’s oceans
is becoming the imperative of our time in the true sense of
those words.

38. Our country proposes that agreement be reached on
the entire complex of issues concerning the removal of the
nuclear threat, from freezing to completely eliminating
nuclear arms. In limiting and reducing arms of any kind,
the Soviet Union will go as far as its partners are prepared
to go.

46. It serves the interest of progress towards a better
world to make the maximum use of all possibilities offered
by the United Nations. As one of the founders of the
United Nations, the Soviet Union would like it to become
a truly authoritative universal peace organization. We
believe that the better the Organization serves the interests
of the peoples, the greater will be its prestige. That is why
our country favours enhancing in every possible way the
effectiveness of the Organization and particularly that of
the Security Council.

39. For the world to become a better place, it has to be
freed from hotbeds of aggression and armed conflict.
Today this means putting an end to the interference in the
internal affairs of Nicaragua and other countries of Central America, the undeclared war against Afghanistan and
the aggression against the Arab States; giving the Arab
people of Palestine an opportunity to establish a State of
its own, and terminating the illegal occupation of Namibia
by South Africa’s racist regime.

47. When joining the United Nations, all States undertake to abide by the decisions of the Security Council. The
least that is required of States in order to attain the goals
proclaimed in the Charter is that they should act in conformity with the Council’s decisions. It is inadmissible that
Council resolutions should remain on paper only, especially its resolutions aimed at removing the crisis situations
in the Middle East, Central America and southern Africa.

40. It is essential not only to eliminate the existing conflicts but also to do everything possible to prevent new
crisis situations. To achieve that, the Charter principles of
the non-use of force, non-interference in the internal
affairs of other States, the peaceful settlement of disputes
and respect for sovereignty must truly become the law of
international life. Any encroachment on those principles
should be strongly opposed, and the Security Council has
a special role to play in that respect. ’

48. Under the Charter, the Security Council is vested
with broad powers to ensure the implementation
of its
decisions. If, so far, the Council has been unable to put its
entire potential at the service of peace, it is because some
people view the United Nations through the prism of their
own narrow interests. Moreover, inadmissible steps are
sometimes taken to undermine the entire United Nations
system.
_

41. The Soviet Union consistently acts in the belief that
all States and peoples should really live in peace and harmony, in conditions of dependable security. We are pursuing this objective in our bilateral relations with other States
as well as on the regional level when we work to continue
and develop the European process started, at Helsinki and
when we put forward the idea of a comprehensive
approach to security in Asia. We seek the same objective
on a global scale, in particular in the United Nations,
where we put forward major initiatives.

49. In his recent annual report on the work of the Organization, the Secretary-General has expressed justifiable
concern about the fact that the United Nations “suffers
from a lack of respect for, and failure to co-operate with,
4

the Council’s decisions”.2 In that context, we note with
satisfaction the efforts the Secretary-General is making in
accordance with the Charter to promote the implementation of decisions taken by the Council and other United
Nations bodies.

“And for these ends to . . . live together in peace with
one another as good neighbours, and to unite our strength
to maintain international peace and security . . .I’.
57. The Ukrainian.people is proud of the fact that at the
Conference in San Francisco the Preamble to the Charter,
which contains those words, and Chapter I, on purposes
and principles, were drafted in a Committee chaired by the
then Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Ukrainian Soviet
Socialist Republic, Mr. Dmitri Zaharovich Manouilsky.

50. Let me mention something else, too. A better world
cannot be built by taking into account the interests and
views of one State only, however powerful and economically developed that State might be. Nor can it be built for
a limited group of States. A better world means peace for
all, which can be achieved only through the efforts of all. I
wish to stress this here in the Security Council, whose work
is based on the principle of the unanimity of its permanent
members.

58. Throughout its 40 years of membership in the United
Nations, the Ukrainian SSR has been and remains true to
the principles proclaimed in the Charter: the non-use of
force, non-intervention in internal affairs of others, the
peaceful settlement of disputes, respect for sovereignty and
the equality of States large and small. We have always
supported and we continue to support the establishment
and expansion of mutually advantageous cooperation on
a basis of equality among countries for the sake of peace
and the good of mankind.

51. The responsibility incumbent on the permanent
members of the Council in no way detracts, of course,
from the role the other Council members and all other
States Members of the Organization are called upon to
play in maintaining world peace. Whatever their differences, these should not be allowed to overshadow what is
most important: namely, their common responsibility for
eliminating the nuclear threat and safeguarding peace.

59. We believe that the United Nations has done a great
deal to promote this cause-not everything we would have
wished, of course, and not always when it was most necessary. But blame for the inadequate effectiveness of the
Organization belongs to those States which, in spite of the
obligations they have assumed, are unwilling or refuse to
comply with them in accordance with the Charter.

52. In the words of Mikhail S. Gorbachev, General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party
of the Soviet Union:
“All people want to live; no one wants to die. Therefore, we should muster political courage and stop the
ominous process that is developing. It is necessary to
stop the arms race and to proceed to disarmament and
begin improving relations.”

60. We vigorously condemn the policy of threats and
blackmail with regard to the United Nations and its specialized agencies, which at the present time has attained
scandalous proportions. The international intergovemmental organization should not and cannot be the tool of
any State or group of States. It is for this very reason that
it is international, because its task is to serve the interests
of all peoples and States. A better world for all is possible
only through the efforts of all.

53. I express the hope that our meeting today will give a
new impulse to the effort to enhance the effectiveness of
the United Nations and the Security Council in their work
for the benefit of peace and the good of mankind.
54. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Mr.
Vladimir Kravets.

61. The Ukrainian SSR believes that the United Nations
and the Charter possess a great reserve of creative energy
for the purpose of building a better world. The fact that for
40 years now it has been possible to prevent the outbreak
of a new world war is abundant testimony to this. On the
credit side of the Organization’s balance-sheet, a document
that was adopted 25 years ago deserves a special placenamely, the Declaration on the Granting of Independence
to Colonial Countries and Peoples. The implementation of
this Declaration has been of invaluable assistance to the
national liberation struggle of the peoples and has promoted the attainment of freedom and independence by
dozens of former colonies and hundreds of millions of
human beings. The young States of Asia, Africa and Latin
America which have joined the Movement of Non-Aligned
Countries have participated in the most active way in the
presentation and adoption of decisions in all organs of the
United Nations.

55. Mr. KRAVETS (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): Among the anniversaries
and noteworthy events which are marked on the international political calendar this year, the fortieth anniversary
of the United Nations is undoubtedly one which stands
out. The historic significance of this anniversary lies in its
organic link with a feat of undying memory-the
great
victory of the peoples of the coalition of united nations
over the forces of fascism and militarism.
56. The triumph of peace over the forces of reaction and
war is a striking example of fruitful co-operation among
countries with different social and political systems united
against a common threat. That inspired the authors of the
Charter of the United Nations to write:

62. By drawing on the means provided in the Charter for
the settlement of international conflicts and the prevention
and halting of acts of aggression, the Organization has

“We the peoples of the United Nations, determined to
save succeeding generations from the scourge of war. . .
5

made a definite contribution
grave international crises.

security, the normalization
of international economic
relations-all
these have been and are the goal of the persistent and consistent efforts of the socialist States.

to overcoming a number of

63. The Security Council has an important role here. In
the context today of ways and means of enhancing its
effectiveness, we state once again that the success of the
Council’s work depends, first and foremost, on the political will of States and their determination to strive for the
consistent attainment of those noble goals set out in the
Charter. It is of paramount importance in this regard that
all States comply unswervingly with their obligation under
the Charter to abide by decisions qfthe Council and to
carry them out. We cannot permit resolutions of the Councii designed to eliminate crisis situations-in
particular in
the Middle East, Central America,and southern Africato remain unimplemented.
64. Article 24 of the Charter unambiguously

70. The celebration of the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations should, in our view, serve as an additional
incentive for the concerted efforts of States in the interests
of achieving the lofty purposes and principles enshrined in
the Charter. History teaches us that we must tight against
wars before they are begun. No other course is open to us.
71. The policy of scrapping the existing military-strategic
balance in the world and the attainment of military superiority, stepping up the arms race and extending it to outer
space, are paths that lead only to the abyss. In view of the
danger threatening us, the only sensible alternative for all
States and peoples is the development of international relations as laid down in the Charter.

states:

“In order to ensure prompt &d effective action by
the United Nations, its Members confer on the Security
Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security, and agree that in carrying out its duties under this responsibility the Security
Council acts on their behalf.”

72. The Ukrainian SSR attaches great importance to the
United Nations as an effective instrument for peace and
will do everything in its power to promote the successof its
work in its major areas of competence, namely, the
strengthening of international peace and security, the
establishment
of good-neighbourly
relations among
nations and the development
of international
cooperation.

65. The Securitv Council has been entrusted with broad
powers in performing its functions; these include the right
to take effective preventive measures and to impose comprehensive mandatory sanctions.

73. The Ukrainian SSR is ready to make its contribution
to the work of the Security Council, the organ to which the
Member States have entrusted the major responsibility for
the maintenance of peace.

66. The basis for imnrovement of the effectiveness of the
United Nations is, alcordingly, strict compliance by all
Member States with the Charter, the maximum utilization
of the potential of the Security Council, underlying whose
work is the principle of the unanimity of the permanent
members, and unswerving compliance with decisions of
the Council.

74. The PRESIDENT:
I now call upon the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago,
Mr. Errol Mahabir.

67. It is not the imperfections of the Charter that should
be blamed or, indeed, the work of the Organization, but
rather the militaristic forces. That is why the peoples of the
world are facing the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations in a situation of growing anxiety for the fate of the
world. The Charter, which was.written 40 years ago, has
lost none of its significance today in our nuclear space age,
which has opened up for mankind boundless possibilities
and prospects of a better life and of development, but at
the same time constitutes a real threat of global
annihilation.

75. Mr. MAHABIR
(Trinidad and Tobago): I am deeply
honoured to address this special meeting of the Security
Council convened to commemorate the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations. It is a happy
coincidence that this historic meeting is being held under
the presidency of a country which was one of the founding
nations and which has since then continued to play a
prominent role in the conduct of the affairs of the Council.
I am confident that under your wise and able guidance,
Sir, this meeting will prove most constructive at this crucial
juncture in the existence of the Council and of the United
Nations.

68. It is hardly necessary to point out in this regard that
in order to combat the present difficult and dangerous
situation in the world the efforts of all States are needed
and that the major target of these concerted efforts is
today the elimination of the threat of nuclear war.

76. I wish to congratulate the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the
efficient manner in which his country’s representative conducted the affairs of the Council during .the month of
August.

69. The elimination of the nuclear danger, the cessation
of the arms race on earth and preventing it spreading to
space, the political settlement of conflicts and the elimination of hotbeds of tension, the organizing of businesslike
co-operation among States on a basis of equality and equal

77. Allow me at this time to convey to the Government
and the people of Mexico the heartfelt sympathy of the
Government and the people of Trinidad and Tobago for
the extensive damage and loss of life resulting from the
recent earthquakes in Mexico.
6

78. Forty years ago, the world, already shocked by the
destruction and suffering of the Second World War,
recoiled in horror at the devastation visited upon Hiroshima and Nagasaki by what was then the most lethal
weapon of war ever employed by man. In the aftermath
was born an urgent desire to promote peace among
nations and to forswear the use of force in the settlement
of disputes. Thus, in 194551 States, reatlirming their faith
in human dignity and in the equality of all men and of all
nations, agreed to establish the United Nations. The
founding fathers envisaged that the United Nations would
achieve a more sober and stable international order. This
organization, inspired by a desire for collective security,
was intended to establish and to maintain international
peace and security and to foster an environment for
orderly, progressive developmental growth and economic
reconstruction.

fundamental problem of man’s inhumanity to man, which
has many facets and manifests itself in various forms.
83. We cannot speak of a better world without reference
to the terrible sufferings of the non-white majority in
South Africa. We should not speak of noble thoughts that
enrich our society and yet ignore the strangulation of the
quest for survival, equality and justice in the country of
their birth. It is universally recognized that the system of
apartheid constitutes a threat to southern Africa and to
international peace and security. Thus, it is a sad reflection
on the world community, and in particular on the Security
Council, that this abhorrent system continues to exist
more than 30 years after it was first brought to the attention of the United Nations. It is regrettable that the measures which would hasten the demise of apartheid are still
not wholeheartedly embraced by those States which are in
the best position to make such measures effective. While
the action recently undertaken by some States against
South Africa is a step in the right direction, more urgent
steps commensurate with the gravity of the situation need
to be adopted.

79. Any analysis of today’s world would show that the
reasons which led to the concerns of the founders of the
United Nations remain valid. The Security Council, which
has been entrusted with the primary responsibility for the
maintenance of international peace and security, is therefore under a special obligation to determine whether it has
been proceeding in the right direction over the past four
decades and to identify the measures which should be
adopted in order to achieve fully the aims set out in the
Charter of the United Nations.

84. In 1977, the Security Council unanimously imposed a
mandatory arms embargo on South Africa. However, it is
to be regretted that the reports of the arms embargo Committee appointed by this very Council indicate that that
embargo has not been fully observed by some States whose
special privileges impose on them a concomitant obligation to be at the forefront of efforts to maintain intemational peace and security.

80. The experience of the last 40 years indicates clearly
that what the Council can and must achieve is the creation
of a climate which will conduce to the realization that a
spiralling arms race is not the guarantee of the safety and
security which it seeks. We shrink from imputing to any
country the barbarous desire to gain world domination by
unleashing the most lethal and devastating of the weapons
in its armoury. We are convinced that what every State
really desires is freedom to survive in a peaceful environment in which it can improve the living conditions of its
citizens and be secure from the risk of attack by others.

85. The continued existence of apartheid and the related
issue of South Africa’s illegal occupation of Namibia in
defiance of Security Council resolutions suggest that it is
with restraint that we should celebrate this anniversary.
Trinidad and Tobago therefore urges that effective steps
be taken before the situation in southern Africa escalates
completely out of control, with the attendant dangers to
the stability of the region and, indeed, of the world.
86. Contemporary international relations are beset by a
growing number of conflicts, all of which have the potential to escalate into international crises. This is evidenced
not only in southern Africa but in such areas as the Middle
Past, South-Past Asia and Central America.

81. It is ironical, however, that in many cases this pmcious freedom is being sought by expending monumental
sums of money on weapons of limitless destruction. One
recognizes that every nation has a right to defend itself.
But the growing arms build-up, both nuclear and conventional, has triggered an intense race far in excess of the
legitimate need for self-defence and is posing a threat to
international peace and security. In fact, one thousand
billion dollars are spent each year on weapons of destruction. A fraction of that expenditure could eradicate the
aggravated famine of this world. An estimated 30 children
die per minute for want of food and basic medical supplies,
yet in that same minute three million dollars are disbursed
on armaments. The world would be transformed if the
time, the skills, the energy and the wealth so prodigally
expended on means’ of destruction were applied to the
betterment of mankind.

87. Some disputes require solutions at the international
level, but where possible, conflicts should be resolved at
the regional level. The situation in Central America, for
example, has shown itself to be conducive to a regional
solution through the initiatives of the Contadora Group.
We applaud the ‘recent creation of the Support Group,
composed of Argentina, Brazil, Peru and Uruguay, to lend
assistance to the Contadora process. We note that talks are
to be resumed next month, and express the hope that they
will be productive and conclusive and will not be impeded
by factors likely to frustrate the search for durable peace
and security in the region.

82. In reviewing our work over the past 40 years and
charting a course for the future, we need to address the

88. It has been established that many conflicts are caused
by socioeconomic problems and that there can be no real
7

peace without global economic security. What is required,
therefore, is a concerted collective effort on the part of all
. States and international institutions to assist economic recovery, particularly in developing countries. It is, however,
with some despair and anxiety that my delegation observes
the current retreat from multilateralism and the absence of
democratization of the international economic system.
The international financial institutions must be responsive
to the justifiable calls for change in their policies and prescriptions, and thus avoid the large-scale social and political
disruptions which would inevitably threaten international
peace and security. The world has become more interdependent and democratic collaboration between the developed and the developing parts of the world has become a
sine qua non of economic progress.

contribute to an atmosphere of international trust. We
believe that confidence-building measures which reduce
areas of tension and encourage good-neighbourliness
among States at both the regional and the international
levels are required to improve the general climate of international relations. The Council should always seek to promote mutual understanding and the confidence that no
State would wish to dominate another or to resort to violence as a means of resolving disputes. Is it too much to
hope that if the Council can assist in resolving outstanding
conflicts of a relatively minor nature there will emerge an
ever-growing confidence that even the super-Powers can
come to regard themselves as rivals, perhaps, but certainly
not as adversaries?
92. In this respect, we welcome the proposed summit
meeting in November of this year between the leaders of
two of the permanent members of the Council. We hope
that those talks will foster a better working relationship
between the two countries and will promote greater cooperation and understanding. That would improve considerably the general climate of international relations and
facilitate the work of the Council and of the United
Nations as a whole.

89. The unfavourable state of contemporary intemational relations contributes in part to the inability of the
United Nations to perform its role adequately and underlines the difftculties with which it is confronted. The
United Nations and the Security Council have been constrained by numerous obstacles: non-respect for and nonimplementation of decisions and resolutions; the increasing unilateral use of force to resolve issues or to serve
narrow self-interest, in contravention of the principles of
the Charter; and the unwillingness of individual States
with differing ideologies to take collective action.

93. The Charter has vested certain States with the right
of veto, but my delegation believes that the veto should not
be used contrary to the principles embodied in the Charter.
The greater the rights accorded to States under the Charter, the greater should be their obligations. We believe that
serious thought should be given to identifying nonprocedural issues on which the use of the veto could be
suspended or limited. This would establish a momentum
towards enhancing the effectiveness of the Council.

90. Desnite these constraints. the United Nations system
has provid itself a dynamic one, capable of evolving and of
meeting, to some extent, the demands of an era and a
membership radically different from those of 40 years ago.
However, if the United Nations is to play an enhanced role
in the quest for a better world and if the Security Council is
to carry out more effectively its primary responsibility for
the maintenance of international peace and security, a
number of measures will have to be adopted. In this
regard, we support whole-heartedly the recommendations
pertaining to the Security Council contained in the
Secretary-General’s reports on the work of the Organization, especially those issued in September 19823 and September 1985. But for those measures to become effective, a
change of attitude on the part of Member States will be
required. When we consider all that has been contemplated and acted upon by the Council over the last 40
years, we are persuaded to agree with the view expressed
by the Secretary-General that the Council

94. The Secretary-General must be allowed an adequate
measure of flexibility, within the limits of the Charter, in
carrying out his preventive role when crises or potential
crises threaten ‘international
peace and security. It is
imperative that in such circumstances he be given the political and tangible support of all the parties concerned.
95. The record of peace-keeping operations is undoubtedly one of which the United Nations and the Security
Council can be proud. However, this mechanism needs to
be strengthened and improved. This is one of the key areas
in which the consensus of the super-Powers and the cooperation of the ccntending parties are required.

“often suffers from a reluctance to preempt, or even to
foresee, dangerous situations and to use the powers of
the Council at a stage when problems might be more
susceptible of treatment”.2
It should therefore be resolved at this special commemorative meeting to address not only conflict but the causes of
conflict, in order to rid the world of war and establish an
everlasting peace.

96. The Securitv Council should convene more frequently high-levei meetings, as envisaged in the Charter.
These should review the efforts to facilitate the resolution
of current or potential disputes and analyse the prevailing
international environment. This would serve to encourage
exchanges of views and help to overcome the misconceptions and distrust which so often lead to stalemate and
conflict.
.

91. Trinidad and Tobago is a small nation that can
threaten no one, and for that matter could hardly resist the
least sophisticated attack by the powerful. Our approach
to our responsibilities as a member of the Council is to

97. It is alarming that at a time when global dangers and
challenges require maximum international co-operation
we find the multilateral approach under the greatest threat.
The perception of shared mutual interests and the need for
8

collective responsibility and consensus are being replaced
by the promotion of narrow sell-interest, by dogmatism,
by the rising tide of ideological crusades and, increasingly,
by recourse to coercion. This trend must be reversed if we
are to avoid global catastrophe.

commemorative meeting of the Security Council will proceed smoothly, in an atmosphere of good understanding,
to a successful conclusion.
104. I also wish to pay a sincere tribute to Sir John
Thomson, for the capable, dignified and efficient manner
in which he has performed the duties of President of the
Council during the past three weeks. His personal and
professional qualities have earned him and his country the
deep respect and admiration of my delegation.

98. The United Nations is a centre-piece of international
co-operation, providing, as it does, the only framework
within which all States can seek to protect and to pursue
their interests by dialogue and persuasion. It will be as
effective as its Members allow it to be. It would be unfair
to lay at the door of the United Nations the blame for all
the current world crises. Some of them are caused by deepseated political realities, attitudes and perceptions.

105. It is also a pleasure for me to convey my delegation’s profound appreciation to Mr. Oleg Troyanovsky,
representative of the Soviet Union, who was the Council’s
President in August.

99. The fond hope of Trinidad and Tobago-and
we do
not think it Utopian-is
to help in some measure to create
in the Council the mucilage of goodwill that will bind
members together in a spirit of trusting fraternity, thereby
rendering unnecessary the search for security by means of
military superiority that is as elusive as it is debilitating.

106. It is with shock and sadness that I have learned of
the tragic natural calamity which has beset Mexico in the
past two weeks. On behalf of the Royal Thai Government,
the Thai people and on my own behalf, I wish to convey
through you, Mr. President, to the Mexican Government
and people our profound condolences and sympathy.

100. We therefore call upon Member States-the powerful and the vulnerable, the rich and the poor-to rededicate themselves to the principles of the Charter and to
remember that international relations are about ordinary
human beings. We must all strive to avoid confrontation
and conflicts; we must place greater store on goodwill,
trust and the benefits of dialogue and co-operation; we
must accept that there are diverse ways of perceiving and
attaining our respective national goals; we must recognize
that peace is not merely the absence of war but also the
satisfaction of basic human needs and rights and the elimination of hunger, poverty, disease, despair and injustice. If
we do, then international peace and security will not be
under constant threat. Then we will not live in fear of
tomorrow, and this will indeed be a better world.

107. The presence of 15 Ministers and representatives at
this historic gathering is in itself indicative of the importance we attach to the work of the Security Council and of
the United Nations as a whole. It provides a solemn occasion for us to review, reflect on and reappraise the past,
present and future of the Organization, particularly the
role of this major organ of the United Nations, the Security Council.
108. We already have before us an excellent report of the
Secretary-General on the work of the Organization. Here I
should like to say how fortunate we are in having such a
highly dedicated and capable Secretary-General. Although
his origin is in the third world, he is a worldly man, with
wide knowledge and experience and a vision that encompasses global interests and dimensions. His report, for
which my delegation wishes to thank him warmly, reflects
his strong commitment to the betterment of the Organization and his genuine concern for its future role. Despite the
oft-repeated criticisms of the Security Council, my delegation agrees with the Secretary-General’s assessment that
“the Security Council has played an essential and often
central role in providing stability and limiting conflict’”
and that “there are ways in which the Council could
improve its capacity along the lines on which it has been
working for many years*‘.2

101. In thanking you, Mr. President, I wish to express
the confidence that if we aspire together, together we will
achieve.
102. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Thailand, Air Chief Marshal, Mr.
Siddhi Savetsila. I call upon him.
103. Mr. SAVETSILA
(Thailand): Mr. President, on
behalf of the delegation of Thailand, I wish to express our
pleasure at seeing you presiding over this historic meeting
of the Security Council. Your presidency is a fitting testimony of the trust and confidence that the members of the
Council have in you. Furthermore, Thailand and the
United Kingdom are bound by close ties of friendship and
cordial relations going back many centuries. We both have
the long-established institution of monarchy, which is cherished by the people. Trade and cultural links have further
consolidated the relationship between our two countries,
and the Thai people have high esteem for your country.
Permit me, therefore, to associate myself with your other
colleagues in extending to you warmest congratulations on
your assumption of the presidency of this august body. My
delegation is convinced that under your leadership the

109. We gather here on this occasion to commemorate
the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations. An anniversary is usually a time for rejoicing as
well as a time for pondering. We rejoice today that the
world has survived for the past four decades without
becoming embroiled in another world war, which, to everyone’s knowledge, would mean the extinction of human
civilization as we know it. Yet as we survey the headlines
of every day’s newspapers or take a look at the issues
which have been brought to the Security Council, we cannot forget that peace is still not a normal state of affairs
around the globe. So this time of rejoicing must also be a
9

time for pondering, as we move into the fifth decade of the
United Nations.

General in their fact-finding missions could by this process
carry the added prestige and authority of the Council,
thereby facilitating the performance of their duties. In this
way, the stature of the Secretariat could be enhanced,
while at the same time the capability of the Council to
fulfil its tasks under Article 34 of the Charter could be
increased.

110. We are today appraising whether the United
Nations, and in particular the Security Council, can maintain peace and security in order for it, in the words of the
founding fathers, “to save succeeding generations from the
scourge of war”. As we survey the globe, we see wars and
threats of war everywhere. In some areas, wars have not
yet broken out because military alliances have served to
uphold a precarious state of no war, no peace. In this
situation of insecurity worldwide, what can the Security
Council do to fulfil its role, as mandated in the Charter, to
be the international organ with the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security?

113. The third step which the Security Council could
take to ensure that. its role in maintaining international
peace and security is not ignored or considered marginal is
to encourage genuine negotiations between parties to a
situation or dispute once the matter has been brought
before the Council. The United Nations, and in particular
the Security Council, have been called “‘a glass house”, or
some even say, “a goldfish bowl”, with worldwide spectators. If the Council is to ensure that it is perceived not
mainly as a theatre for public diplomacy but rather as a
forum where serious negotiations can lead to substantive
results, then it should minimize the time spent in listening
to prepared speeches by countries not directly involved in
the dispute. Instead, more time should be given to the
parties to the dispute to negotiate between themselves
under the auspices of the President of the Council ‘or with
the assistance of the Secretary-General, or of a conciliation
committee or selected Council members, which could be
created under Article 29 of the Charter. The focus as
always should be on the pacific settlement of disputes, not
merely the issuance of another resolution, which, in the
absence of such settlement, tends to be ignored as soon as
adopted, thereby undermining in a cumulative manner the
prestige and authority of the Council.

111. First, the members of the Security Council must go
back to the Charter of the United Nations, which provides
the legal basis as well as the guidelines for the role of the
Council. The Charter proclaims that the initial means to
maintain international peace and security is the pacific
settlement of disputes. The Security Council is enjoined to
call upon the parties to seek first to settle their disputes by
peaceful means before bringing matters to the Council for
consideration, in accordance with Article 33, paragraph 1.
Therefore, the Council should adopt as a normal practice
the requirement that no disputes could be brought before
it until it has determined that the parties to the disputes
have seriously resorted to various means of pacific settlement. The Council should not rush to sit in judgement on
a particular issue until it has satisfied itself that other
peaceful avenues have been tried unsuccessfully by the parties concerned. For the Council to yield automatically to
any request of any Member State to convene a meeting
would be to squander away its moral authority and to risk
being used as a forum for mere propaganda and polemics.
If the Council is to reassert its authority as the supreme
arbiter of international disputes, it must as a first step
judiciously screen them in the light of available evidence.

114. My country’s principal concern on this occasion of
the commemoration
of the fortieth anniversary of the
United Nations is to see the Organization, and in particular the Security Council, assume once again its rightful
place as the organization responsible for maintaining international peace and security. As a small country, Thailand
attaches great ~importance to the United Nations as the
embodiment of our hope for a world free of war and
tyranny. We see it and this organ, the Security Council, as
the last defender of the rights of small countries to exist
with freedom and dignity in the international community.
We hope to make our small contribution in defence of
those rights, That is why we sought a seat on this body. My
country believes, as the late Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjtjld did, that “You have not done enough, you have
never done enough, so long as it is still possible that you
have something to contribute”. My country, therefore,
appeals to fellow members of the Security Council; and of
the United Nations, to contribute what each can to the
realization of the purpose expressed in the Preamble of the
Charter of the United Nations: “to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war, which twice in our lifetime
has brought untold sorrow to mankind”.

112. The second step which the Security Council could
take to enhance its ability to maintain international peace
and security is provided in Article 34 of the Charter, which
author&s the Council to investigate any dispute, or any
situation which might lead to international friction or give
rise to a dispute. At present there is no instrument which
the Council could use to perform the aforementioned function on a regular basis. Perhaps this can be remedied by an
enlargement of the Secretariat staff servicing the Council.
But perhaps an effective solution may be to encourage and
authorize the Secretary-General to gather information by
all means which would better enable him to exercise his
authority under Article 99 of the Charter to bring to the
attention of the Council any matter which, in his opinion,
may threaten the maintenance of international peace and
security. The role of the Secretary-General in the Council should not be confined to an advisory or monitoring
function. He should be given the authority to become the
“eyes and ears” of the Council and regularly make available to the Council his information pertaining to developments which may threaten international
peace and
stability. Furthermore, representatives of the Secretary-

115. We are all living in one world, irrespective of any
differences that may exist in our political, economic or
social systems. The state of the world cannot but reflect the
current human condition. Thus, the promotion of human
advancement should be our most cherished goal. When
10

the larger part of humanity is living in abject poverty, the
real challenge is to assessthe problems from that perspective. Regardless of nationality, people who have to endure
immense suffering share in common the aspirations and
ideals which are universal and which are enshrined in the
Charter. Their world is an interdependent world; by the
affinity of their yearnings and hopes. Perhaps that is the
true significance of interdependence-an
interdependence
that will benefit the common people. Thus, ‘%ommon” in
this sense signifies not only membership of the world community at its most basic and fundamental level, but also
the commonality of human ideals and aspiration.
-

tion of the debate between the Powers and, on the other,
the lack of parallel progress in disarmament and in the
institutionalization
of collective security-the two fundamental pillars of the thorough fulfnment of the task
assigned to the Security Council by the Charter. Of course,
the concept of collective security is very different from the
balance of terror in which we now live. The challenge
facing us is this: we must in the meantime devise machinery that will make possible the establishment of collective
security within secure and permanent terms of reference.
122. In order to breathe new life into the Security Coun‘cil there’ would first have to be a renewed assertion of the
general concept of international authority, as has been
pointed out in his latest report on the work of the Organization by the Secretary-General-whose
presence and
work in the Organization are a source of pride for my
country. The existing international instruments would perhaps suffice if there were a genuine political will to cooperate, particularly on the part of the five permanent
members of the Council; but such political will proves to
be elusive because of historical circumstances that are
quite obvious and that lead us to the only possible collective consensus: the discouragement we now .feel.

116. The PRESIDENT:
I call now on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Peru, Mr. Allan Wagner Tizon.
117. Mr. WAGNER TIZ6N (Peru) (interpretation from
Spanish): I wish to say how pleased my country is to see
you, Sir, the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdoms presiding over this
commemorative meeting of the Security Council as the
United Nations celebrates its fortieth anniversary. I am
sure that under your wise leadership, the Ministers taking
part in the meeting will prove able to transform this
solemn commemoration
into a well-articulated effort of
collective reflection, in order to carry out the essential renewal of this central mechanism for peace and security.

‘123. We can see, therefore, on the one hand, that the
principal organs of the United Nations are gravely bogged
down, as illustrated by the rhetorical inflation of the General Assembly and the compulsive inhibition-which
is not
the same thing as prudence-with- which the Security
Council treats international political problems. That is not
only the institutional reflection. of the crises which have
occurred in the past four clecades, but also the effect of the
gradual and systematic removal of substantive problems
from the sphere of action of the United Nations.

118. A great deal has been said-and it is to be expected
that much more will be said in the next few days-about
the idealistic inspiration of the authors of the Charter of
the United Nations and about the supranational implications inherent in their basic postulates and normative
principles.
119. I disagree with that view. All the international institutions that-kmerged from the Second Word War, in the
political and the economic spheres, were imbued from the
outset with the scepticism and bitterness that are inevitably
born of historical experiences as devastating as wars. The
statesmen of 1945, although they did promote guidelines
of civilized conduct for the international community by
defining the structure of the Organization, injected it with
‘a dose of hard realism based on their perception of the
need for the five victorious Powers to have a tutelary role,
and the corollary need to keep the weaker countries in a
state of indefinite subordination. The United Nations
therefore is the result of the interaction of profound motivations, both idealistic and pragmatic-motivations
that
are not always clear and not always readily compatible.

124. As we see it, this situation only proves, in the political sphere, the anachronistic nature of the international
structure created by the generation of the great war, which
is also becoming increasingly evident in the economic and
financial field. That order, which sought the establishment
of a democratic system of collective security based on a
vague consensus on norms of international law, was defective from the start, because of the inequality created by the
veto and the privileged position given to the Powers, to the
detriment of the possibility of action by the small and
medium-sized countries. We must be quite clear about
that. I am not saying that the legal subordination of the
medium-sized and small countries is the cause of all the
problems facing the Organization; but we must remember
th;It in this body, which bears the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of peace and security, the Commitment entered into by the great Powers was to promote
peace and security in the service of the international community and not in accordance with whatever their own
political or security ideas might be. Therefore, the United
Nations in 1985 cannot exist simply as a gigantic, laborious monument, lacking all real political will; it must
assume a role consonant with the universality of the new
international reality and its problems in all spheres of global responsibility, because all those problems now have the
same political roots.

120. The United Nations has not replaced-indeed,
it
was never conceived of as a replacement for-the system
of nation-States. Neither was it intended to be a mere
forum for good will or harmless rhetoric. Therefore, there
can be no sustained examination of the scope and limitations of the United Nations and of its principal organ
unless that evaluation takes place within the dynamics of
international life.
121. We are all aware of the principal reasons for the
collapse of the original concept of international political
cooperation: ‘on the one hand, the ideological exacerba11

125. The new political role that we are calling for must
involve recognition of the sovereign and constructive role
that properly belongs to the countries of what is termed
the developing world. To make that great qualitative leap
would mean accepting a logical premise: that the interdependent nature of today’s world is no mere hypothesis, but
a realistic statement of fact, and that in turn would be an
essential first step in introducing into the United Nations
bodies the effectiveness that they lack. In other words, the
Security Council will not be able to function as the body
responsible for the maintenance of peace and security
unless steps are taken to ensure that, in the way it handles
the matters before it and in’its future voting practice, there
is an effective effort to seek agreement and negotiation,
discarding any notion of patronage, which is not in keeping with a modem concept of the world’s immediate
future.

adopted resolutions on items that truly have a bearing on
the maintenance of international peace and security, those
resolutions have not been implemented. Therefore, Peru
believes that the time has come to replace lamentations
with the action required by the Charter and, given the
disregard for the Council’s resolutions on Namibia and
other matters, to take the maximum enforcement measures under Chapter VII to put an end to the illegal occupation of Namibia, which is repulsive to our conscience as
free men, thus restoring to some extent the credibility of
the highest international body.
13 1. Throughout history, mankind’s associations have
been imperfect, as was inevitable, but the present century,
which has produced catastrophes of the magnitude of the
wars of 1914 and 1939, has also made notable attempts at
bringing peoples together. The United Nations is both the
best of them and the one with most room for improvement. But the current paralysis of effective channels for
international co-operation, especially the breach opened
up between the countries of the North and the South,
endangers not only the survival of the United Nations but
the very concept of multilateralism, which is as desirable as
it is elusive.

126. I therefore beheve that the basic peace-keeping function assigned to the Council by the Charter demands more
than a change in political will by the major Powers which
would guarantee parallel progress in disarmament and collective security. It demands much more: it requires an
indispensable consensus that the ,problems of backwardness are a decisive factor in bringing about recurring disturbances in the international political atmosphere, and
that underdevelopment, the product of injustice, is the fundamental reason for the precarious nature of peace in the
postwar of today.

132. Today we face a threat of greater dimensions, when
certain international institutions are turning themselves
into privileged instruments of the Powers, to the detriment
of the vital interests of the weaker countries, jeopardizing
their very viability, as is seen so with such dramatic and
striking eloquence in the policies of the International
Monetary Fund and as is found in the anachronistic institution of the veto in the Security Council. When that
occurs, we see taking shape before us an international
structure wholly at odds with the concept of equality, foreshadowing the emergence of supranational policies of an
oppressive nature.

127. Accordingly, there can be neither a diagnosis of our
problems nor progress towards significant political agreement unless the countries that have been left outside so far
can be given a central role-that is, if they do not participate in the real negotiations on the fundamental political
problems and if those countries do not make use of that
constructive function within the Council, overcoming the
temptation to adopt a rhetorical or repetitive approach.

133. Notwithstanding
the difficult circumstances .confronting my country, my Government has placed a wager
on life. And we have placed another wager, with the
unswervering faith of our Andean nation and our firm
commitment to act, on a new genuinely democratic international order in which peace will be the consequences of
our civilized quest for agreement and the development of
all countries will be the result not of handouts, which generate dependence, but of genuine justice, properly distributing the fruit of the effort of our peoples. In this spirit,
we wish the Security Council would rise above its role of
merely containing existing conflicts, that it would be something more than a solemn forum for discussing matters of
limited scope. We must discard the idea that the Council,
instead of being a framework for resolving grave conflicts,
is instead an instrument in aggravating them.

128. Peru unreservedly supports the suggestions made by
the delegations present and the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral that, within its present framework, the Security
Council not only consider but also resolve some of the
distressing and almost permanent problems of today’s
world. But the Council’s exclusive preoccupation with
trouble spots that periodically erupt with loss of life and
material damage, from the Persian Gulf, South Africa,
Afghanistan, Central America and the Middle East to
other latitudes, is not enough to neutmlize a sort of gangrene gnawing away at the international system.
129. We believe that, as tangible evidence of a construe
tive inspiration capable of giving a new dimension to the
concept of peace and security in the light of the dangerous
features of the present situation, the first step should be to
allow the Secretary-Genera1 to act in those areas or those
cases that do not concern matters of global strategy. From
there on, the path would continue to be risky, but it would
lead to the future and would not be a route back to the
formalization of international anarchy.

134. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Permanent Representative of Madagascar to the United Nations,
Mr. Blaise Rabetatika.
135. Mr. RABETAFIKA
(Madagascar) (inrerpretafion
French): It is my honour and privilege today to
express to you, Sir, the singular satisfaction of my Govem-

from

130. Qn the other hand, it is unacceptable that in the few
cases over the past few years in which the Council has
12

contradicted, and, in the spirit of consensus which should
always prevail amongst us, they can be considered as the
central pillar of all our actions and decisions.

ment at seeing you presiding over this historic meeting of
the Security Council in commemoration
of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations. Mr. Jean Bemananjara,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Democratic Republic
of Madagascar, who is prevented from being present
because of compelling and unforeseen commitments, has
instructed me to convey to you his sincere regrets that he is
unable to be here today and to extend his best wishes for
the success of these deliberations.

142. The part of the Secretary-General’s report on the
work of the Organization relating to the Security Council
has already been the subject of a thoroughgoing exchange
of views among members of the Council. We are particularly grateful to him for having reminded us of such important points as the Council’s role in the regulation of
armaments; the reasons which prompted us to think of a
collective system of international peace and security; the
prevention, control and reduction of conflicts; the need for
unanimity and a spirit of co-operative consultation in the
Council; and the readiness of Member States to turn to the
Council for action and to respect and implement its
decisions.

136. Since the beginning of the year there have been
intensive consultations among members of the Council in
order to enable us to observe this anniversary appropriately and solemnly, bearing in mind our membership of the
United Nations and the particular responsibilities are ours.
Quite rightly, therefore, our choice fell on the theme
“United Nations for a better world and the responsibility
of the Security Council in maintaining international peace
and security”. .

143. It is clear that if we succeed in putting into practice
the suggestions of the Secretary-General and pursue and
develop the thoughts he has been good enough to share
with us, we will in that way already have contributed to the
advent of a better world. The international community has
quite rightly identified our shortcomings and weaknesses
and expects that we, ourselves, will strengthen our capacity
to take decisions and act, inasmuch as our role is already
defined in the Charter.

137. One might be tempted to deal with the subject selectively or in a dichotomous fashion by treating in succession what we expect of the United Nations and the role of
the Security Council in meeting the needs and aspirations
of the peoples. However, this would not be in keeping with
the spirit that prevailed at the drafting of the Preamble of
the Charter of the United Nations, and we remain convinced that international peace and security must be seen
!in a global context, which necessarily entails the prevention of war, the safeguarding of the fundamental rights of
man and of peoples, equality in the laws of nations, maintenance of justice, respect for intemationai obligations and
promotion of the economic and social progress of all peoples. Forty years ago, those were the conditions for a better world, and they have lost none of their relevance today
in so far as they have not yet been fulfilled.

144. In this regard, the major obstacle which appears to
be paralysing the Council in the exercise of its functions is
our inability to find a broad consensus at the right time on
the most important problems. Bilateral disputes and divergent interests have a tendency to prevail over our obligations to the international community, and that has led to
unfortunate consequences for the authority and the integrity of the Council and has undermined the confidence
Member States have placed in us.

138. It is thus that the risk of a generalized war will not
be eliminated as long as confrontation and distrust prevail,
as long as the conventional and nuclear arms race, which is
now being extended to all environments, is not halted, and
as long as conflicts and tensions persist with their always
unforeseeable consequences.

145. It could hardly be otherwise, when we have set aside
such important problems as Namibia, apartheid, Palestine,
the Middle East and Cyprus, for which we are still seeking
solutions, not to mention those problems that have been
deliberately disregarded, either because the interested parties have not deemed it useful to seize us of these matters
or else because, guided by special and fleeting interests, we
have not felt ready to examine them, still less to propose
any solutions.

139. Similarly, the notion of security-inseparable
in our
view from that of economic security-will
not be fully
realized unless we are ready to commit our collective
responsibility and unless the permanent members of the
Council, in the exercise of their special privileges and
duties under the Charter, agree to seek among themselves
as much common ground as possible.

146. We must also consider ways and means to strengthen the respective preventive roles of the Security Council
and the Secretary-General. That, as the Secretary-General
has just reminded us, would entail setting up a rapid-alert
system that could help to prevent dangerous crises, making
available on a permanent and systematic basis of data on
the development of crises and on the risks of potential
disputes, a power to be entrusted to the Council or to the
Secretary-General to take initiatives, even in the absence of
formal notification of a matter, the coordination or, even
better, the linking of the Council’s efforts with those of
regional, international and sub-regional organs, and the
search for new conciliation procedures that would make
this system more compelling to the parties involved.

140. Furthermore, it would seem desirable to us that all
Member States, whose cooperation is so-necessary, should
share the same concept of their obligations under the terms
of the Charter and agree to be guided in their relations by
the principles of respect for the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of States, non-intervention,
mutual respect,
mutual advantage, non-use of force or the threat of force
and the peaceful settlement of disputes.
141. The points I have just made sometimes lend themselves to differing interpretations but they have never been
13

147. However, our ability to take effective and systematic action would be improved only if we make use of all
the resources offered by the Charter, whether in Chapter
VI, Chapter VII or Chapter VIII. Thus, we would be
assured that any solutions and settlements we might propose would be in keeping with the purposes and principles
of the Charter and would not result in any policy of diktat.

very survival, the United’Nations has served as a beacon of
hope. During the 40 years of its existence, the Organization has several achievements in varied fields to its credit.
It has played a major role in the process of decolonization;
it has contributed to socioeconomic progress and created
universal consciousness of the rights of human beings. It
has been responsible for the progressive development and
codification of international law. Although its achievements have fallen short of the expectations of the founding
fathers, the United Nations still provides the best hope for
mankind and a solid foundation to build upon. It has
proved to be the most appropriate forum in which to deliberate upon the most important issues of the day and in
which to seek solutions to pressing intemationai problems
of peace, security and global economic co-operation in our
interdependent world. It would be difftcult to imagine a
world without the United Nations, in spite of all the cynicism and criticism which- have been laid .at its door.

148. Our emphasis on relying constantly and in all circumstances upon the provisions of the Charter testifies to
our devotion to the lofty ideals that inspired the founders
of the Organization and to our faith in the Council’s ability to maintain international peace and security. For those
of us who possess neither deterrent force nor adequate
military potential, we can only rely upon the role of the
Council in the peaceful and negotiated settlement of disputes. However, our wishes and our determination, however justified and pertinent they may be, cannot by
themselves persuade the Council to discharge its responsibilities more effectively or bring us closer to the goals of
the Charter or enforce respect for them.

154. In 1983, the late Prime Minister Indira Gandhi, in
her address to the General Assembly,4 declared that firm
faith in the United Nations was central to the Movement
of Non-Aligned Countries. At the recently concluded Conference of Foreign Ministers of Non-Aligned Countries
held at Luanda earlier this month, Ministers from over 100
countries expressed their deep and abiding commitment to
the United Nations, to preserving and strengthening the
Organization and to making it fulfil more effectively the
purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter.

149. In the end, international security means the security
of all with the support of all-in particular, the permanent
members of the Council-in
order that peace can be realized by all nations and peoples., Then, and only then, can
we speak of a better world, one finally free from the forces
of all forms of domination and exploitation, fear and
injustice.
150. The PRESIDENT:
I now call upon the Minister of
State for Commerce of India, Mr. Khurshed Alam Khan.

155. Before I proceed to consider the special role
assigned to the Security Council in the maintenance of
international peace and security, I should like to express
our deep gratitude to the Secretary-General for his very
thought-provoking
report for 1985 on the work of the
Organization, as well as for his statement made earlier in
this meeting. His analysis is penetrating and his recommendations pragmatic. Coming in the wake of our ongoing
exercise of exchange of views aimed at strengthening the
effectiveness of the Council inspired by his earlier reports,
this could, we hope, pave the way for concrete, meaningful
and realistic action in enhancing .the Council’s effectiveness and generally in revitalizing the United Nations as a
whole.

15 1. Mr. Alan KHAN (India): May I begin by saying
how pleased we are to see you, Mr. President, in the Chair.
The relations between our two countries are marked by the
close bonds of friendship and multifaceted co-operation
against the background of an old historical association.
We are fellow members of the Commonwealth. Under
your able guidance, we look forward to fruitful deliberations at this commemorative meeting.
152. It is a special privilege to be here in the company of
several distinguished Ministers at this unique gathering to
mark the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Our
presence on this historic occasion is testimony to our abiding faith in the purposes and principles of the Charter of
the United Nations and to our collective commitment to
international peace and cooperation. We meet here today
to focus attention on a subject of utmost importance,
namely, the United Nations for a better world and the
responsibility of the Security Council in maintaining international peace and security..Our discussions should provide us an opportunity to take stock of the performance of
the United Nations over the past fourdecades and to determine ways and means of strengthening the effectiveness of
the Security Council in fulfilling its primary role of maintaining international peace and security.

156. Under the provisions of the Charter, the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security is vested in the Security Council. Although
the Council has played a useful role and- has acted as a
safety net in several ways in preventing the outbreak of
war, its weaknesses and shortcomings have prevented it
from becoming the effective instrument envisaged in the
Charter. In particular we feel that the Council suffers from
want of a collegial spirit, which hampers consensus. It is
the lack of the requisite political will among Statesparticularly among the more powerful and wealthy-to
act as trustees of the interests of the weaker and poorer
that is at the root of the inability of the Council to exert
itself in the direction of achieving its basic objectives.

153. In a world which is characterized by suspicion, mistrust, discrimination and inequality, tension and conflict,
in a world in which the nuclear peril poses a threat to our

157: The special position which the permanent members
of the Security Council enjoy under the Charter places
14

upon them added responsibilities and obligations which
should transcend narrow national interests. We expect the
permanent members to live up to the trust reposed in ‘them
and to fulfil their obligations under the Charter.

162. We welcome the peace-keeping activities of the
Council and would recommend further use of measures
under Chapters VI and VII of the Charter whenever conditions so warrant. Further, we would stress the importance
of holding regular periodic meetings of the Council under
Article 28, paragraph 2, of the Charter. We hope that our
meeting at the level of Ministers will be followed by regular
contacts at a high political level.

158. The international political and security climate,
marked by a progressive escalation of the nuclear arms
race, poses a grave threat to the survival of mankind. In
the minds of the founding fathers, the primary purpose of
the United Nations to maintain international peace and
security was closely linked with progress in arms limitation
and disarmament. In spite of the provisions of Article 26
of the Charter, which gives the Security Council a leading
role in the establishment of a system for the regulation of
armaments, it is unfortunate that the Security Council has
not so far deemed it fit to address itself to this crucial issue.
We urge Council members to give attention to this question and to call for effective measures to achieve disarmament and to eliminate the risk of nuclear war.

163.
We welcome the three specific suggestions made by
the Secretary-General in his latest report. We fully share
his conviction that members of the Security Council, especially the permanent members, should give matters of
international peace and security priority over bilateral differences. Council members should be willing to make
deliberate concentrated efforts to solve one or two of-the
major problems which confront us. We have in mind the
situation in South Africa, which is riven by the pernicious
system of apartheid, the question of Namibia, and the
situation in the Middle East, including in particular the .
question of Palestine. There are also other crisis situations
and conflicts. Finally, we attach considerable importance,
during this fortieth anniversary commemoration,
to the
renewed affhmation by Member States of Charter obligations, in particular those relating to the non-use of force
and the peaceful settlement of disputes..

159. In this context I should like to retail that at the
initiative of the Prime .Minister of India, Mr. Rajiv
Gandhi, a meeting of six heads of State or Government
was convened at New Delhi in January 1985. The six ieaders issued a joint declaration [S/16921, annex] which urged
the nuclear-weapon States to halt all testing, production
and deployment of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems and immediately follow this with substantial reductions in nuclear forces. This first step was to be followed by
a continuing programme of arms reduction leading to general and complete disarmament, accompanied by measures to strengthen the United Nations system and to ensure
an urgently-needed transfer of substantial resources from
the arms race to social and economic development. Two
specific steps identified by the six leaders were the early
conclusion of a comprehensive test-ban treaty and the
prevention of an arms race in outer space.

164. The membership of the United Nations, has grown
to 159 during the last 40 years; the Organization is
approaching its goal of universality. We therefore believe
that a corresponding increase in the membership of the
Security Council to reflect more adequately the enhanced
membership of the Organization is overdue. It would
make the Council more representative of all interests and,
hence, more effective in the discharge of its functions
under the Charter. It would be opportune here to recall the
proposal already placed before the United Nations by severa1 non-aligned countries, including India, on the question of equitable representation on, and an increase in the
number of,non-permanent members of, the Council. We
hope that this proposal will be given the attention it
deserves.

160. During our frank and stimulating discussions in the
Security Council of the Secretary-General% report, several
valuable ideas have been presented which, if implemented,
could result in enhancing the special responsibility of the
Council, acting on behalf of the international community
in the collective maintenance of peace and security, and
could bring it closer to the position prescribed for it in the
Charter. I shall briefly touch upon some of these. We lay
considerable emphasis on the Council’s role in preventive
diplomacy. Measures such as informal efforts on a regular
basis to control crisis situations, the dispatch of factfinding missions, and private meetings with parties concerned are worth considering.

165. We should like also to make an observation on our
perceptions of the relative roles of the Security Council
and the General Assembly in the maintenance of intemational peace and security. The Council undoubtedly has a
special responsibility and special powers. Equally, the General Assembly, as the universal organ, has both moral and
legislative authority to pronounce and make recommendations on all matters under the Charter. The Charter is
intended to be an integral and organic whole, and the
General Assembly and the Security Council are meant to
work collaboratively in the cause of the promotion of
peace and security. There is no room for any conflict of
interest or for confrontation.

161. It is our view that the responsibilities entrusted to
the Secretary-General under Article 99 of the Charter
should be fully explored, and the Secretary-General
enabled to pursue quiet diplomacy and his role of good
offrces wherever appropriate and necessary. In this context, we emphasize the crucial importance of’establishing
relations of trust and co-operation between the Security
Council and the Secretary-General, as envisaged in the
Charter.

166. We are indeed nrivileged to be a member of the
Security Council at this-mom&t, when the United Nations
is entering ‘its fifth decade. During our current membership, which has coincided with our chairmanship of the
Movement of Non-Aligned Countries, we have endea15

voured to work with others in the interests of promoting
peace and stability. We are firm in our conviction that the
scheme of the Charter is basically sound. What is needed is
political will among States to make the United Nations
exert itself in the direction of achieving its basic objectives.
We hope that our deliberations today will give a renewed
impetus to all Council members, especially the permanent
members, to make the Security Council the effective instrument it was intended to be. An effective and responsive
security Council would certainly contribute to the revitalization of the United Nations system, as a whole.

174. That is why France is particularly pleased that the
Council should have decided to convene this commemorative meeting and to make its keynote the theme of the
United Nations for a better world and the responsibility of
the Security Council for the maintenance of international
peace and security.
175. I see this as an opportunity for all the members of
the Council to set forth their views on what the Council
can and should do the better to carry out its responsibilities. Reinvigorating the Council will, to my mind, be the
best way of celebrating the fortieth anniversary of the
Organization. Maintaining international peace and security is-need I repeat it-the first purpose of the United
Nations, and the primary responsibility in this regard lies
with the Security Council.

167. The PRESIDENT:
I call next on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of France, Mr. Roland Dumas.
168. Mr. DUMAS (France) (interpretation from French):
I shall limit my words to consideration of the role of the
Security Council, as that is the item on our agenda.
169. This meeting is without precedent. There was,
indeed, in 1970, a Security Council meeting at the ministerial level [2555th meeting], but that meeting-and
incidentally, not all members were represented by their
Minister-took
place in private. For that reason it had no
impact on international public opinion.

176. I shall not dwell on the manifestations and causes of
the weaknesses of the Organization in the sphere of the
maintenance of peace. They have been stated many times,
particularly by the Secretary-General, who, since his first
annual report, has developed an analysis that by and large
matches our own.
177. Our organization is not a super-State or a sort of
world government. It is a body of sovereign States that
includes almost all the States of the world, and thus it
comes close to achieving the goal of universality which is
implicit in the Charter. It therefore necessarily reflects the
ideological, political, economic and social differences that
exist in the world today. It is therefore inevitable that it
should know difficulty and even failures. But what is essential, to our mind, is that it should remain, in the terms of
the Charter, a centre for harmonizing the actions of
nations in the attainment of common ends. This presup
poses in particular that it deal with the main problems
affecting international peace and security. We are, however, bound to observe that certain such problems are
either not discussed or dealt with at the United Nations or
give rise to resolutions that remain dead letters. Too often
the Organization and the Security Council thus appear to
be mere sounding boards, or even propaganda forums.
Disagreement among certain of its most important
Members is certainly one of the reasons for this phenomenon, but it is not the only one.

170. Today’s meeting is a public one. We wanted it to be
so, for while quiet diplomacy may have its virtues, and that
is often useful, even necessary, it is not the natural role of
the Council, which was designed to take public positions.
171. This is, in our view, even more necessary 40 years
after the entry into force of the Charter of the United
Nations, at a time when the speed of means of transmission and the impact of audiovisual means of communication make it essential for there to be a close link between
international public opinion and the persons and organs
responsible for diplomatic actions.
172. We must recognize, however, that, far from growing
stronger, this link has actually weakened and that today
there is a real gulf between the Council and world public
opinion. The image and prestige of the Council have been
harmed over the past few years, and this in turn has
affected the Organization as a whole. In fact, the strength
of the Organization depends to a large extent on the balance between the Security Council, which is more actionoriented, as intended by the Charter, by virtue of its
composition and its rules of procedure, and the General
Assembly, whose delibemtive function is dominated by the
principles of universality and equal voting rights. Any
weakening of the Council endangers this balance and is
therefore prejudicial to the effectiveness and credibility of
the Organization, to the cost of all its Members.
173. At a time when the General Assembly is celebrating
the fortieth anniversary of the Organization on a grand
scale in the presence of a great many heads of State or
Government, the Security Council, the primary organ for
the maintenance of international peace and security, could
not appear to be found wanting and thus risk confirming
the deciine of its image on the international scene.

178. The blurring of the distinction between the respective functions of the General Assembly and the Security
Council has also contributed to this. One’ sees a growing
tendency to transform debates of the Council-which
should be action-oriented and should concern, above all,
the members of the Council and the main parties to a
dispute or conflict-into
a substitute for a General Assembly debate, providing all the Member States with an opportunity to make known their views on a given situation.
179. Another cause lies in the weakening of the sense of
responsibility of every Member State towards the Organization, which is reflected both in the proliferation or resolutions that go unapplied and the excessive use of
group-to-group negotiation.
16

180. I believe that around this table there is a consensus
that something should be done about this state of affairs.
But what?

only to complain, so that it might become once again a
body for decision and action.

181. Certainly, institutional reforms are not the path to
take. Far from improving the functioning of the Organization, they would weaken its potential effectiveness and
introduce divisive subjects, whereas what we should be
seeking is common ground.

188. To demonstrate this determination, we believe, as
the Secretary-General has also suggested, that the Council
should make a deliberate an-d concerted effort to solve one
or two of the major issues before it, chosen from among
those that are outside the East-West dialectic which I mentioned a moment ago. This undertaking does not seem to
be beyond the reach of the Council, provided that its
members have the will to act. This is the case with France.

182. The Charter has laid down a framework that should
enable the Organization to fulfil its role in the maintenance
of peace: the Security Council has been assigned primary
responsibility in this domain. The Council remains,
through its composition and its operating rules, the organ
best suited for the exercise of this responsibility, but the
Secretary-General undeniably has a role of his own to play
under Articles 98 and 99 of the Charter. We mentioned
this only recently. The General Assembly too can and
shotrId make its contribution, but in a different way, in
keeping with its nature and the functions assigned to it by
the Charter.

189. It is also important that the Secretary-General, for
his part-and
I am sure he will permit me to say this,
because of my friendship for him-should
assume in full
the role conferred on him under the Charter. He will really
be able to do this only if he feels he has the backing of the
members of the Council, with whom he is required to act
in close consultation and to maintain trustful relations.
France, for its part, is ready to give its support to the
Secretary-General whenever it can when he is acting, of
course, in nursuance of the mandates entrusted to him by
the Council or takes, in the framework of his functions,
useful initiatives for the maintenance of peace. The concept the present Secretary-General has of his functions, as
he has explained on numerous occasions and as is evident
from the actions that he has undertaken to facilitate the
solution of certain international disputes and conflicts,
seems to us to be the best. As the Secretary-General has
himself has emphasized, the confidence that Member
States place in him should not, however, mean that they
can divest themselves of their own responsibilities, as
happens sometimes, ‘not to say too often.

183. The tools are there; the means exist. What is lackinn
is the political will, the determination to use to the full the
resources of the Organization. Adjustments that affect current functioning may be useful, but they are secondary and
not the essential,
184. In this respect, the permanent members have a special responsibility and France, for its part, is fully aware of
this. Several times in the recent past, it has demonstrated
its commitment to the Security Council by taking the initiative of referring to it important questions on which it felt
the Council should decide and act. Similarly, France has
supported initiatives that have seemed likely to contribute
to maintaining international peace and security, regardless
of their origin. We will continue to work to improve relations among all members of the Council, particularly the
permanent members.

190. This reminder is a timely one. The Organization,
and the Security Council in particular, cannot succeed in
the tasks conferred on them by the Charter unless the
Member States adopt a realistic and responsible attitude,
unless they are ready, especially within the Council, to
allow a sense of responsfbility to prevail over respect for
solidarities or a narrow concept of national interests.

185. France therefore can only welcome the first &agestion made by the Secretary-General in his latest am%.ral
report, and which he repeated here today, which invites
members of the Council “to give matters of international
peace and security priority over bilateral differences.‘*

191. Let us not hide behind the overly comfortable myth
of a bureaucratic organization endowed with its own will,
outside the control of its Member States. It is, in the final
analysis, on the collective will of Member States that the
success or failure of the Organization depends. To put the
Organization back on the road to effectiveness, which I
believe is what it needs, let us assume fully the responsibilities we accepted-some of us, 40 years ago-by becoming
Members of the United Nations. France, for its part, is
ready and determined.

186. It is particularly important to extricate the Council
from the logic of confrontation in which it has been locked
by the East-West dialectic. Without waiting for improvement in the relations between its principal protagonists
which is obviously to be desired, the members of the Council who pursue a genuine policy of non-alignment can
make a vital contribution.

192. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the Deputy Prime
Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt, Mr.
Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid.

187. In order to regain its prestige, the Security Council
must exercise its responsibilities to the full and refuse to
allow itself to become bogged down in ritual debates and
prolonged consultations behind closed doors. It should
take a public stand on the major problems which affect
international peace and security, 1,ook for ways and means
to resolve them and cease to be a place where one comes

193. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (interpretationfrom
Arabic): I wish at the outset to express the appreciation of
the Egyptian delegation for the constructive initiative of
calling for the convening of this meeting of the Security
17

Council at the ministerial level on the occasion of the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations. Egypt, together
with all other Council members, supported this valuable
initiative, since it provides a unique opportunity to review
the experience of the past four decades of the Organization’s existence and to analyse its performance with its
positive and negative aspects.

mankind, the challenge facing our world today resides in
the ability to attain corresponding achievements in human
conduct with a view to spreading peace, security and
equality throughout the world. I believe that succeeding
generations will stand perplexed before a civilization which
made such great material achievements in so short a span
of time but failed to fulfil the aspirations of some peoples
in liberation, freedom and the exercise of rights endorsed
by the same international organization of which we are all
proud to be a part.

194. Sir, I am honoured to speak today under your presidency, as Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of the
United Kingdom. Egypt has very close ties with your country, in addition to the personal ties that we have between
us, in which I take great pride.

199. The questions of Palestine; southern Africa and the
vast economic disparities between the peoples of the world
are all an enigma because of our failure to reach just soiutions for them. We may be brought to account for this
situation in view of the serious responsibility we shoulder
as members of the Council, which is the main international
organ entrusted with maintaining international peace and
security. For these reasons, we should deliberate carefully
.on this delicate phase in the evolution of our contemporary world and carefully study the ideas and proposals
offered by Member States from the rostrum of the General
Assembly and during the meetings of the Security Council.

195. I am honoured to speak to&y on behalf of Egypt
on this historic occasion. I highly cherish the memories of
Egypt’s role in the drafting of the Charter of the United
Nations, its signing of the Charter as a founding Member,
as well as its participation in the work of the Security
Council on several occasions since the inception of the
Organization. I also recall Egypt’s continued contribution
to all the activities of the Organization and its affiliation
with most of its regional and political groupings.
196. Egypt’s enthusiasm for the Organization and its
firm belief in the Charter, its purposes and principles,
reflect an historical fact which has deep roots in the sentiments of the Egyptian people that go back several thousands of years ,before the existence of the Organization,
namely, unshaken faith in peace and in the maintenance of
peace. Since the time when the Egyptian citizen started to
lay the foundations of his civilization, he has geared his
efforts and thoughts to construction and has refrained
from acts of destruction. A glance at the immortal monuments of Egypt-which are still an inexhaustible subject of
study and research-confirms
the fact that the Egyptian
has always, since the dawn of history, sought to build and
construct, to spread culture and civilization, and has
always been guided by his values, principles and beliefs.
He never. wasted his efforts on inventing weapons of
destruction or tools of havoc. This strong desire for peace
is no doubt one of the major factors of the eternity of
ancient Egyptian civilization and the failure of attempts to
demolish it over the centuries.

200. Two years ago, in his address to the General Assembly, President Hosni Mubarak put forward the idea of a
review and appraisal of the international situation in all its
aspects within the framework of the United Nations with a
view to establishing a new international order in which
justice, peace and prosperity would reign. Egypt had earlier called for the convening of a special session of the
General Assembly to discuss the various fields of activity
and performance of the United &Nations as well as its
responsibility in maintaining international peace and security. This call was supported by many Member States in
view of its special importance.
201. As a result, Egypt heard with interest the points
underlined by the President of the General Assembly in his
opening statement at the current session regarding the
necessity for convening a conference to review the Charter
in order to eliminate the contradiction between its letter
and its spirit, and what he said in relation to the application of Article 27 of the Charter, which, as Member States
have come to realize, gives the permanent members of the
Council a double veto-something
which the authors of
the Charter had never intended to grant.

197. Egypt’s destiny has dictated that it always remain at
the heart of events which take place in one of the world’s
most volatile regions, beset by conflicts and problems, and
that it should assume its role on one of the major issues of
peace which has existed since the establishment of the
United Nations. Egypt’s affiliation with Africa and the
Arab World-which
is a source of great pride-has
enabied Egypt to play a distinctive role in the activities of
the United Nations and to live a unique experience which
witnessed the evolution of the Organization and its
methods of tackling the major issues that have been
brought to its attention since its inception.

202. In his latest report on the work of the Organization,
the Secretary-General describes the world in which we live
as one “of almost infinite promise which is also a world of
potentially terminal danger”. He describes the situationas
an historic choice between a world abundant in promise
and hope and one fraught with dangers and conflicts.
203. In the exercise of its historic choice, Egypt will never
hesitate to support the enhancement of the effectiveness of
the United Nations and to work for it strengthening as the
guardian of peace and the forum of coexistence of nations
and peoples. The principles and provisions of the Charter
will remain for Egypt, as they are for many developing and
recently independent countries, the guarantee for the safeguarding of their independence and sovereignty under the

198. Forty years may well be too short a period to allow
for a fair judgement or a sound scientific analysis of the
experience of the United Nations. Although this period has
witnessed enormous scientific, technological and economic
progress, when compared to the total accomplishments of
18

I

-

umbrella of international legitimacy and the principies and
purposes of the Charter.

.follow up the implementation of its own resolutions, even
if they were adopted unanimously.

204. The’profound changes that have left their.mark on
the evolution of mankind during this short span of time
will shape and affect the future of the United Nations. The
need for the interdependence of nations may well be the
most far-reaching of those changes, a requirement for their
survival and a guarantee of their progress.

209. Experience has proved that the Security Council,
particularly at times of crises-and how numerous they
are-has lost its ability to act, in most cases as a result of
the lack of political will. This has prevented the Council
from discharging its responsibilities and has reduced its
role to voicing condemnations or launching appeals; in
addition, the veto has frequently been abused-a fact
which has resulted in international conflicts getting into a
vicious circle of rivalry between the two conflicting blocs.

205. I had the opportunity when I was Representative of
Egypt to follow at first hand the methods used by the
United Nations in dealing with many international political and economic developments. I can state from experience that the approach of the Organisation in dealing
with the problems and crises in the world has gradually
deviated from the philosophy advocated by the Charter,
which is based primarily, on the one hand, on conferring
on the Security Council the responsibility of taking the
necessary measures to maintain international peace and
security and, on the other, on the necessity for abiding by
the resolutions adopted by the Council to face any threat
to world peace. Nevertheless, individualism and not collectivism has for the most part had the upper hand-a situation that has led to a gradual retreat from internationalism
and multilateralism
in dealing with international
problems.

210. All those facts confirm the urgent need to review the
existing system of collective security within the Organization, in order to make it more effective.
211. First among the methods to enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council in maintaining peace and security is the type of conduct engaged in by members of the
Council and the political will they express-especially the
Council’s permanent members, which have special
responsibilities.
212. A precondition for restoring the Council’s effectiveness and ability to act is the availability of means-and,
preceding that, the collective will-for
ensuring the commitment by the parties to a conflict to carry out and abide
by the Council’s decisions. There is no doubt that there
cannot be such a development if there is not co-operation
among members of the Council and co-ordination
between the Security Council and the General Assembly
by means of overall permanent programmes to follow up
resolutions adopted by the two organs.

206. What we direly need today is a thorough analysis
and a scientific and realistic diagnosis of the current international situation-a
diagnosis that should not seek to
apportion blame or divide responsibility, but rather to
invigorate the concepts of independence and solidarity
with a view to defusing tension, confronting escalating violence and tackling economic problems.
207. The United Nations at age 40 is badly in need of the
crystallization of a scientific conception, or rather a
renewed outlook, in order to ensure the effectiveness of the
system of collective security under the provisions of the
Charter, because this system ‘has been the core of the
Organization’s philosophy since the time when the Organization was still a dream in the minds of its founders. Now
more than ever before, its capabilities need to be strengthened through a response by its Members to its resolutions,
implementation
of its will and a readiness to be guided by
its collective wisdom, particularly in respect of the issues of
international peace and security and the rights of peoples
to independence and self-determination and to live within
a secure international system conducive to the achievement of economic and social development.

213. It is regrettable that the Council’s resolutions, even
those adopted unanimously,
have not been fully
implemented-a
fact that confirms the necessity for political will and the ability to ensure enforcement and
response. Among the practical and vital methods to
enhance the effectiveness of the Council, in addition to the
presence of political will and collective conduct, is that vast
spectrum of mechanisms available to the Council in treating situation and conflicts that may threaten international
peace and security.
214. Those mechanisms take several forms, and their
chances of success are varied. There is the innovative form
represented by the establishment of peace-keeping forces
to disengage belligerents and maintain the status quo.
There are the good offices of the Secretary-General and
the possibility, in the provisional rules of procedure of the
Council, for it to hold periodic meetings to review the
international situation and monitor grave incidents, within
the framework of what has come to be known as preventive diplomacy. There is the Secretary-General’s exercise of
his powers in bringing to the attention of the Council any
matter which may threaten the maintenance of intemational peace and security and in making contacts, conducting consultations and assembling information on areas of.
tension in the world.

208. Any careful study of the work of the Security Council will confirm that the raging rivalry between the two
super-Powers in our contemporary world has had a negative impact on the possibilities available for the application
of the provisions of the Charter, has detracted from the
value and effectiveness of the philosophy of cohective security, and has caused the Council-the
principal body
entrusted with the maintenance of international peace and
security-to lose its ability to adopt decisive resolutions to
halt aggression and settle international disputes, or even to
19

215. Those varied forms of mechanisms available to the
Council will be enriched and made more effective by
updating and rationalizing the Council’s rules of procedure, which, despite their adoption 40 years ago, remain
provisional and not comprehensive or final. The time has
come to update them and make them flexible enough to
meet the requirements of international relations, taking
into account the experience acquired over the years.

the parties concerned. Furthermore, resolutions enabling
the Palestinian people to exercise its right to return and to
self-determination remain unimplemented because of the
absence or paralysis of the political will on the part of
some parties, and this is unacceptable. Resolutions on the
establishment of a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in
accordance with international law and respect for the right
of the peoples and States of the region to existence and
security, foremost among which is Security Council resolution 242 (1967) demands a more reasonable response.
Resolution 242 (1967) should be implemented and all its
provisions should be complied with. The commitment to
the resolution as a whole should be followed up, in conformity with the principle of the inadmissibility of the conquest of territories by force, with a view to returning to
their owners all the occupied Arab territories in the West
Bank, including Jerusalem, Gaza and the Syrian Golan
Heights. The repeated appeals by the Council to stop the
war between Iran and Iraq have not been accompanied by
the necessary mechanism for implementation and followup, and have thus lost credibility. The collective will frequently expressed by the Council concerning the
regrettable developments in South Africa has been ignored
and even challenged by the racist regime there.

216. In the light of the preceding points, Egypt intends to
introduce a-specific initiative aimed at updating and rationaliz.ing the procedures and working methods of the Council, with a view to increasing its effectiveness and enabling
it to discharge its responsibilities at the right time. That
initiative takes into account the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral contained in his report to the Organization for
19823 and for this year. In our opinion, the proposals are
objective, profound and candid in redressing the shortcomings of the Security Council and the United Nations as a
whole, because of the ineffectiveness of the system of collective security.
217. The ideas put forward by Egypt stem from our firm
belief in the need to advance the work of the Organization,
especially its main bodies responsible for international
peace and security.

221. The whole world is watching to see how the Security
Council will discharge its responsibilities, promote and
enhance its effectiveness, find new methods and procedures and capitalize on its powers and machinery to restore the confidence in its resolutions which has been
shaken. There is no doubt that the primary responsibility
with regard to an enlightened conviction of the importance
of collective security, the necessity for a common political
will, the capacity to enforce, if need be, implementation of
the Council’s resolutions, and early preventive diplomacy
to contain hotbeds of tension and disputes through
genuine co-operation in order to resolve them in the interest of international peace and security, rests with the permanent members of the Council.

218, Over the past two years the Council, in informal
consultations, has discussed some of these ideas without
reaching specific agreement ‘on the method of achieving
the desired reforms. We hope that the present anniversary
celebration will provide a renewed impetus for more
research and more creative efforts to crystallize those ideas
and translate them into practical forms that will contribute
to reinforcing the Council’s effectiveness in the discharge
of its responsibilities.
219. The great significance of the fortieth anniversary of
the United Nations lies in the renewal of adherence to the
principles of the international organization, faith in the
credibility of collective action and fidelity to the purposes
and principles. of the Charter. Guided by those principles
and seeking to reach those objectives with a view to
enhancing the ability of the Organization and increasing
the effectiveness of its main body in maintaining intemational peace and security, Egypt will put forward during
the current session its initiative and practical views as a
token of renewed faith in the system of collective security,
the pillar of the Organization since its establishment.

222. In conclusion, we look forward to an era in the near
future in which the Organization will become a bridge, or a
place where cultures, civilizations and values mingle and
thrive; an era in which it will become an alarm system
warning of the dangers of natural and man-made disasters
which threaten peoples and States and jeopardize the
material and human environment alike. We look forward
to a time when the Organization will herald a new era in
international
relations pervaded by peace, justice and
prosperity for all, without distinction as to colour, race or
religion.
.

220. The tasks entrusted in the coming decades to the
United Nations, and particularly the Security Council, will
largely concern the fulfilment of its responsibiiities under
the Charter in settling international disputes, especially
those which. threaten international peace and security.
Dozens of resolutions adopted by the Council, representing a basis of international unanimity which should be
respected and implemented, still await effective mechanisms through .which to do this. For example, the Coun-’
cil’s resolutions on the Middle East and the Palestinian
question still lack the practical and executive mandatory
measures necessary in the absence of a serious response by

223. On the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations,
let us move forward towards a better tomorrow, committing all our hearts and minds, with unshaken faith,injustice and legitimacy. Let us walk bravely on a new and
untrodden path, guided by understanding, not confrontation; dialogue, not disputation; solidarity, not disagreement; truth, not deception; Peace is our goai and our
means as we fulfil the responsibilities entrusted to us by the
people of the planet so as to create a better world for them
and for the generations to come.
20

224. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Denmark, Mr. Uffe EllemannJensen.

compared with these guidelines, our experience in the
Council so far has been mixed.
232. As far as South Africa is concerned, we are generally encouraged by the way the Council has dealt with the
issue during the past nine months. Denmark’s national
position on this question is clear. For many years we have
considered the situation in South Africa to be a threat to
international peace and security and a source of tension in
all of southern Africa. To bring about the peaceful abolition of the apartheid system, the international community
must increase its pressure on South Africa and make it
more effective through the adoption of appropriate measures, including measures under Chapter VII of the Charter. The present situation calls for a large measure of
realism and flexibility within the Council and for recognition of the importance of sending an unequivocal message
to South Africa from the Council. We feel encouraged by
the growing understanding that only the South African
regime would benefit if the Council were prevented from
expressing the universally shared opposition to apartheid.

225. Mr. ELLEMANNJENSEN
(Denmark): May I
start, Mr. President, by saying how pleased I am to see you
in the Chair today. I am confident that under your able
guidance we can conclude our deliberations successfully.
226. Denmark’s strong and consistent support of the
United Nations is well known. From the outset, our membership of the United Nations has been a cornerstone of
Danish foreign policy. We have given practical expression
to our belief in the role of the United Nations by, for
example, contributing to the Organization’s peace-keeping
operations, by our firm support, in deeds as well as in
words, for United Nations efforts in the economic, social
and technical fields and by our efforts in the Security
Council.
227. The Council, on which ‘the Charter of the United
Nations confers primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security, has-for reasons known to everyone-to a large extent been deprived
of its ability to fulfil its original vocation. Achievements,
however, do not have to be complete to be real. I fully
agree with the Secretary-General that in the real conditions
of international life, the Council has played an essential
and often central role in providing stability and limiting
conflict.

233. As regards the situation in southern Lebanon and
the conflict between Iran and Iraq, the results have been
quite disappointing. If one looks at the provisions in the
Charter which deal with the Organization’s peace-keeping
role, the Iran-Iraq conflict would appear to be just the
kind of problem that the United Nations should be able to
solve. None the less, while the Secretary-General, with the
Council’s support, has been able, thanks to a very persistent and competent effort, to achieve some results towards
restraint in that otherwise bloody and indiscriminate conflict, the Security Council has not really been able to play
its proper role.

228. My Government has carefully considered how Denmark, as a member of the Council, can best contribute to
the further strengthening of that organ in performing the
tasks assigned to it in the Charter.

234. Recently the members of the Council expressed
their strong support for the mission of the SecretaryGeneral on the Cyprus question. As a country which has
contributed military forces to United Nations peacekeeping on the island for more than 20 years, we share the
conviction of the Secretary-General that what has been
achieved since his initiative of August 1984 should lead to
an early agreement on the framework for a just and lasting
settlement of the Cyprus question. We therefore strongly
urge the parties to make a special effort in the coming
weeks, in co-operation with the Secretary-General, to
reach an early agreement.

229. Our participation in the work of the Council is
guided by two main considerations.
230. First, we strive to have the Council function as a
forum of negotiation rather than debate. The Security
.Council should clearly distinguish itself from the General
Assembly. Both organs are important, but in separate
ways. For the Council to maintain and enhance its authority and its real influence on world events, it is essential that
it speak with one voice. It is therefore a constant endeavour for Denmark to promote agreement in the Council.
Unanimity is generally required for a clear and unequivocal signal to be sent from the Council to the parties to a
conflict and to ensure that the Council’s decisions are actually implemented.

235. Since his first annual report the Secretary-General
has persistently tried to draw the attention of the Council
and the Members of the Organization to opportunities for
improvement, while at the same time clearly stating the
shortcomings of the present state of affairs. His observations have given rise to much useful thinking. In this connection, I should like to recall the report stating the views
of the five Nordic Governments on the strengthening of
the United Nations which was forwarded to the SecretaryGeneral in June 1983 [S/15830, annex]. In that paper we
pointed out the desirability of strengthening the United
Nations peace-keeping forces, of holding periodic meetings
of the Council as part of the establishment of an earlywarning system, and of a more frequent use by the

231. Secondly, and this is related to the first point, we
should like to see the Council approach regional conflicts
within their regional context rather than as consequences
of world-wide competition between East and West. It is in
no way our intention to simplify the analysis of the
regional conflicts or of the factors which aggravate them
and sometimes even cause them. Efforts to solve them,
however, should concentrate on their regional causes,
which are often of an economic or social nature. When
21

Secretary-General of his prerogatives under Article 99 of
the Charter.

the interest of maintaining world peace and building a
better world, the Council must be able to discharge its
lofty responsibilities in a more effective way. We, as
members of the Council, should respond positively to this
reasonable demand.

236. In his latest annual report, the Secretary-General
makes a few concrete suggestions of a political nature for
improving the standing of and respect for the Security
Council. We agree especially with the suggestion that the
Council in the near future make a deliberate and concerted
effort to solve one or two of the major problems before it.
We, for our part, believe that the Council should concentrate on the problems in southern Africa in the immediate
future.

242. Looking back over the past 40 years, we recognize
that the Security Council has considered many conflicts in
different parts of the world and adopted a considerable
number of resolutions on the settlement of the issues
involved, thus playing a positive role in preventing, defusing and checking conflicts and easing international tension. All this is commendable. However, it should also be
noted that the Council took wrong decisions on certain
questions, which went against the will of the world’s peoples and harmed their interests. The point now is that,
measured against the provisions of the Charter, the performance of the Council leaves much to be desired. What
causes general concern and anxiety is that the Council
often proves impotent when it is asked by Member States
to take effective measures against breaches of the peace.

237. In conclusion, no one today could imagine a world
without the United Nations, but much needs to be done to
strengthen the Security Council’s role in maintaining international peace and security. A process has been started,
and the clock cannot be turned back. What is required.is
the full implementation
of the provisions already in the
Charter and, above all, sufficient political will on the part
of conflicting parties to avail themselves of the Council
machinery and to heed the Council’s decisions. Progress in
this direction may avert great human suffering and help
make a reality of the motto of this fortieth anniversary:
“United Nations for a better world”.

243. A positive and encouraging change in the post-war
world is the emergence of a large number of newly independent States in the world arena, changing the composition of the United Nations and of the Security Council,
where the third world and small and medium-sized countries are playing an increasingly important and constructive role. The balance sheet of the successesand failures of
the Council in the past provides us with much food for
thought. Whenever the Council adheres strictly to the purposes and principles of the Charter, reflects the just
demands of the great majority of Member States, particularly the third world and small and medium-sized countries, and pools collective wisdom through full consultations, it achieves success in its work. Whenever the
purposes and principles of the Charter are contravened
and the will of the big Powers is imposed on the Council, it
suffers setbacks. We should value. this historical experience, which could serve as a reference and guide in our
com.mon quest for correct ways of resolving contemporary
issues.

238. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the State
Councillor and Minister for Foreign Affairs of China, Mr.
Wu Xuegian.
239. ‘Mr. WU XUEGIAN
(China) (inzerprerution from
Chinese): First of all, allow me to congratulate you
warmly, Sir, on your assumption of the presidency of the
Security Council for this month. The unswerving efforts
that you have made to help settle a question left over from
history between China and the United Kingdom and to
promote international co-operation are well known and
praiseworthy. As an old friend of yours, I am confident
that with your rich diplomatic experience and outstanding
skill you will guide this important meeting to success.
240. On the solemn occasion of the commemoration of
the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the United
Nations, it is undoubtedly of great importance for the
Security Council to convene such a meeting as this at the
ministerial level to deliberate on the item “United Nations
for a better world and the responsibility of the Security
Council in maintaining international peace and security”
This question is without doubt of prime importance.

244. I should like to make a few observations on ways to
strengthen the role of the Security Council.
245. First, in all its activities, including its peace-keeping
operations, the Council must abide by the provisions of
the Charter, and in particular its purposes and principles.
This requires all States members of the Security Council
strictly to observe and uphold in international affairs the
principles of respect for the territorial integrity and sovereignty of other countries, the settlement of international
disputes by peaceful means, non-interference in the intetnal affairs of others and consultations on an equal footing.

241. The peoples of all countries aspire to build a better
world in peace. The United Nations was founded 40 years
ago for the very purpose of,averting the scourge of another
war. The Charter of the United-Nations
c&f&s on-the
Security Council primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and the curbing of acts of
aggression. In spite of there not having been a world war
for four decades, the fierce arms race and recurring
regional conflicts have subjected peace to constant threat
and damage. The responsibilities of the Security Council
today have.not been lightened but have- become heavier. In

246. Secondly, in carrying out its duties the Council
should earnestly heed the sound and correct views of
Member States, support their reasonable demands and
give expression to their legitimate aspirations. The Charter
stipulates that the Security Council acts on behalf of
United Nations Members and should uphold justice for
22

countries that are victims of aggression. Only thus will it be
possible to ensure useful results in the work of the Council.

tion of world peace and for a better world, and will make
their contribution towards the attainment of these goals.

247. Thirdly, the permanent members of the Council
should fulfil in good faith the special responsibilities conferred on them by the Charter. They should take the lead
in complying with the purposes and principles of the Charter by actual deeds, honour and support the common will
of the overwhelming majority of Member States, consult
with the other members of the Council on an equal footing
and work in close co-operation with them. World affairs
should not be monopolized arbitrarily by a few big Powers. They can be handled well only through consultations
on an equal footing among the countries concerned. Special responsibilities mean heavier duties, and the veto
power should not be used as a tool to shield acts of aggression and injustice.

251. The PRESIDENT:
May I express my personal
thanks to the State Councillor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of China for the kind remarks he made about my
part-in his words-in helping to resolve a problem left
over from history. That exercise was essentially a partnership, and I salute my partner in that exercise in the same
spirit as that in which he saluted me.
252. I now call upon the next speaker inscribed on my
list, the Minister for Foreign Affairs and Co-operation of
Burkina Faso, Mr. Basile L&tan? Guissou.
253. Mr. GUISSOU (Burkina Faso) (inreroreturion from
French): My delegation‘is pleased thatthe Security Council
has convened this official meeting on the eve of the fortieth
anniversary of the United Nations, and that it is being held .
under your presidency, Sir.

248. We are pleased to note that the Secretary-General
has offered some ideas in his annual reports on the work of
the Organization over the past few years, and many
Members of the United Nations and members of the Security Council have also put forward suggestions in this
respect. They include strengthening the co-ordination and
co-operation between the Security Council, the General
Assembly and the Secretary-General, ensuring the implementation of Security Council resolutions and supporting
the Secretary-General in his active efforts in compliance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and the mandate of the Council. In our view, these proposals contain a
considerable number of constructive ideas which merit
further study. We sincerely hope that the Council will continue its efforts to enhance its efficiency and fulfil its duties
and that concrete results can be achieved at an early date.

254. Forty years ago, having learned the lessons of the
conflagrations of two world wars, the peoples of the world
expressed their common determination to work together
to save succeeding generations from the scourge of war.
Further, they proclaimed their faith in fundamental
human rights, in the dignity and value of the human person, in equal rights for men and women and for nations
great and small.
255. The practical, living expression of that common
determination
was the establishment of the United
Nations, whose purposes include the maintenance of international peace and security, the development of friendly
relations among nations based on respect for the principles
of the equality of peoples and their right of selfdetermination, and the achievement of international cooperation for the solution of economic, social, intellectual
and humanitarian
problems and the promotion
and
encouragement of respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms for all, without distinction as to race, sex,
language or religion.

249. In order to strengthen the rule of the United
Nations as a whole, we believe that, apart from the functions of the Security Council, it is imperative to enhance
those of the General Assembly-an
essential point that
must not be neglected, since the Assembly has a wider
representation compared with the Council. In recent years,
the General Assembly has adopted a number of important.
resolutions on maintaining peace and security, opposing
aggression and upholding justice, thanks to the efforts of
the third world and small and medium-size countries. The
overwhelming majority of Member States have called
strongly for the strengthening of the role of the General
Assembly. China supports this proposition.

256. The question before us today concerns the role the
United Nations in general and the Security Council in particular should play in contributing to a better world for all.
That question makes us wonder, first and foremost, what
we mean by “a better world for all”, and secondly, what
role the Security Council has played or could have played
to achieve that end.

250. As a founding Member of the United Nations and a
permanent member of the Security Council, China is fully
aware of the heavy responsibilities it shoulders. In the
activities of the Organization and the Council, China has
always abided by the purposes and principles of the Charter and devoted itself to the just cause of the maintenance
of international peace and security. Pursuing an independent foreign policy, China has developed its relations with
countries all over the world in line with the five principles
of peaceful coexistence. On this solemn occasion commemorating the fortieth anniversary of the founding of the
United Nations, 1 wish to reiterate that the Chinese
Government and people will, as always, work with all
other peace-loving countries and peoples for the preserva-

257. For my country, Burkina Faso, which is classified
according to the statistics of the United Nations among the
poorest in the world, a better world for all is a world where
there no longer are ghettos in which millions of human
beings stagnate because their skin is black or their culture
different; a world in which all forms of exploitation,
oppression and domination have ended; a world from
which ignorance, hunger, thirst and sickness have been
banished.
258. For my people, my country and its political leadership, a better world means, first and foremost, a guarantee
23

of our daily bread, drinking water, good health and the
complete eradication of illiteracy for everyone. There and
there alone lies the philosophy underpinning our understanding of “a better world for all”. Beyond that specific,
practical, realistic sphere, Burkina Faso can only indulge
in sterile theorizing about the concepts of others and their
interpretation of a better world in accordance with their
own experience.

acknowledgement that the world is divided into the superPowers and the others, and, worse, by allowing those
super-Powers to impose on us their own Manichean vision
of the world.
264. Although believers and infidels alike think of the
end of the world in terms of a divine curse, that refusal and
that negative determination are surprising, frightening and
shocking because of the boundless solitude into which they
plunge those who do not possess the power to destroy our
planet. The situation faced by mankind today brings us
sharply into brutal contact with these new gods who, with
a single gesture, sane or not, are able to put an end to life
on earth. Because those gods have made the repository of
international peace and security into a place of privilege
from which they dictate their will to the world through
their vetos, the Organization has been made incapable of
eliminating once and for all every kind of threat to peace.

259. To be sure, the purposes of the United Nations were
intended progessively to transform the world in precisely
that way. Thus, on the eve of the commemoration. of the
fortieth anniversary of the United Nations, we should ask
ourselves hard questions about the way in which, individually and together, we have been able to translate that determination into reality. In other words, we should engage in
individual and collective self-criticism, evaluate our successes and our failures, and in the light of that evaluation,
open up new perpectives .for an Organization which is
more dynamic because it is better adapted to the new situations of its Members. This is especially true of the Security
Council, which, because of the role assigned to it in the
Charter of the United Nations, necessarily determines,
through its positive or negative actions, whether or not the
purposes I have just mentioned are achieved.

65. The Charter, for which Burkina Faso has the greatest
and deepest respect, was conceived at a time when the
historical circumstances and the development of science
and technology were different from what they are today.
The progress made by mankind in these fields has
undoubtedly been a powerful factor for cross-fertilisation,
understanding and bringing peoples together. On the basis
of the conditions at the time, those who drew up the Charter made it forward-looking in order to ensure its dynamism and effectiveness. Therefore we must ensure that it is
never confined on any pretext whatesoever in the straitjacket of lethal immobility.

260. Much constructive action has been taken by the
United Nations. I will mention only the most important: in
the task of decolonization, which has yet to be completed,
many peoples and nations, thanks to their courageous
action and their steadfastness, have achieved international
sovereignty and national independence; a certain measure
of international co-operation has been brought about;
mankind has so far been spared a third world war. My
delegation welcomes these successes, which clearly show
what the world is capable of achieving with the concerted
efforts of the peoples.

266. The Charter is not a remnant of history. It should
be the history of nations in movement. It is thus in the
interest of all nations to be certain that it is capable of
transforming itself the better to deal with their developing
concerns.

261. It seems more important to those of us who are
concerned about the future of mankind, because our
adherence to the purposes and principles of the United
Nations puts us under the obligation to safeguard that
future, that we blaze the trail and prepare the means for
future successes. That will be possible only if each of our
States has the political will to act everywhere and at all
times with strict respect for the Charter.

267. We know how often we are misunderstood and how
we are called iconoclastic the minute we venture to speak
of changes. Yet it is no exaggeration to say that if the
Security Council did not exist, it would be utterly impossible to invent it today. If the Council now, as in the past,
has been only marginally effective, that is because certain
of its structures are to some extent out of step with the
course of history. Therefore, for the sake of mankind, we
should honestly and constructively tackle the problem of
reforming them. Only in that .way, we believe, can we
really help the Council fully to discharge its primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international peace
and security.

262. During the past 40 years the Charter has been
flouted frequently. The flourishing of science had led us to
hope that the feeling of racial superiority which was at the
root of colonialism and wars between nations would disappear for ever. Unfortunately, some of our failures indicate
the survival of that feeling. The refusal to accept others as
they are and the aggressive determination to impose on
them our own economic, social, cultural and political
values have created and continue to give rise here and
there to hotbeds of tension and bloody confrontation.

268. Throughout its history the Security Council has
aroused great hopes. It is no exaggeration to say that its
credibility has at times been called into question in a way
that has caused concern. In the light of that past experience, we consider it our duty to give our views about the
way in which its effectiveness can be increased and it can
be made into the true guarantor of international peace and
security. Since we have had the privilege of observing its
workings both from outside and from within, we wish here
and now to make a few specific proposals concerning its
effectiveness.

263. That refusal, that negative determination, is seen
every day in Africa, Asia, Latin America and elsewhere.
Every day it is seen in the Janus-like polarization of the
world which we all have encouraged, in one way or
another, consciously or unconsciously, by our implicit
24

269. We propose the enlargement of the membership of
the Council. Our proposal is based essentially on the same
reasons that prevailed in 1963 and which led to the amendment of Article 23 of the Charter, increasing the membership of the Council from 11 to 15. It is only right and
proper that the United Nations, which has grown since
then to the point of becoming nearly universal, should
have its structures transformed in keeping with those
changes so that it is better geared to its new dimensions.
We believe it is necessary, indeed essential, to proceed
today with the same sort of readjustment.
270. We propose that the right of veto enjoyed by the
permanent members of the Council be reviewed and rectified, if not simply annulled. This right has made a considerable contribution to perpetuation of the domination of
the few over the majority. On the threshold of the twentyfirst century, it is difficult to understand how those who
normally present themselves as the staunch advocates of
democracy can accept and perpetuate such a situation.
While we understand the main concern of the.authors of
the Charter, we denounce that right because it has lost its
original substance. The right of veto, as we see it, should
be rethought and seen as the expression of a common will
and no longer as the manifestion of the power of a State
that seeks to impose its own will on others.
271. Receptive as we are to the winds of change, and
aware of the role we have to play in the Security Council in
order to ensure respect for the Charter so that humanity
may prosper, Burkina Faso has in its term of office endeavoured as far as possible to exercise restraint. Our constant
and permanent concern has been, and will be, to ensure
that our contribution to the search for solutions to the
problems confronting the world is always unequivocally
geared to safeguarding international peace and security.
272. Let us once again give vent to our creative genius.
Once again let us endow ourselves with the political will to
change that which obviously no longer accords with collective expectations. It is perfectly possible to conceive of the
right of veto being allocated according to geographical
distribution among the members of the Council. Such a
change in an established order which seems to us to be
outmoded would, provided all agreed to be strictly bound
by their obligations and their commitments, undoubtedly
make it possible to ensure implementation of the numerous decisions we have taken, which often remain dead
letters.
273. We propose that in 1986 a high-level meeting of the
Council be convened which would have on its agenda the
question of disarmament, which should, we believe, be
closely linked to the concept of economic and social development of mankind as a whole. Certainly it is not a normal situation when such an important issue, which
represents a permanent threat to international peace and
security, is not included on the agenda of the Council.
274. My delegation hopes, on the eve of the fortieth anniversary of our Organization, and at the end of the term of
Burkina Faso on the Security Council, that each and every

one of us will heed the appeal thaw has been made to us by*
humanity in the voice of the Secretary-General in his 1985
report on the work of the Organization. Peace and security
are what humanity needs, not confrontation and ideological blocs. The commemoration of the fortieth anniversary
should for each ‘one of us be an opportunity to pledge
ourselves to contribute to make the world a better one for
all. We are duty-bound to turn the world into a place fit
for mankind to live in.
275. Let us pool our efforts to put an end to the arrogance of those who are wrong-headed, to eradicate the
tragic spectacle of children dying of hunger, to wipe out
ignorance and to ensure the triumph of the legitimate
struggle of peoples against the injustice of the present
order, to silence the rattle of arms, and finally, with one
concerted will, struggling for the survival of mankind, we
can, as the President of my country, Captain Thomas Sankara, said at the thirty-ninth session of the General Assembly, join with the great poet Novalis:
“Soon the stars will come back to the Earth where
they have long been gone; soon the sun will return, the
star will shine again among the stars, all the races of the
world will gather together again after a long separation,
the old orphaned families will find one another again
and every day there will be new discoveries, more
people will embrace one another; then the inhabitants
of the old days will come back to the Earth, the ashes
will be relit in each tomb, the flame of life will bum
again, the old houses will be rebuilt, the old times will
come again and history will be the dream of the present
extended to intinity.“s
276. The PRESIDENT:
I now call on the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Australia, Mr. William Hayden.
277. Mr. HAYDEN (Australia): Mr. President, it occurs
to me that I am the fourteenth person to be given the
opportunity to open those windows you were talking
about earlier this afternoon, which would suggest we have
had the opportunity to provide a great deal of ventilation
for those matters which concern us, and I trust the consequences will be markedly positive.
278. The common and continuing bonds of history and
democratic traditions between our two countries lead me
particularly to say that the Australian delegation and I are
pleased that you-the Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom-are
presiding over this commemorative meeting of the Security
Council on the fortieth anniversary of the United Nations.
279. Australia was one of those 5 1 nations that took part
in the creation of the United Nations 40 years ago. It was a
crucially significant development, and at the time we tried
to emphasize important points about it as seen from the
viewpoint of smaller nations. Great Powers had made the
decisions about waging war and about ways to end war,
but all nations had been drawn into the consequences of.
these decisions. Great nations had sought for themselves a
near-monopoly of power, but they did not have a monop-

287. It is Australia’s firm view that the application of
: sanctions against South Africa is necessary as a serious
signal that apartheid and all its apparatus must be dis280. The realities of great power-its determinant effect ! mantled before a tide of bloodshed sweeps over that
on international relations and the existence of spheres of
unhappy country.
influence-were clearly understood. But smaller nations
felt that they were entitled to their views, and to their views
288. The Australian Government has already ‘instituted
being accepted as a factor in decision-making in the new
action against South Africa in such areas as official investinternational arrangements.
ment and trade. It has established a code of conduct in
which Australian companies operating in South Africa
281. This made for some feeling between great and small
undertake not to profit from apartheid by using racist
nations 40 years ago. It may still do so today. It is one of
labor laws and practices. We are working on proposals for
the great values of the United Nations that, after 40 years,
next month’s meeting of the Commonwealth heads of
the smaller voices can still be heard on matters affecting
Government to appoint a group of international authoritheir well-being.
ties to advance proposals for the peaceful transition of
South Africa to a multiracial society based on universal
282. One of these matters is arms control and disarmaadult suffrage.
ment and the impact on it of the relations between the
United States and the Soviet Union. Australia is a commit289. We do not wish to see South Africa brought to its
ted member of the Western association of nations. We do
knees, but we do want to see it brought to its senses. And
not feel any need to be embarrassed about that. But we are
we want to do so before the violence now happening in
also concerned about the mistrust which exists between the
South Africa spreads its effects beyond South Africa’s
super-Powers and the dangers created by their confrontaborders. If the South African Government does not
tion. We are not ndive. We understand that divisions so
respond to the selective sanctions and voluntary measures
deep cannot be willed away or removed overnight.
so far applied to it, it is Australia’s strong view that the
Security Council should consider the next step: mandatory
283. But we do urge great .Powers to take our concerns
economic sanctions under Chapter VII of the Charter of
seriously. We urge them, in the course of this fortieth annithe United Nations.
versary session and at the summit in November, to reach
understanding on the need to contain the danger of con290. This brings me to a final important point. It conflict where their interests collide. We urge them to seek
cerns the role and effectiveness of the Council and particuevery opening to effective arms control and disarmament.
larly the remarks about this in the latest report of the
For our part, we are determined to assist the process by
Secretary-General.
continuing to put up ideas by which this can be achieved,
especially through an effective and comprehensive ban on
291. We owe the Secretary-General a serious effort to
nuclear testing.
translate his proposals into effective action. He has played
a valuable and constructive role in dealing with major
284. The great Powers must understand the common
disputes, using powers assigned him by Article 99 of the
concern among smaller nations about what is seen as their
Charter to bring disputes himself before the Council. He
increasing domination of events. They must appreciate the
sent
a mission last year to investigate allegations about the
common fear that serious miscalculation by either of them,
use
of
chemical weapons in the war between Iraq and Iran.
or a breakdown in the management of their tense and
In 1982, he undertook an initiative to end the hostilities
complex relationship, could lead to the ultimate disaster.
over the Falklands. The Australian Government supports
No’ nation can evade the consequences of nuclear war.
proposals that the Secretary-General be more intensively
Indeed, it is now close to impossible to ignore the conseinvolved as mediator, arbitrator, negotiator or catalyst in
quences of even regional unrest.
seeking solutions to international problems which threaten
to
disturb the peace.
285. Look at the ripple effect of the sitution in South
Africa. Australia is deeply concerned at the threat to world
292. Since Austrafia has been a member of the Council,
order arising from the activities of the South African
we have tried to help improve the Council’s capacity for
Government, such as its obstruction of Namibian indepenquiet diplomacy, through the reduction of the number of
dence and its aggression against its neighbours. All these
speakers in Council deliberations, for example. We have
activities stem, of course, from its genuinely evil system of
suggested that periodic meetings should review in a systeapartheid.
matic way the state of international security. It is not
responsible of the Council to wait until crises actually
286. A tragedy of great magnitude is unfolding over
arrive before calling on the Secretary-General to try to
South Africa. It could have been avoided if the warnings
settle them.
had been heeded which the United Nations has consistently given South Africa over many years. The white
minority there seems intent instead on maintaining the
293. We agree also with the Secretary-General’s
essence of its political and economic privilege through the
approach that the Council make a concerted effort to deal
denial of fundamental human rights enforced by brutally
with one or two of the major problems before it. We
coercive State power.
believe that the Council should redouble its attempts to
oly of wisdom. Peace had become indivisible: war by one
nation now meant danger for all.

26

end the war between Iraq and Iran. The Australian
Government has proposed that the Council should have
separate private meetings with each of the parties to the
conflict. The scope for progress towards a solution could
be explored privately at such meetings. We must help
break this impasse.

300. For some, the evils prevalent. in our world are evidence that the United Nations has failed, that its founders
were little more than utopian dreamers, and that this idealistic venture of ours has broken apart in the rocky waters
of reality. I disagree, The founders of the United Nations
were not foolish idealists. They were statesmen, perhaps
the greatest statesmen of this century. For them, the
United Nations was no panacea for the world’s ills. They
knew that pursuing the ideals of the Charter in a world of
sovereign States would be an endless, often disappointing
task, that it would require perseverance and hard work on
the part of all nations.

294. The Australian Government takes the view that
practical, achievable improvements such as those I have
just described will enhance the effectiveness of the Council
in keeping and protecting the peace. It is a pity, in this
context, that the idea did not find favour of a private,
informal session of the Council today, in ,which we could
have exchanged ideas freely and frankly on how to make
the Council work more effectively. Nevertheless, I hope
that, even in this more formal and ceremonial setting, our
exchanges will be useful.

301. Yet, the founders believed in the future. They
believed that by setting standards towards which all
nations could aspire and work, progress towards a better
world could be made. They set themselves and their
nations on a course without any, certainty&f reaching the
final destination, but with the determination always to
move forward-to greater prosperity, to greater freedom,
to greater peace.

295. Our responsibility is, after all, enormous. The point
should be firmly in our minds: we may not have another
40 years if the Council fails to respond to the challenges
posed by our present threatening environment. It can meet
these challenges only if it can strengthen its power and
authority, as the Secretary-General has reminded us. The
Council is now too important to the preservation of peace
to be allowed to become bogged down in cumbersome,
trivial and irrelevant forms. Let us try to start our second
40-year period of history with a determined policy of
improving the Council as the world’s peacekeeper, the
main instrument by which we hand on security to the
generations following on after us.

302. That is the test by which we must judge the United
Nations today. Our goal must be to continue to move
forward, to work for progress despite the obstacles. In
doing so, we must combine idealism about the goals we
seek with realism about how best to achieve them in this
imperfect world. The United Nations can be a force for
peace and human betterment if we have the will and the
wisdom to make it so.
303. We have seen many successesover the past 40 years.
The United Nations peacekeeping and peacemaking
efforts have been valuable at critical times-in Korea, in
the Congo, in Cyprus and on the Golan Heights. Through
its various specialized agencies, the United Nations has
helped eradicate diseases like smallpox; it has provided
relief to millions of refugees throughout the world; it has
served mankind well in the areas of health, communications and transportation. On all these issues the United
Nations has remained true to the principles of the Charter,
and the world is a better and safer place for it.

296. The PRESIDENT:
I call on the Secretary of State of
the United States, Mr. George’ P. Shultz.
297.

Mr. SHULTZ

(United States of America): As oth-

ers have done, I salute the President for his and his coun-

try’s persistently constructive role here in the United
Nations and in their dealing with the world’s problems.
298. Forty years ago, the Organization and the Charter
of the United Nations embodied mankind’s most cherished hopes for a better world-a world where intemational disputes could be settled peacefully, where
self-determination would be advanced, where economic
co-operation would promote prosperity and where human
rights would be honoured. For four decades this grand
vision has inspired millions across the globe. Today each
of us, and especially members of the Security Council, has
a duty to his own people and to posterity to keep that
vision alive.

304. Unfortunately, the United Nations has also failed in
important ways. And I do not mean that it has failed to
remake the world and put an end to the evils we see all
around us. That would truly be a Utopian expectation. I
mean’that the United Nations has often failed to remain
true to itself and its own principles; it has failed to provide
the guiding vision we need to help keep us on a straight
path toward a better world.

299. But none of us here harbours any illusions about
our world or about the United Nations. International conflicts, aggression and violence still mar the global landscape, still bring suffering to millions, still threaten world
peace. Hunger and disease still claim victims among the
poor and needy. Freedom, and the most basic human
rights, still lie trampled beneath the tyrant’s boot in many
parts of the world. The United Nations today is a troubled
organization. But that is, in part, because it mirrors a
troubled world.

305. Too’often,‘the
United Nations has been abused in
the service of narrow, selfish national or bloc interests.
Too often, it has been used as a platform for voices ‘of
hatred and bigotry-as in the case of the resolution 10
years ago equating Zionism with racism [General Assembly
resolution 3379 (xxx)]. Too often, disputes and disagreements among nations and peoples have been magnified
and exacerbated instead of being resolved through reasoned debate and discussion. Too often, the purposes and
principles set forth in the Charter have been twisted, dis27

torted and manipulated in the service of goals antithetical
to the. vision of the founders.

312. We too must believe in the future. It is not for us to
end the journey that began 40 years ago, or to deviate from
the path set forth in the Charter, simply because the going
has been hard. It is not for us to despair or take refuge in
cynicism, but to labour constructively to make the United
Nations better serve its original goals.

306. We can do better than this. We owe it to future
generations to restore and maintain the integrity of this
great institution. My country recognizes that it has an
important role to play. We all do. The United States is
committed to protecting the United Nations against harm
ful and abusive practices. We are committed to ensuring
that the principles of the Charter are honoured and
adhered to. And we will remain committed so long as there
is hope that the United Nations can continue to be a force
for good. President Harry Truman said this 40 years ago:
“We have solemnly dedicated ourselves and all our will to
the success of the United Nations Organimtion”.
Today,
with our hopes tempered by realism, I can tell you on
behalf of all Americans, our will has not flagged, and our
dedication has not wavered.

313. ‘lhe true lesson of experience is a lesson of continued aspiration. The United-Nations has done important
work; there is much it can do to help the world maintain
peace and improve the human condition. Progress toward
the goals of the Charter has been possible where idealism
and realism have been harnessed together.
314. The failure of the United Nations to meet all its lofty
aims is no cause for despair. We cannot make the world
over with the stroke of a pen or a well-turned phrase, but
we can work to ensure that the United Nations guides us
on a straight course in our common journey. We must
continue to set high goals that inspire us to work harder
and to persevere. As President Reagan said in his address
to the General Assembly two years ago:

307. We, the members of the Security Council, are the
focal point of the world’s hopes. The major Powers represented here have a vital role to play in building the safer,
more peaceful world we all seek. The Charter gave the
Council formidable powers to help resolve disputes. Those
p,owers should be used wisely and courageously in the
service of peace.

“You have the right to dream great dreams. You have
the right to seek a better world for your people. All of
us have the responsibility to work for that better world
and, as caring peaceful peoples, think what a powerful
force for good we could be. Let us regain the dream the
United Nations once dreamed.“6

308. We have seen that creative Council actions can provide a basis for resolving some of the most difficult issues
of our time. Resolution 242 (1967), for instance, has provided the essential political and legal framework for Middle East peace-making. The lesson is that Security Council
resolutions can have an impact when. they are realistic,
balanced, and constructive. One-sided actions and resolutions, on the other hand, have accomplished nothing, and
never will. Selective condemnation has often exacerbated
situations.

315. The PRESIDENT:
I now venture to speak for a
moment or two not in my capacity as President but as
Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs
of the UNITED KINGDOM.
316. I begin by extending my personal thanks to colleagues for the distinguished, thoughtful and eloquent way
in which they have presented their insights and observations to the Council this afternoon. I should like also to
echo a thought that was common to almost every one of
the statements and join my colleagues in paying a tribute
to the Secretary-General-the
fifth holder of that office,
someone whom we all know to be well qualified by his
experience as a previous permanent representative of his
country, by his distinguished years of service in the Secretariat. He was well qualified when he was chosen; he has not
disappointed us. We are enormously grateful to him.

309. We have to make the Securitv Council work for
peaceful solutions as effectively as *possible. This may
require greater and more systematic involvement of the
Council at early stages of developing conflicts; wider
capacities for fact-finding, observation, and good offices;
more extensive and regular informal consultations among
Council members; and greater use by the SecretaryGeneral of his powers under Article 99 to bring threatening situations to the Council’s attention.

317. It has been a privilege for me to have the opportunity of presiding over this historic meeting, to play my part
on behalf of the United Kingdom-able
to contribute
something from our experience and our connection with
the United Nations. The United Kingdom was a coarchitect of the Charter of the United Nations, one of the.
nations involved with the birth of the United Nations. The
United Kingdom was the nation that had the privilege of
serving as host to the first meeting of the Security Council,
in London on 17 January 1946. So we have been actively
involved in the United Nations throughout its history,
actively involved as one of the permanent members taking
part in the whole range of its activities. We have done so,
well aware of our special responsibilities as one of the
permanent members of this Council. We echo the words of

310. I take note of the fact that many around this table
have said more or less the same thing about what the
Security Council should do, so perhaps there is an emerging consensus on some of these matters.
311. What we need, above all, is a greater commitment
to fulfilling the role envisaged for the Council by the
founders of the United Nations. This Council chamber
should not be treated as another arena for name-calling,
for ideological and political
confrontation.
As the
Secretary-General has noted in his most recent report,
Council members are the guardians of peace; no one else
can perform this vital role. After 40 years, let us rededicate
ourselves to the task.
21B

our colleague of the People’s Republic- of China, who
reminded the permanent members of the duties and obligations that we owe to the United Nations as-a result of our
tenure of that position.

for more than 20 years with the United Nations
Peace-keeping Force in Cyprus, a force towards the cost of
which the United. Kingdom is this year contributing
approximately $24 million. We do not begrudge this,
because that Force exemplifies what peace-keeping forces
can achieve.

.cV~rus

318. If one has to express in a sentence. a’judgement on
the Organization and on the Council thus far, it is a judgement that has been made in most of the statements this
afternoon. It is that this is not simply a forum in which 15
separate nations express 15 separate national points of
view. The same thought has recurred in many of the statements today. In the statement of the French representative, the Council was described as a college whose
members are prepared to search for common ground. Our
Malagasy colleague reminded us of the spirit of cooperative consultation that should inspire us, and our
Danish colleague reminded us of the need for us to speak
with one voice.

324. However, we still find ourselves asking-and
it is
right that we should-whether the Council is as effective as
we would wish; whether, in the phrase of the representative
of the Soviet Union, there are lessons for the future that we
can learn from the past, whether we can, as the Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Burkina Faso asked, find a new
dynamic or must remain-to use his rather gloomy phrase,
though I would not be quite as gloomy as that-confined
in lethal immobility? I think not.
325. It is possible at times to be discouraged as one looks
at any organization. Sir Winston Churchill, speaking
about the United Nations as long ago as 1946, asked:
“What happens if the United Nations themselves are sundered by the awful schism and clash of ideologies, interests, policies and passions? What happens if with all our
loyal endeavours we can build no more than a Tower of
Babel?” In a sense we have had many answers to that
question in this afternoon’s debate. We were reminded by
the representative of Peru of the need to overcome the
temptation to adopt rhetorical and repetitive approaches.
The representative of Thailand echoed the same thought,
when he said that this was not a theatre but a forum for
serious diplomacy.
-

319. This meeting surely demonstrates, more perhaps
than some of us might have expected, the clear sense of
collective purpose that should inspire us and that to a large
extent does just that.
320. Of course, over the 40 years of its existence the
Council, like every institution, has seen its role and style
evolve, but it has not forgotten the objective of which our
Indian colleague reminded us, in Article 24 of the Charter,
where the Council is defined as the supreme mechanism
for the maintenance of international peace and security. So
it has remained and so it should remain, although the
methods have changed and will change.

326. It is for those reasons that we need to consider why
disputes are brought before the Council. If it is a platform
for rhetoric, the Council’s roie. is doomed to be that of an
ineffective.onlooker;
but if it is a place for political dialogue and negotiation, the Council has an effective role
indeed. We have been reminded during the discussion of
many ways in which we can improve its effectiveness.
Above all; perhaps, we have been reminded that the
responsibility for adopting those improvements rests with
those seated around this table. The responsibility for making the Council more effective rests with every member.
The representatives of France and Egypt said that what
was lacking too often was the necessary political will.

321. One thin;! that I think has happened over the years
is that the Council has probably turned out to be an agent
more of persuasion than of coercion; that our- functions,
when we perform them at our best, have tended to move
away from open public meetings to discussions in confidence; and in that way and in others, we have achieved
some notable successes.
322. I was stmck by another phrase used by our Danish
colleague, who said: “Achievements . . . do not have to be
complete to be real” [supra, para. 2231. One of those
achievements was mentioned by the United States Secretary, of State, namely, the success that we have achieved in
defining the terms of settlements that have to be achieved,
the importance of resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) as
an enduring blueprint for peace in the Middle East, the
importance of resolution 435 (1978) as abasis for progress
on the situation in Namibia.

327. I was struck by what Secretary of State Shultz said
about the common thread that went through many of the
speeches-that is; the extent to which we were willing to
respond to suggestions for improvement, many of them
attributed to the Secretary-General himself: that the Council could engage in more preventive diplomacy; that we
should consider instituting regular meetings to consider
disputes not formally brought to our attention; that the
Secretary-General should bring matters to the attention of
the Council at an early stage; that we should examine our
procedures critically. Not every problem is best considered
by ,being publicly debated; not every debate is best terminated by a resolution. The idea of private, informal meetings might reduce the scope for propaganda and increase
the Council’s ability to play a constructive role.

323. If we look in a different direction for practical
achievements, the Secretary-General, the representative of
Trinidad and Tobago and others reminded us of the
importance of peace-keeping forces. In the definition of
Mr. Brian Urquhart, who sits behind the SecretaryGeneraI, a peace-keeping force is an internationally constituted pretext for the parties to a conflict to stop fighting
and a mechanism to maintain a cease-fire. It is not a bad
invention, which has been successful in the Lebanon with
the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and in

328. So there are many suggestions before us as to how
we can improve our methods, and suggestions, too, as to
29

,

the objectives to which we might apply those methods.
There is a realistic acknowledgement that not every dispute is capable of resolution by the United Nations or ?ny
other organization, but a realistic reminder, too, that there
are certain longstanding disputes not Pominated by the
East-West divide that surely deserve a fresh bout of our
attention, which call for special efforts, as the representative of Australia reminded us. He mentioned more than
one. There is the Iran-Iraq dispute, where no clash of
great-Power interest is involved and where there is almost
a universal will for settlement. However, the involvement
of the Council is dependent upon the active consent of the
parties, which we all hope will be forthcoming. That is one
field in which the Secretary-General’s efforts are of
supreme importance and deserve our support.
329. A-nother example is the Arab-Israel dispute, where
the urgent need for a balanced, negotiated settlement
strikes us all so clearly, a settlement providing for the
secure existence of Israel and the self-determination of the
Palestinian people, with resolution 242 (1967) providing
the necessary basis; where we can welcome King Hussein’s
initiative and can all surely seek to encourage a step-bystep approach- towards a comprehensive solution.

more effectively and examine ways..in which the United
Nations as a whole can function more eff&tively. In the
words of our Australian colleague tonight, we owe that to
the Secretary-General and to those who will come after in.
his office and those whom we seek to serve in the world
outside. Perhaps most important of all is for Member
States-those which we represent-to examine our own
practice; for Member States to recommit themselves to the
ideals of the Charter; for Member States to search for
practical ways to pursue its. objectives.
335. The Security Council has achieved much. It can
achieve more. So let there be no doubt of the message to
the world from this historic meeting: that the Council has
rededicated itself anew to working for a better world.
336. I resume my function
Council.

as PRESIDENT

of the

.337. The members of the Security Council have authorized me to make the following statement on their behalf:
“The Security Council met in public at the Headquarters of the United Nations in New York on Thursday; 26 September 1985, at the level of Foreign
Ministers, to celebrate the fortieth anniversary of the
Organization.

330. Yet another example is Cyprus, where the United
Nations role is essential, because both sides have confidence in it, where the current initiative offers a unique
opportunity, but where once again the Secretary-General
needs
- the support of the Security Council.

“The meeting was chaired by the Secretary of State
for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs of the United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland as the
President of the Security Council for September. Statements were made by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; the Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic, Trinidad and Tobago, Thailand and Peru; by the Permanent Representative of
Madagascar to the United Nations; by the Minister of
State for Commerce of India; by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of France, Egypt, Denmark, China, Burkina Faso, Australia, the United States of America, and
the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth
Affairs of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, as well as by8the Secretary-General.

331. Then there is southern Africa, where the situation in
so many ways is of major concern to us all, where we see in
its most striking form an example, in the words of the
representative of Trinidad and Tobago, of man’s inhumanjty to man; and South Africa, where we all join in rejecting
apartheid for just that reason, where our objective is
clear-fun&mental
change, where we must ensure that
our’ actions contribute effectively to that end, where I
believe we should take care not to allow the Council to
degenerate into a place simply for debate’ for and against
mandatory trade boycotts, where we should ask ourselves
whether we cannot build on the Council’s role there, too,
as an agent of persuasion.

‘The agenda for the commemorative
332. The thread running through so many interventions
this evening was picked up most effectively by the Secretary of State of the United States, when he said-to
paraphrase-that
the United Nations is not less relevant
than it was40 years ago, not less important than it was 40
years ago, it is more necessary, more important; because
we have come thus far, we have further to go together.

meeting was:

‘United Nations for a better world and the responsibility of the Security Council in maintaining international peace and security’.
“The members of the Council welcomed the opportunity .provided by the fortieth anniversary of the United
Nations to reaffirm at a high level their obligations
under the Charter and their continued commitment to
its purposes and principles. They conducted a wideranging review of the international situation. They
expressed their deep concern at the existence of various
threats to peace, including the nuclear threat. While
acknowledging that it has not always proved possible
for the Organization to eradicate those threats, they
underlined the continuing relevance of the United
Nations as a positive force for peace and human
advancement. They welcomed ,the continuing growth of

333. We have recognition that the Council’s relevance to
today% problems and the problems of the future depends
on the will of its members to put it to good use. The
Councit can focus attention, elaborate frameworks for settlement and promote negotiation, but its success in doing
that ultimately depends upon the willingness of Member
States to recognize its authority and to use its resources.
334. It is right that in this anniversary year we should
examine was in which the Security Council can function
30

the membership of the Organization to a point where
the objective of universality of membership, which they
endorsed. had almost been achieved.

charging its principal role of maintaining international
peace and security. Accordingly, they resolved to continue the examination of the possibilities for further
improvement of the functioning of the Security Council
in carrying out its work in accordance tith the Charter.
In this context, they paid special attention to the suggestions addressed to the members of the Council in the
Secretary-General’s annual reports on the work of the
Organization. They thanked the Secretary-General for :
those reports and encouraged him to play an active role
within the scope of his functions under the Charter.”

‘The members of the Council were cognizant of the
primary responsibility for the maintenance of international peace and security conferred by the Charter on
the Security Council and of. the special rights and
responsibilities
of its permanent members. They,
stressed that a collegial approach within the Council
was desirable to facilitate considered and concerted
action by the Council as the main instrument for inter-’
national peace. They acknowledged that the high hopes
placed in the Organization by the international community had not been fully met and undertook to fulfil their
individual and collective responsibility for the prevention and removal of threats to the peace with renewed
dedication and determination. They agreed to employ
appropriate measures available under the Charter when
considering international disputes, threats to the peace,
breaches of the peace and acts of aggression. They recognized the valuable contribution made on many occasions by United Nations peace-keeping forces. They
called again upon the entire membership of the United
Nations to abide by their obligations under the Charter
to accept and carry out decisions of the Security
Council.

338. The Security Council has thus concluded its business for the commemorative meeting, and I declare the
meeffng adjourned.
l7te meeting rose at 7.25 p.m.

NOTES
’ OJj%zialR‘ecor& of the General Assembly. Fortieth Session, Annexes,
agenda items 48 to -69 and 145, document A/40/192.
-p Ibid., Fortieth Session, Supplement No. 1. (A/40/1). p. 3.
s Ibid., Thirty-seventh Session, Supplement No. 1 (A/37/1).
4 Ibid., Thirty-eighth Session, Plenary Meetings, 9th meeting.
s Ibid., Thirty-ninth Session, Plenary Meetings, 20th meeting, para.
80.
b Ibid., Thirty-eighth Session. Plenary Meetings, 5th meeting, para.
43.

“They agreed that there was an urgent need to
enhance the effectiveness of the Security Council in dis-

31

.

HOWTOOBTAINUNITEDNATIONSPUBLIcATIONS
United Nations publications may be obtainedfrom bookstores and distributors throughout the
world. Consult your bookstore or write to: United Nations. SalesSection.New York or Geneva.

C~;MMENTSEPROCURE~~LESPUBLICATIONSDESNAT~ONSUN~ES
Les publications des Nations Unies sont en vente dans les libmiries et 16sagencesdfpositaims
du monde entier. Infot%tez-vous aup& de votre libraire ou adressez-vous & : Nations Unies.
Section des ventes. New York ou Gedve.
KAK nOJIYYHTb

CI3fiAHMR OPJ-AHM3ALJWM O6%E,4KHEHHbfX
HAfJMfl
HauitR MO)I(HO KYllHTb 8 KHHXCHbIXMKtK3HHaX
H arettfernax no ncex patIosax Mttpa. HanonttTe cnpantttt 06 tt3nattttttx n natttehtJ(~~H)KHoM
hrara3tttte rtnrt ntttttttfe no nnpecy: Opramtsauttn 06ti~mtettttbtx Hauuti. Cexumt no
nponane ttsnasttfi, Hbla-hpic HJ~H setiena.
M3nKHHKOpfaHa3~~iiOtiaenHHeHHMx

COMOCON!XGUIRPUBLlcACIONESDELASNACIONESUNIDAS
Las publicariones de las Naciones Unidas estin en venta en librerfas y casas distribuidoras en
todas partes del mundo. Consulte a su librero o dirljase a: Naciones Unidas. Seccidnde Ventas.
Nueva York o Ginebra.

Limboin United Nations, New York

00500

90-61439-January

.
199%1,925.
