S/PV.8019

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8019th meeting

Saturday, 5 August 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Aboulatta . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Egypt)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Liu Jieyi
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Lambertini
Mr. Bessho
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skau
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Rycroft
Mrs. Haley
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-24719 (E)
*1724719*

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of the Republic of
Korea to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its consideration
of the item on its agenda.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2017/674, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Bolivia (Plurinational State of), China, Egypt,
Ethiopia, France, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Russian
Federation, Senegal, Sweden, Ukraine, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Uruguay
The President (spoke in Arabic): The draft
resolution received 15 votes in favour. The draft
resolution has been adopted unanimously as resolution
2371 (2017).
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements after the vote.
Mrs. Haley (United States of America): Exactly
one month ago, I came before members of the Security
Council and declared that it was a dark day for the world
because of the dangerous and irresponsible actions of
North Korea. Almost one week ago, I said that the days
of talking were over and that it was time to act. Today,
the full Security Council has come together to put the
North Korean dictator on notice, and this time, the
Council has matched its words and actions. Resolution
2371 (2017), which we have adopted today, is a strong,
united step towards holding North Korea accountable
for its behaviour.
2/12

05/08/2017

Today, the Security Council increased the penalty
of North Korea’s ballistic-missile activity to a whole
new level. North Korea’s irresponsible and careless acts
have just proved to be quite costly to the regime. Today’s
resolution is the single largest economic sanctions
package ever levelled against the North Korean regime.
The price which the North Korean leadership will pay
for its continued nuclear and missile development will
be the loss of one-third of its exports and hard currency.
This is the most stringent set of sanctions imposed
on any country in a generation. These sanctions will
cut deep, and in doing so will give the North Korean
leadership a taste of the deprivation it has chosen to
inflict on the North Korean people.
Nuclear and ballistic missile development is
expensive. The revenues which the North Korean
Government receives are not going towards feeding its
people. Instead, the North Korean regime is literally
starving its people and enslaving them in mines
and factories in order to fund these illegal nuclear
programmes. Even as famine looms on the horizon;
even as the regime continues to ask for international
assistance to cope with devastating floods and a possible
drought later this year, its displays of aggression take
precedence over its own people.
Even as we respond to the North Korean nuclear
threat, the United States will continue to stand up for the
human dignity and rights of the North Korean people. It
is the continued suffering of the North Korean people
that should remind the Security Council that, while
resolution 2371 (2017) is a significant step forward, it is
not nearly enough. The threat of an outlaw, nuclearized
North Korean dictatorship remains. The unimaginable
living conditions of so many of the North Korean people
are unchanged. The North Korean regime continues
to show that widespread violations of human rights
go hand in hand with threats to international peace
and security.
I thank each and every one of my colleagues who
worked so hard to bring this resolution to a vote. I
have previously pointed out that China has a critical
role to play on matters related to North Korea. I want
to personally thank the Chinese delegation for the
important contributions it made to the resolution.
While the Security Council has done good work, the
members of the Security Council — and all United
Nations Member States — must do more to increase
the pressure on North Korea. We must work together
17-24719

05/08/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

to fully implement the sanctions we imposed today and
those imposed in past resolutions.
The step we take together today is an important one,
but we should not fool ourselves into thinking we have
solved the problem. We are not even close. The North
Korean threat has not left us. It is rapidly growing more
dangerous. We have seen two intercontinental ballistic
missiles fired in just the past month. Further action is
required. The United States is taking and will continue
to take prudent defensive measures to protect ourselves
and our allies. Our annual joint military exercises, for
instance, are transparent and defence-oriented. They
have been carried out regularly and openly for nearly
40 years. They will continue.
Our goal remains a stable Korean peninsula, at
peace and without nuclear weapons. We want only
security and prosperity for all nations, including North
Korea. Until then, this resolution and prior ones will
be implemented to the fullest to maximize pressure on
North Korea to change its ways. Today is a good day at
the United Nations. We will need many more such days
in order to peacefully resolve the crisis that has been
created by North Korea’s dangerous and illegal actions.
As I have said before, time is short, but today we have
taken one step in the right direction.
I again thank my colleagues and their teams for
their action and support towards sending a strong
message to the North Korean regime.
Mr. Rycroft (United Kingdom): North Korea is no
longer a threat faced by a single country or a single region.
It is instead a threat that confronts us all. The two tests
in the past month were of an intercontinental missile,
extending the threat much further than before, to many
more countries. In a world where North Korean missile
tests seem routine, let me be clear — this is not business
as usual. Let us make no mistake. As North Korea’s
missile capabilities advance, so too does its contempt
and disregard for the Security Council. We must meet
this belligerence with clear, unequivocal condemnation
and with clear, unequivocal consequences.
Today, we have banned North Korean exports of
coal, iron ore, lead and seafood. These are the lifeline
exports that sustain Kim Jong Un’s deadly aspirations.
In simple terms, should the North Korean regime
continue its reckless pursuit of an illegal missile
programme and a deadly nuclear programme, it will
have vastly less resources to do so.

S/PV. 8019

We have also capped the number of foreign workers
from North Korea. Every year, the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea sends thousands of ordinary workers
overseas. They often endure poor conditions and long
hours, and their toil serves to provide critical foreign
currency for North Korean Government coffers. This
is undoubtedly a form of modern slavery, and today
we have taken the first step to ending it. The world
will now monitor and curtail work authorizations for
these desperate expatriates. And those who are already
victims of this abusive system can trust that the United
Kingdom will continue to work towards a complete end
to North Korea’s institutionalized modern slavery.
North Korea bears full responsibility for the
measures we have enacted today. By acting in flagrant
violation of its legal obligations, and by going against
the will of the Security Council expressed in countless
resolutions, North Korea has chosen the path it now
finds itself on. It is a path that, at a minimum, will lead
to further suffering for its own people, and at most
could prove to be catastrophic for the whole world.
It does not have to be this way. North Korea should
forgo the path of provocation — forgo the path of
further escalation. There is no reason why the people of
North Korea cannot share the normal, prosperous life
of their neighbours. The world would welcome them,
not threaten them. So in the Chamber, let us once again
call on North Korea to halt and reverse its nuclear and
missile development programmes. Let us once again
call on it to prioritize the well-being of its people over
its illegal and destabilizing military programmes.
North Korea’s security and well-being do not
depend on nuclear weapons. They do not depend on
far-reaching missiles. They do not depend on a myth
of self-sufficient defiance of the wider world. To live
in constant tension with the world cannot be in the
interests of North Korea’s regime, let alone its people.
We have taken a step forward. We have spoken
with a unified voice that we are ready to act in an
unprecedented way in response to North Korea’s
reckless nuclear pursuit. Every country must ensure
that these measures are adhered to. Every country must
live up to its word. This time, there is too much at stake.
We simply cannot afford to fail.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): France
welcomes the unanimous adoption of resolution 2371
(2017), which reinforces the sanctions imposed by the
United Nations on North Korea as a result of the ballistic

17-247193/12

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

missile launches that took place on 3 and 28 July.
We thank the United States for its leadership in the
negotiations, as well as for its unwavering commitment
to this issue, which today is more important than ever
for international peace and security.
For years, North Korea has pursued the forced
development of its nuclear and ballistic programmes,
initiated at the highest level of the regime. It seeks
methodically to acquire an operational nuclear arsenal,
at the cost of the sacrifice of its own population. The
launches of the past few weeks have taken us a step
further towards the threat posed by North Korean
programmes, clearly demonstrating Pyongyang’s
determination to bring the entire international
community within the reach of its missiles. This is an
unacceptable situation, which directly challenges the
security of us all.
Let us not deceive ourselves — the threat is global,
and even beyond this grave and direct threat, it is the
entire non-proliferation regime that is in danger, even
though it is one of the pillars of our system of collective
security. That is why weakness is not an option, and
why France has been convinced from the outset that
only a position of great firmness can open the way to
the political and diplomatic strategy that is itself the
only possible outcome to this crisis.
In that context, it is more urgent than ever to put an
end to North Korea’s nuclear and ballistic programmes
and bring Pyongyang back to the negotiating table. In
recent months, however, despite repeated warnings,
North Korea has persistently ignored every injunction
by the Council and has defied the international
community as a whole. Considering the seriousness
of the threat that is currently hanging over all of us,
stamping our authority on the situation is a matter of
urgency. Bringing to bear the greatest diplomatic and
economic pressure possible is the only way to put a stop
to these programmes, bring North Korea back to the
negotiating table and promote a peaceful solution to the
current crisis.
Through today’s resolution, and beyond its
unambiguous condemnation of North Korea’s
unjustifiable actions, the Council is articulating two
complementary actions — punishing a new group of
individuals and entities that are central to the functioning
of the regime and its programmes, and imposing an
embargo on several key sectors of activity, including
the capacity to provide the liquidity that Pyongyang
4/12

05/08/2017

needs to finance its illegal programmes. Clearly, these
measures, which will probably cut the regime’s income
by an amount estimated to be more than $1 billion a
year, are likely to change the situation. They emphasize
the scope of the tools available to the Council, whose
effectiveness is increased tenfold when it takes action
and does so unanimously, as it has today. Of course, they
are accompanied by humanitarian exemption clauses
aimed at minimizing the consequences for the people of
North Korea, who are not targeted by these measures.
The new resolution’s determined response is also a
new warning. This dangerous and irresponsible leap on
the part of the regime, whose irrationality is equalled
only by its methodical pursuit of its goal, must stop.
North Korea must understand that if it continues to
choose the road of escalation and provocation, we will
have no choice but to ramp up the pressure. And one of
the messages that we have unanimously sent today is
that we are ready to do that. As we have said a number
of times, sanctions are not an end in themselves but
a means of forcing Pyongyang to return to a serious
dialogue. In the face of the regime’s irresponsible,
unjustifiable stubbornness, today we have no alternative
to firmness if we are to bring North Korea back to the
path of reason and thereby pave the way for a political
and diplomatic outcome of this crisis.
Mr. Vitrenko (Ukraine): Ukraine welcomes
today’s unanimous adoption of resolution 2371 (2017)
and commends the efforts of the delegations involved
in drafting and bringing the text to a vote, under the
strong leadership of the United States.
North Korea’s advancing nuclear- and ballisticmissile programmes are close to the most significant
proliferation challenge of our time. Ukraine firmly
condemns Pyongyang’s continuous illegal activities.
Besides their highly visible manifestation in the form
of nuclear tests and missile launches, it has also crafted
an intricate system for evading sanctions in order to
circumvent the restrictions and prohibitions already
in place. Today’s resolution not only strengthens the
existing measures, it reinforces them with additional
sectoral and targeted sanctions and clarifies some of
the Council’s previous measures. It also unambiguously
affirms the Council’s openness to a dialogue on a
peaceful and diplomatic solution to the situation on
the Korean peninsula and its determination to avoid
affecting the North Korean population.
17-24719

05/08/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Ukraine has always been committed to taking
effective multilateral action against the proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction. Our collective decision
today is a clear demonstration of the Council’s firm and
united stance in responding decisively to this threat to
the global non-proliferation regime. I would also like to
emphasize the importance of ensuring that all Member
States implement the Council’s relevant resolutions
promptly and comprehensively in order to make the
sanctions produce results. We need to act jointly at the
global level if we are to eliminate the risk of further
provocations and curb the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s rampant nuclear and missile ambitions.
Mr. Bermúdez (Uruguay) (spoke in Spanish):
Uruguay voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017)
and welcomes its unanimous adoption by the Security
Council. The fact that Council members are united
on the issue is crucial to our response to the serious
threat that North Korea’s defiant attitude in continuing
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme poses
to international peace and security, with two — not
one but two — launches of intercontinental ballistic
missiles in the month of July alone. That is a clear and
flagrant violation of every relevant Security Council
resolution. As if that was not enough of an abuse, it
also undermines the impulse for the common good
and the spirit of peaceful coexistence that govern
our Organization. Once again, Uruguay reiterates
how important it is to ensure that the Government of
North Korea respects all the Council’s resolutions and
abandons its nuclear ambitions.
As my delegation said recently at the briefing session
on general issues pertaining to sanctions, if we are to
improve the effectiveness of United Nations sanctions,
the sanction regimes must do their job — effectiveness
being understood as the ability to ultimately achieve
the goals that the sanctions are aimed at. Sanctions
regimes should be designed to be a tool that enables
the Security Council to achieve a goal. To be effective,
that tool should complement others, such as mediation
and dialogue. The goal of the sanctions regime imposed
on North Korea should be to achieve the peaceful
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
In that regard, I am referring to what my delegation
has already said about the importance of working to
reduce tensions on the Korean peninsula and making
every effort to return to the path of dialogue so as to reach
a definitive settlement of this very serious situation. It
is also important to ensure a greater commitment and

S/PV. 8019

willingness on the part of Member States to comply
with international obligations and Security Council
sanctions, while at the same time, in this case, avoiding
any adverse humanitarian consequences for the civilian
population of North Korea.
Lastly, I would like to reaffirm that Uruguay is
committed and determined to continue working for
a peaceful diplomatic and political solution for the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
Mr. Liu Jieyi (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Security Council resolutions on this subject contain
explicit provisions against any launches by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea using ballisticmissile technology. China opposes the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s launching activities,
which violate Council resolutions and defy the will of
the entire international community.
We have always insisted on the importance of
denuclearizing the Korean peninsula, upholding peace
and stability there and seeking a solution through
dialogue and consultation. We have always been firmly
opposed to chaos and conflict on the peninsula. In our
view, that is what resolution 2371 (2017) is all about. Its
unanimous adoption by the Council demonstrates that
the international community has a united position with
regard to the nuclear issue on the peninsula.
There are three major components to this
resolution. First, it sets out further sanctions targeting
the nuclear and missile programme of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. Secondly, the resolution
does not intend to impact negatively activities that
are not prohibited by the resolution, such as economic
activities and cooperation, or food and humanitarian
assistance. Thirdly, it calls for the resumption of
the Six-Party Talks, commits to finding a solution
through peaceful, diplomatic and political means, and
stresses the importance of de-escalating tensions on
the peninsula by the parties concerned. China believes
that these are part and parcel of this resolution, and
all parties should implement the provisions contained
therein fully and earnestly.
China has been making tireless efforts to promote
the denuclearization of the peninsula and to uphold
peace and stability there. On 4 July, China and Russia
issued a joint statement on the issue of the Korean
peninsula. Both of our countries put forward a road
map for the resolution of this issue, which is based
respectively on China’s idea of a due approach, which

17-247195/12

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

calls for parallel efforts, while moving forward with
both the denuclearization of the peninsula and the
establishment of a peace mechanism based on the
suspension for suspension initiative, which calls for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to suspend its
nuclear and missile activities, and for the United States
and the Republic of Korea to suspend their large-scale
military exercises, as well as on Russia’s step-by-step
approach. This China-Russia joint initiative is realistic
and feasible. It aims to tackle both the symptoms and
the root causes of the problem and to seek a solution
through an integrated approach. We hope that this
initiative will receive a response and support from the
relevant parties.
China has taken note that the United States has
recently indicated once again that it is not seeking a
regime change or a regime collapse in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and that it is in no hurry to
push for the reunification of the peninsula. The United
States has also indicated that its troops will not push
through the thirty-eighth parallel. It is our hope that
the United States will translate these “four no’s” into
concrete policies towards the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Beefing up military deployment
on the peninsula is not in the interest of realizing
denuclearization there or of maintaining regional peace
and stability. The deployment of the Terminal High
Altitude Area Defence missile system will not bring a
solution to the issue of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s nuclear testing and missile launching. What
it will do is seriously undermine the strategic balance
of the region. As such, it is detrimental to the strategic
security interest of regional countries, including China.
China strongly urges the parties concerned to
halt the process of this deployment and to dismantle
relevant equipment. Realizing denuclearization and
durable peace and stability on the Korean peninsula
is in the interests of all the parties. China urges the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to respect
Council resolutions and to cease taking actions that
might further escalate tensions on the peninsula.
We hope that the parties concerned will immediately
take effective action to prevent the situation from
further escalating, create conditions for the resumption
of talks and undertake efforts to bring, at an early date,
the nuclear issue of the peninsula back to the right track,
that of seeking a peaceful solution through dialogue
and consultation.
6/12

05/08/2017

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), on sanctions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We understand the need to halt Pyongyang’s missile
and nuclear programme, which is unacceptable to us.
We share the feeling of neighbouring States in the
region. The ballistic missiles launched without warning
from North Korea pose a major risk to marine and air
transit in the region, as well as to the lives of ordinary
civilians. We call on the North Korean Government to
end the banned programmes and to return to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the
oversight of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
We also call on that country to join the Chemical
Weapons Convention.
All must understand that progress towards the
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula will be
difficult so long as the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea perceives a direct threat to its own security.
For that is how the North Koreans view the build-up in
military activity in the region, which takes on the forms
of frequent wide-ranging exercises and manoeuvres by
the United States and allies as they deploy strategic
bombers, naval forces and aircraft carriers to the
region. Another destabilizing factor in the region is
the scaling up in the Republic Korea of the American
Terminal High Altitude Area Defence missile defence
system. We have repeatedly noted that this not only
constitutes an irritant, but also undermines the overall
military balance in the region and calls into question
the security of neighbouring States. We hope that the
assurances provided by the Secretary of State of the
United States were sincere, and that the United States
is not seeking to dismantle the existing situation
in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or to
forcibly unite the peninsula or intervene militarily in
the country.
We are concerned that the paragraph we proposed
for the resolution did not receive support. Potential
military misadventures on either side are liable to spell
disaster for regional and global stability. We stress that
the additional restrictive measures imposed through the
resolution against the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea cannot be an end in themselves. They need to
be a tool to engage the country in constructive talks.
It is not possible to settle the Korean issue through
sanctions and pressure being brought to bear on
Pyongyang alone. The resolution must be a part of a
17-24719

05/08/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

political strategy, which is yet to be crafted and agreed
on, and the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
must be engaged in this.
Sanctions must not be used for the economic
asphyxiation of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea or to deliberately worsen the humanitarian
situation. This applies in particular to illegal, unilateral
restrictions that strike civilian sectors, which are
unrelated to the missile and nuclear programmes of
the country. Such sanctions may lead to the significant
deterioration of the living conditions of the North
Korean people — incidentally, as United Nations
humanitarian agencies are warning about. Experience
shows the destructiveness of unilateral measures when
sanctions, instead of diplomatic tools, are used as a
universal means of settling such issues.
It is clear that in order to normalize the situation
on the Korean peninsula, we need a comprehensive
approach that includes an end to the missile and nuclear
tests of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
rejection of a reinforced military infrastructure, and
the reduction of the scale of exercises and manoeuvres.
There is a need to create trust among States in the region.
We must abandon the obsolete, ineffective algorithms
for addressing the nuclear problem in the Korean
peninsula, and we must address this issue through
unique creative approaches. Isolation and pressure need
to be replaced by dialogue and negotiations, and that is
the thrust of the Russian and Chinese dual suspension
and parallel progress proposal.
We recall that our countries have drafted a joint
road map that prevents the threat or use of force and
proposes a comprehensive solution to all problems
on the peninsula, including the nuclear one, through
political and diplomatic means, without precondition,
and through political talks and the resumption of SixParty Talks. These ideas warrant attention as they
represent a possible starting point to break the deadlock
and resume negotiations. We must find ways to engage
in dialogue with the leadership of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and to prompt meaningful
dialogue on the nuclear and missile issues. Once again
we would like to draw attention to the joint RussoChinese statement on the settlement of the situation on
the Korean peninsula, dated 4 July.
We should like to draw attention to some contentious
issues in the resolution. Of course Pyongyang is
violating the sanctions against it, but it is not providing

S/PV. 8019

the components of weapons of mass destruction to
non-State actors. There is no direct link between the
implementation of resolution 1540 (2004) and official
Pyongyang actions. This reference in the context of
sanctions must be ended. This is counterproductive for
the resolution itself above all.
More than ever before, it is important to jointly
seek a political solution to the range of issues plaguing
the Korean peninsula. Following the adoption of the
resolution today, the pressure of sanctions has been
exhausted. We stand ready to work collectively here.
At the same time, the United Nations must step up
efforts to deliver humanitarian assistance to the people
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. The
relevant exemptions, provided for in the resolution at
our insistence, enable us to further address this.
Mr. Seck (Senegal) (spoke in French): The
delegation of Senegal welcomes the unanimous adoption
by the Security Council of resolution 2371 (2017), on
nuclear non-proliferation in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, as well as the constructive spirit
that prevailed during the negotiations held under the
leadership of the United States delegation as penholder.
With this resolution, the Security Council has, for
the second consecutive time this year and the third time
in less than 10 months, strengthened sanctions against
the Pyongyang authorities as a logical reaction to the
country’s methodical pursuit of its ballistic and nuclear
programme. Indeed, the launch of ballistic missiles
conducted by North Korea on 3 and 28 July, in deliberate
violation of the relevant resolutions of the Security
Council and of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons, represents a serious threat to peace
and security on the Korean peninsula and beyond. It
is also a direct threat to air navigation security and to
the security of the millions of people who live, work
and travel in the region. There were no warnings or
advance notice of the launches, which overshot by far
the maritime and aerial jurisdiction of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, affecting other areas that
are among the most densely populated in the world.
Senegal expresses its deep concern about these
actions and wishes to echo the words that our SecretaryGeneral, Mr. António Guterres, addressed to the
North Korean authorities, urging them to fully abide
by its international obligations in this area in a clear,
irreversible and verifiable way.

17-247197/12

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

It is for these reasons that the delegation of Senegal
voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017), which, in
addition to freezing the assets of and banning travel by
certain individuals and entities, imposes bans on the
export of coal, iron and iron ore, as well as restrictions
on access to the international banking system.
The delegation of Senegal will await the report
that the Security Council, through this resolution, has
requested the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), on non-proliferation
in North Korea, to provide within 15 days. The report is
to highlight any additional items related to proliferation
and conventional weapons that could be added to the
consolidated list of measures already taken.
Another important element that led to Senegal’s
positive vote is the fact that the resolution reaffirms the
Council’s resolve to prevent the measures adopted from
having any negative humanitarian repercussions on the
North Korean civilian population, normal economic
activities, cooperation or the provision of food
assistance. Senegal welcomes the exemptions granted
to activities carried out by diplomatic or consular
missions in the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
as well as those related to the humanitarian assistance
provided by the United Nations or in coordination
with it.
The delegation of Senegal reiterates that this
series of targeted measures, taken in order to respond
to the challenge represented by the North Korean
nuclear and ballistic programme, must be part and
parcel of a comprehensive political strategy aimed at
engaging the parties in dialogue, with the support of the
international community.
I therefore reiterate my country’s commitment
to a political and diplomatic solution to this issue
and express Senegal’s support for the relaunching of
the Six-Party Talks, so as to achieve the verifiable
denuclearization of the Korean peninsula and promote
peaceful coexistence among the countries in the region,
with full respect for each other’s sovereignty and on the
basis of the commitments undertaken by the parties in
the joint declaration of 19 September 2005.
I would like to conclude by reiterating our call on the
members of the Security Council and the international
community to launch at long last this crucial phase in
the situation on the Korean peninsula.
8/12

05/08/2017

Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): Sweden welcomes
the adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) today, which
shows that the Council continues to stand united and
that we are fully determined to deal with the growing
threat posed by the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s nuclear and missile programmes. With this
vote, the Security Council continues to shoulder its
responsibility and assert its authority with respect
to a situation that jeopardizes international peace
and security.
The latest missile test, again of intercontinental
range, is yet another breach of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea international obligations, in defiance
of numerous Security Council resolutions. This is a
cause for utmost concern for the region and, indeed, for
the whole world. The potential dangers are evident, and
the threat is growing. We express our deepest solidarity
with the neighbouring countries and their peoples,
living under the constant shadow of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s threatening behaviour.
Sweden therefore condemns the latest tests in the
strongest possible terms. We reiterate our call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to cease all
development of its ballistic-missile and nuclear-weapons
programme. We urge it to take immediate steps towards
complete, verifiable and irreversible dismantlement
of the programme, in accordance with the relevant
Security Council resolutions. We further call on the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to speedily and
unconditionally re-engage in a meaningful and credible
dialogue with the international community, with a view
to fulfilling the obligations laid out by the Council.
The international community must, on its part,
redouble efforts to effectively and fully implement
current resolutions and to act swiftly to implement the
new sanctions adopted today. All States Members of
the United Nations must do their utmost in this regard.
At the same time, sanctions alone will never solve
this situation. Sanctions must be accompanied by
dialogue and confidence-building measures so as to
reach a long-term, sustainable solution. There is an
urgent need to avoid escalation and to take steps to
prepare for a peaceful, diplomatic and comprehensive
solution to the situation on the Korean peninsula, and
for the wider region.
It is also of key importance to re-establish
inter-Korean communication channels. As a member of
the Neutral Nations Supervisory Commission, Sweden
17-24719

05/08/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

strongly encourages the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to resume contact and cooperation with the
Commission at the border station in Panmunjom.
This would contribute to reducing tensions as well as
increase trust and transparency.
We must contribute to finding diplomatic openings,
and we welcome all initiatives to facilitate a peaceful
and comprehensive solution through dialogue. As we
have said previously in the Council, it is deeply worrying
that tensions have continued to rise in recent months,
and the potential for mistakes, misunderstanding and
miscalculation is high. A regional security mechanism
should be the medium-term goal.
There is no military solution to this situation. We
strongly support today’s resolution and stand firmly
united with Council members in condemning the
actions of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
But in parallel, creative diplomacy aimed at bringing
about dialogue and negotiations is also urgently needed.
We call again on the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to re-engage in a credible and meaningful
dialogue with the international community.
Mr. Lambertini (Italy): Italy welcomes the
unanimous adoption of resolution 2371 (2017). We
recognize the leadership role played the United States
on this issue and we thank the United States mission
for its untiring effort to bring us to reach today’s
important result.
Today the Security Council is once again — this
is the second time in 2017 — sending an unequivocal
message to the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea (see resolution 2356 (2017)). The international
community is united in condemning North Korea’s
increasing provocations and is determined to confront
this new level of threat to international peace and
security by taking further action. As demonstrated by
the latest intercontinental ballistic-missile launches,
which Italy condemns in the strongest terms, North
Korea is advancing illegally towards an operational
nuclear capability, severely undermining our collective
security and the global non-proliferation regime.
This is an extraordinary situation that calls for
proportional measures.
The resolution that we have adopted today provides
for the broadest, most comprehensive set of sanctions to
have been applied by the Council in many years. It will
remain in force for as long as the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to pursue nuclear weapons

S/PV. 8019

and their means of delivery. We therefore urge the
North Korean regime to take immediate measures to
abandon its nuclear and ballistic-missile programmes
in a complete, verifiable and irreversible manner. In
consultation with key partners, Italy also stands ready at
the appropriate time to support additional autonomous
restrictive measures in the European Union context.
We reaffirm that the Security Council’s concern
is directed towards the Government of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and not its people, who
continue to suffer as resources are diverted from
economic development towards military, nuclear
and ballistic-missile programmes. As in the past,
we will remain vigilant in order to ensure that these
new restrictive measures do not have any adverse
consequences from a humanitarian perspective.
While increasing pressure on the North Korean
leadership at this juncture is essential, we call on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to make
credible progress on its obligation to denuclearize,
thereby enabling negotiations leading to a peaceful
solution as stated in the European Union Foreign
Affairs Council Conclusions of 17 July 2017. In this
regard, Italy reaffirms that sanctions are not an end
in themselves but a means to promote the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s full compliance.
Finally, as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006), I would like to restate
Italy’s unwavering commitment to the full and effective
implementation of all Security Council resolutions on
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We will
reach out to the full United Nations membership in
order to ensure that these latest measures are applied
quickly and comprehensively.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): We welcome the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), condemning in the
strongest terms the continuing ballistic-missile tests
conducted by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
in violation of various Security Council resolutions.
The step taken today, imposing additional sanctions
measures as a consequence, is therefore proper.
It is important that we continue to maintain the
unity of the Council in addressing this problem. In our
view, this is perhaps the most critical factor that may
ensure a breakthrough eventually, if, in addition, the
matter is handled with a great deal of care and wisdom.

17-247199/12

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The
nuclearand
ballistic-missile-related
programmes of the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea pose serious threats to regional and international
peace and security. It is absolutely crucial that the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea immediately
cease these provocative actions in order to reduce the
tension in the Korean peninsula and prevent its further
escalation. That is why we believe taking the measure
the Council took today was made unavoidable.
It is becoming all the more apparent that this
situation could get out of hand if it is not managed
properly. We believe it is important to make additional
efforts to try to open up possibilities for the diplomatic
path towards the resolution of a problem that is indeed
both complex and dangerous.
One thing is undeniable — and on this all
reasonable people must agree — and that is that there
is a need for channels of communication to avoid
the risk of miscalculation and reduce tensions in the
Korean peninsula. That is why we believe that there
is an urgent need for finding a lasting, comprehensive
political and diplomatic solution to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea issue through dialogue
and negotiation. It is indeed a good thing that the justadopted resolution takes this into account. This requires
that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea return
to its international commitments on denuclearization
and fully comply with the relevant resolutions of
Security Council.
Finally, the latest ballistic-missile launch by the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea reminds us that
the full implementation of the Council’s resolutions by
all Member States is much more critical now than ever
before. We believe that Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1718 (2006) and the Panel of Experts
that supports it will continue to play a critical role in
this regard, and they should be encouraged to further
strengthen their engagement with Member States to
improve implementation of the measures.
Let me conclude by reiterating, once again,
Ethiopia’s firm commitment to continuing to work
towards the full implementation of these Security
Council resolutions, including the one that we have
adopted today.
Mr. Sadykov (Kazakhstan): We support the
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017), which envisages
tough sanctions as a means to persuade Pyongyang to
change its course in favour of a nuclear-weapon-free
10/12

05/08/2017

future. The resolution also leaves room for the
resumption of dialogue or a six-party mechanism
for negotiations.
Kazakhstan strongly condemns as irresponsible
and dangerous North Korea’s international-range
ballistic-missile launches as they undermine our
shared international efforts to strengthen regional
and, ultimately, international peace and security. Such
actions are in serious violation of Security Council
resolutions and pose a threat to peace. Furthermore,
they destabilize the situation in the North-East Asia
region, as well as globally.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s
irresponsible policy negatively affects the global
process of nuclear non-proliferation and undermines
our collective efforts to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free
future for the planet. We urge the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to abandon its nuclear ambitions for
the sake of the security and development of its people
and for the benefit of all humankind.
The threat of the missile and nuclear programmes
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea makes it
imperative for all parties concerned to intensify their
efforts to find a mutually acceptable solution through
the early resumption of negotiations. A solution to
this situation is possible only through dialogue and
not through any military strategy triggered by the
provocative actions of the North Korean authorities.
Mr. Bessho (Japan): Japan welcomes the unanimous
adoption of resolution 2371 (2017). We would like to
express our appreciation to the United States for taking
the lead on it. We would also like to thank all other
members of the Council for their support and hard work
to make today’s adoption possible.
The need for the Security Council to strongly
condemn North Korea’s nuclear tests and ballisticmissile launches has considerably grown in the past
year and a half. Since January 2016, North Korea has
conducted two nuclear tests and launched approximately
40 ballistic missiles. The sheer number and frequency
show how unprecedented and unacceptable these
provocations are.
Not only is the quantity outrageous, the qualitative
advancements are also deeply alarming. Just last
month, we saw two ballistic-missile launches with
intercontinental range. The second launch was already
more technologically advanced than the first. The
17-24719

05/08/2017

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

footage broadcast on Japanese television of the most
recent launch showed that it was visible with the
naked eye in Hokkaido as it fell into the sea off the
coast of Japan. If the launch had been less lofted, the
missile’s range could have covered half the globe. It is
abundantly clear that this is an imminent global threat
to all Member States, not merely a regional one.
North Korea seems determined to continue
its nuclear build-up. In March 2016, the Security
Council responded to its fourth nuclear test by
adopting resolution 2270 (2016), at the time the most
comprehensive to date, sending a clear message to
North Korea that it must halt its nuclear development.
After a fifth test occurred, in September 2016, the
Security Council sent an even stronger message via
resolution 2321 (2016). Nevertheless, North Korea has
continued to ignore the international community’s
calls by obstinately forging ahead with its nuclear and
missile development programmes. That has resulted in
the Council’s adoption of resolution 2371 (2017) today.
The resolution is robust and will reduce the North
Korean regime’s revenues by approximately $1 billion.
It represents an urgent call to North Korea to change
its behaviour.
At this point, it is clear to everyone that North
Korea is nowhere near resuming a meaningful dialogue.
If we are to change its behaviour, we have no choice
but to continue to increase the pressure. All Members
of the United Nations must demonstrate a renewed
commitment to implementing the existing Security
Council resolutions, including the one we have just
adopted, rigorously and thoroughly. Japan will continue
to work closely with Council members and all Member
States in order to reach a comprehensive solution to the
problems related to North Korea.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): Bolivia reiterates its firm
condemnation of the conduct of nuclear tests and the
launching of ballistic missiles by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, and we urge it to abandon
its nuclear and ballistic-missile programme fully,
verifiably and irreversibly.
Bolivia voted in favour of resolution 2371 (2017)
today based on its peaceful ideals. We do not believe
in war as a way of solving the global problems facing
the international community. However, we would also
like to make it clear that for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia, sanctions should not be an end in themselves.

S/PV. 8019

In the situation under discussion, they should help the
parties involved to come to the table for dialogue. We
also believe that the sanctions we have adopted today
should have the smallest possible impact on the civilian
population and should not affect the humanitarian
situation in North Korea.
We urge all the parties involved to avoid escalating
rhetoric or action that could increase tensions and
put international peace and security in jeopardy on
the Korean peninsula. We welcome and reiterate our
support for China’s dual-action initiative designed to
enable a simultaneous halt to both the ballistic-missile
launches and nuclear tests and to the military exercises
on the Korean peninsula. We also welcome the fact that
today’s unanimous resolution supports that and also
requests that the Six-Party talks be resumed. We urge
all the parties involved to abandon any kind of military
solution and to resume dialogue with a view to reaching
a peaceful diplomatic and political solution.
In our capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1540 (2004), we
would like to point out that the provisions of resolution
1540 (2004) are aimed at establishing a platform of
assistance and cooperation among States in order to
prevent non-State actors from having access to weapons
of mass destruction. We are completely against using
it as a way of coercing or directing sanctions against
States Members of the United Nations. Lastly, we
categorically reject the imposition of unilateral
sanctions, which constitute a flagrant violation of
international law as illegal measures that extend one
State’s internal jurisdiction over another, in violation of
the principle of the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of States.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now make
a statement in my national capacity as Permanent
Representative of Egypt.
Egypt joined the international consensus and voted
in favour of the Security Council’s adoption today
of resolution 2371 (2017), based on our consistent
commitment to upholding the credibility of the nuclear
non-proliferation system and of the Council and our firm
belief in the importance of ensuring that the Security
Council and all United Nations bodies and international
stakeholders can deliver on their mandates and their
responsibilities in this regard, as Egypt is doing. We
also believe that all similar threats should be treated
with the same level of seriousness as threats in the field

17-2471911/12

S/PV.8019

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

05/08/2017

of the nuclear proliferation, and that every effort should
be made to achieve the universality of the the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, without
double standards.

to take this opportunity to thank the United States for
its leadership and commitment, as well as all the other
members of the Council, including China, for their
spirit of cooperation.

Egypt is aware of the threat that North Korea’s
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions
poses to international and regional peace and security.
In that regard, we reiterate our desire to see all the
parties concerned commit to working to reach a peaceful
settlement to the crisis on the Korean peninsula,
exercising restraint, taking steps on both sides to
de-escalate the situation and paving the way to a return
to the negotiating table, with a view to upholding the
interests of all concerned and protecting international
peace and security. Once again, Egypt welcomes every
initiative and constructive idea that uses negotiation
and dialogue to achieve the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and, ultimately, either lasting peace
or reunification of the two Koreas.

Resolution 2371 (2017) introduces robust measures
for a sectoral ban that will significantly block the flow
into the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea of hard
currency that might otherwise be diverted to its illicit
programme of weapons of mass destruction. We believe
that these measures will help significantly to curb the
ability of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
further develop its weapons of mass destruction-related
activities. By unanimously adopting this resolution
today, the Security Council has once again demonstrated
that the international community will remain strongly
united in its commitment to stop the reckless and
destabilizing behaviour of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea.

I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Republic
of Korea.
Mr. Cho Tae-yul (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s important meeting and inviting my delegation
to participate in it.
Once again, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea has turned a deaf ear to the stern warnings of
the international community and has responded with
even more serious provocations. Along with its nuclear
programme, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s missile provocations on 4 and 28 July pose a
very serious threat to international peace and security
that requires concerted action at the global level. Such
reckless acts of defiance to repeated calls from the
international community must be met with strengthened
measures that can ensure that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea will have to bear the consequences
of its flagrant violations of international norms
and obligations. That is why the Republic of Korea
welcomes and fully supports the Council’s unanimous
adoption today of resolution 2371 (2017). I would like

12/12

In order to pressure the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to change its course, full and thorough
implementation of the Security Council’s multiple
sanctions resolutions is of the utmost importance. The
Republic of Korea will remain committed to supporting
other Member States in their ongoing efforts to fully
and effectively implement these resolutions, including
resolution 2371 (2017), adopted today.
Pyongyang still seems to be operating under
the delusion that its nuclear and ballistic missile
programmes can ensure its security. On the contrary, its
obsessive pursuit of such programmes will only serve to
strengthen the already firm resolve of the international
community. No matter how far the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea moves in pursuit of its nuclear
ambitions, our resolve to stop this will never diminish.
Pyongyang should therefore refrain from further testing
our robust collective resolve, and I sincerely hope that,
by choosing the path towards denuclearization, the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will eventually
stand on the right side of history.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
more names inscribed on the list of speakers.
The meeting rose at 4.10 p.m.

17-24719
