THIRTY-SECOND

YEAR

MEETING:

NEW

3 1 AUGUST

I977

YORK

CONTENTS
Provisional

agenda (S/Agenda/2026)

Expression

of thanks to the retiring

Adoption

of tire agenda

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . , ,
President

Page

I

. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . ,. . , . . . .

I

. . . . .. . . . , . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . .. . .. . . .

1

The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent Representative of Cyprus to
the United
Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/l 2387) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

I

D

slPV.2026

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol Sl. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document

indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information

about it is given.

The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of R~SO~K~~OOS and Decisions of the
Security Council, The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

;i

I’
c

2026th
Held in New York
Presi&nt:

on Wednesday,

Mr. Jacques LEPRETTE (France).

f?eselzt: The representatives of the rollowing States:
Benin, Canada, China, France, Germany, Federal Republic
oi’, India, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mauritius, Pakistan,
Panama, Romania, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America and Venezuela.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2026)
1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representative of Cyprus to the United Nations
addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
The meeting was culled to order at Il.35

MEETING

u.m.

Expression of thanks to the retiring President
1. Tie PRESIDENT (interpretation .fiom French): Before
taking up the item before us this morning, 1 have a very
pleasant task to perform. On behalf of the Security Council
and on my own behalf, I should like to extend our thanks
to the representative of China, who presided over our
deliberationsin July. I-le did so with a competence and
distinction which displayedhis outstanding qualities. Under
his presidency, the Council unanimously adopted two
resolutions, recommendingto the General Assembly the
admissionto the United Nations of new Members: the
Republic of Djibouti and the Socialist Republic of Viet
Nam. I need not recall here the importance of these
decisions.
Adoption of the agenda
Theagendawasadopted.
The situation in Cyprus:
Letter dated 26 August 1977 from the Permanent
Representativeof Cyprus to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/12387)
2. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): I
should like to inform the Council that I have received
letters from the representatives of Cyprus, Greece and
Turkey in which they ask to be allowed to participate in
the discussionof the question before the Council. In

31 August

1977, at 11 a.m.

accordancewith the provisions of Article 3 1 of the Charter
and rule 37 of the provisional rules of procedure, I propose
to invite those representativesto participate in the discussion without the right to vole.
At the invitution of the President, Mr0 Christophides
(Cyprus) Mr. Papoulias(Greece] and Mr. Tiirkmen (Turkey)
took placesat the Council table.
3. The PRESIDENT (interpretation ji+om French): I
should also like to inform the Council that I have received
from the representative of Turkey a letter transmitting
another letter addressedto the President or the Council by
Mr. Vedat Celik, in which he asked to bc allowed to speak
in the course of the debate. I propose, if there arc no
objections from membersof the Council, to invite Mr. Celik
to make a statement at the appropriate time, in accordance
with rule 39 of the provisional rulesol’ procedure.
It wasso decided.
4. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): Before
calling on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus, the
first speaker on my list today-and it givesme pleasureto
welcomehim amongstus-1 should like to pay a tribute to
Archbishop Makarios who died suddenly on 3 August last.
5. Mr. CI-IRISTOPHIDES (Cyprus): Mr. President,I wish
to thank you first of all for your condolenceson the loss of
our President,Archbishop Makarios.
6. Since the Turkish aggressionagainstCyprus in July and
August 1974 and the continued occupation of 40 per cent
of its territory by the Turkish forces, the General Assembly
and the Security Council have repeatedly dealt with the
Cyprus problem. Both the Assembly and the Council have
establishedthe framework within which ajust settlement of
the problem shouldbe reached. The Assembly unanimously
adopted resolution 3212 (XXIX)
and resolutions
3395,(XXX) and 31/12, on which only Turkey cast a
negative vote. Among other resolutions, the Council
adopted, also unanimously, resolution 365 (1974), by
which it endorsedresolution 3212 (XXIX), and resolution
367 (1975), by which it established the process of
negotiating procedure between the representativesof the
Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities in Cyprus-the
Greek majority of 80 per cent, and the Turkish minority of
18 per cent. These and other resolutions called on al] states
to respect the independence, sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the Republic of Cyprus, called for the cessation
of all foreign interference and demandedthe withdrawal of
all foreign troops without delay and the urgent return of

the refugees to their homes in safety. They also provided
for the holding of substantive and meaningful negotiations
under the personal auspices and direction of the SecretaryGeneral, between the representatives of the Greek and
Turkish Cypriot communities, with a view to reaching
freely a mutually acceptable political settlement based on
their legitimate rights. It is significant that the paragraph
immediately following the one referring to negotiations
;)ointedly urged all parties to refrain from unilateral
actions, particularly such as would change the demographic
character of Cyprus,

mental principles such as freedom of movement, freedom
of settlement and rights of property for all Cypriots were to
be safeguarded. It was also agreed that the territory under
the administration of each community should be discussed
in the light of economic viability or productivity and land
ownership, and that the powers and functions of the central
government were to be such as to safeguard the unity of the
country. Those guidelines were intended to provide the
interlocutors with the terms of reference on the basis of
which to negotiate a political settlement of the constitutional and territorial aspects of the Cyprus problem, as
provided under one of the provisions of the resolutions on
the question of Cyprus, leaving for implementation by
Turkey those provisions of the resolutions that concern it
exclusively and which include the withdrawal of foreign
troops, the cessation of foreign interference and, consequently, the return of the refugees to their homes in safety.

7. Of all the provisions of the resolutions on Cyprus,
Turkey has chosen to pay lip service only to the one which
referred to the negotiations. The preference shown by
Ankara for that provision has been dictated by ulterior
motives. It has been trying to obscure the prime provisions
of the resolutions which demand the withdrawal of its
troops from Cyprus and the return of the refugees to their
homes-.-provisions
which Turkey chose to ignore-by
claiming that such withdrawal and such return are subject
to the outcome of the negotiations. The purpose of the
negotiations, however, is clearly and unambiguously stated
in the resolutions. The negotiations are concerned only
with the internal aspects of the problem and not with the
withdrawal ol‘ the foreign troops and the return of the
refugees to their homes, which, in accordance with the
resolutions, should precede and not follow the talks. For
how could the people of Cyprus, of whatever origin, by
themselves bring about the cessation of the aggression and
occupation of their country by a foreign Power and in what
way could they be expected to negotiate freely their future,
with the presence of a powerful army of occupation on
their territory and with the agonizing problem of 200,000
refugees’?

11. My Government had serious doubts at the time
whether the Turkish Cypriot leader had agreed to the
guidelines genuinely and in good faith or for tactical
reasons, in an effort to neutralize the various pressures
exerted on Turkey to show reasonableness and moderation
in order to make progress in the talks possible. Nevertheless, the Greek Cypriot side, in its desire for such
progress, took the far-reaching decision to submit at the
Vienna talks a map providing for a bi-zonal solution of the
territorial aspect of the problem. In this respect, I would
remind the Council that the Turkish side had been alleging
that the main obstacle to progress in the negotiations was
the Greek Cypriot side’s refusal to accept a bi-zonal
federation. The map was submitted, after assurances were
received from Ankara and the Turkish Cypriot leadership,
through third parties, that the Turkish Cypriot negotiator
would respond positively to such a map and that he would
give a clear indication of his side’s position on the territorial
aspect.

8. At the same time, Ankara-which
dictates the Turkish
Cypriot position in the negotiations-has
never allowed a
constructive and meaningful dialogue to develop. The aim is
obvious: in that way, Turkey is enabled to consolidate its
position in the occupied area by creating faits accomplis and
to head off pressures for concessions by misleading the
world into believing that it is genuinely seeking a solution
to the Cyprus problem through the Cyprus problem
through the intercommunal talks.

12. The acceptance of a federal system and the decision to
present a map at Vienna on the basis of a bi-zonal solution
of the territorial aspect, were indeed great concessions on
the part of the Greek Cypriot side. This good will and
moderation, however, foundered on the Turkish intransigence. The Turkish Cypriot negotiator, in breach of
the prior assurances given by Ankara and the Turkish
Cypriot leadership, failed to give any indication of his side’s
views on the territorial aspect of the problem. He stated: “I
have not come to Vienna either to give anything back or to
indicate what we intend to keep.” Furthermore, in violation
of the agreed guidelines, which clearly speak of a federation
within which the unity of the State would be safeguarded,
his proposals on the constitutional aspect of the problem in
fact provided for the creation of two separate, loosely
connected States. At the most, the Turkish proposals aimed
at a loose confederation.

9. All talks and negotiations have so far, two and a half
years after their commencement, demonstrably failed to
comply with the essential requirements for negotiations
under the relevant resolutions, and inevitably they havt
produced no results, The only purpose they served was to
assist Turkey in its efforts to cover up its faits accomplis by
putting forward the pretence of not disturbing the talks.
10. Last February, a climate of some optimism regarding
the solution of the problem was created following two
meetings between the President of the Republic, the late
Archbishop Makarios, and the Turkish Cypriot leader,
Mr. Denktag. At their last meeting, held on 12 February in
the presence of the Secretary-GeneraI, certain guidelines
were agreed on, and this was considered at the time to mark
a breakthrough in the intercommunal talks. It was agreed
that the common objective was the creation of an independent, non-aligned, bi-communal federal state, where funda-

13. The Turkish attitude in the talks proves, beyond any
reasonable doubt, that Ankara-which,
as I have already
mentioned, dictates the Turkish Cypriot stand in those
talks-is not genuinely interested in reaching a settlement
through them. Since the adoption of resolution 367 (1975),
which established a process of intercommunal negotiations,
there have been several rounds of talks at Vienna and in
New York. Yet, for one reason or another, under one
2

pretext or another, the sad fact remains that the Turkish
side, three years after the Turkish aggression against
Cyprus, and two and a half years after the commencement
of the negotiating process, has failed to give any indication
whatsoever of its intentions on the territorial issue of the
Cyprus problem-an all-important issue-and has refused to
carry out the negotiations in a meaningful and substantive
manner as provided by the United Nations resolutions.

which enables Ankara to proceed with its plans against
Cyprus and its people with the least possible reaction from
individual States, international organizations and world
public opinion. Another is that of reassuring individual
States and international organizations, when these show
concern over a unilateral action proposedby Turkey, that it
does not intend to proceed with that action, while in fact,
at the sametime, it doesproceed with it unobtrusively and
perhaps with somedelay. Yet another tactic employed by
Ankara is to create a crisis by putting forward excessive
demands which, after international or other pressures,it
reduces to a somewhat lower level, to the relief of
everybody, except, of course, the unfortunate people of
Cypms, for, in the meantime, Ankara hasmadeyet another
encroachmenton their lcgitimatc rights in furtherance of its
expansionist plansagainstthe Republic of Cyprus. A fourth
tactical manoeuvre of Ankara is its favourite game of
transposingresponsibility for its actions or inaction on to
the shouldersof the Turkish Cypriot Ieadership, and vice
versa, dependingon the particular time and situation. This
tactic should have become by now so obvious asto mislead
no one, for it is well known who is in command in the
occupied area: it is Ankara, through its 40,000 troops and
its tanks and bayonets.

14. Ankara does not look for a just solution of the Cyprus
problem through the intercommunal talks, but it does find
convenient a semblance of negotiation, for it uses the
. negotiating process as a smoke-screen to mislead world
opinion, exploiting the intervening time for the creation
of faits accomplis and the consolidation of the cle @to
situation created by the use of force.
15. Since the commencement of the intercommunal talks,
Ankara and its army of occupation, in close collaboration
with the Turkish Cypriot leadership, its puppet, proceeded
to an illegal declaration purporting to establish what it calls
a “Turkish
Federated State of Cyprus” and to the
introduction of a so-called constitution
under which
Greek-Cypriots
are considered as aliens, wllile Turkish
colonizers are considered as citizens, of the bogus “State”.

19. The Turkish Government’s decisionto proceed to the
colonization of the new town of Famagusta,asannounced
by the Turkish Premier, Mr. Ecevit, on 20 July 1977, and
given tangible expressionby an on-the-spot visit by the then
Deputy Prei-Gerof Turkey, Mr. tiunes, hasbeenthe climax
of the Turkish policy of faits accompIis and of Ankara’s
contempt for and disregardof the United Nationsresolutjons
on Cyprus. This new Turkish provocative move, if allowed
to proceed, can only be the coup & gr&c to the
intercommunal talks.

16. During the same period, the army of occupation,
through tactics of deprivation, humiliation, harassment and
physical violence, expelled from the area under its control
almost the bulk of the Greek Cypriot population that had
remained in the Karpas area following the second phase of
the Turkish invasion in August 1974. Further to that,
Ankara massively imported into the occupied area tens of
thousands of settler-colonizers from Turkey and implanted
them in Cyprus for permanent settlement. The houses, the
lands, the shops, the factories, the hotels and all the
belongings of the 200,000 Greek Cypriot refugees-one
third of the population of Cyprus-who
by force of arms
are prevented from returning to their ancestral homes and
lands, were distributed to the colonizers and to Turkish
Cypriots from the south who were moved to the north,
whether by persuasion or otherwise, in pursuit of Ankara’s
political objectives. In addition, churches were looted and
desecrated, archaeological treasures were either destroyed
or sold abroad, and Greek names of towns, villages, streets
and locations were replaced by Turkish names in an effort
calculated to change artificially the age-old character of the
area. It is also significant to mention that the postal address
of the so-called “Turkish Federated State of Cyprus” is
Mersin, a province of Turkey, and that its currency is the
Turkish lira and not the Cyprus pound.

20. It is a wc!.l established fact that the new town of
Farnagusta-which did not fall within the planned Attila
line but whose inhabitants fled in terror before the
advancing Turkish tanks-was cordoned and scaledoff by
the Turkish army, following the second phase of the
Turkish aggression in August 1974, and nobody was
allowed to enter, on orders from the Turkish military
commander. The generalimpressionwasjustifiably created,
and indeed cultivated by Ankara, that the new town of
Famagusta would remain closed and be returned to its
rightful inhabitants.
21. At the United Nations, it was the generalexpectation
that this development would take place in November 1974
and, when this did not rnaterialize, that it would take place
at the commencement of the intercommunal talks in 1975,
as Ankara’s first step for the settlement of the Cyprus
problem. Reversingthis generalunderstanding, the Turkish
Premier,Mr. Ecevit, according to Reuters,stated on 20 July
1977, after a Cabinet meeting, that his

17. Ankara’s sinister plans against Cyprus are becoming
more and more manifest every day, Its plans are to wipe
out any trace of Greek Cypriot presence in the occupied
part of Cyprus, to partition the island and to annex, de
facto, the occupied area, thus satisfying, for the present, its
geopolitical objectives. All its illegal and inhuman actions
arc motivated by this over-all objective, and no denials by
Turkish officials or Turkish ambassadors can conceal
Ankara’s real plans, for its actions speak lounder than its
words.

“caretaker Government was starting preparations to
revive the modern section of the Cypriot port city of
Famagusta,which had been closed off since the Turkish
intervention of 1974”.
He further stated that

18. Various tactics are employed by Ankara in the pursuit
of these objectives. One of these tactics is the creation of
faits accomplis, step by step, known as the “salami” tactic,

“because the area was kept closed, the impressionwas
given that Turkey had put it in a display window as a
3

concession for settlement of the Cyprus problem” and hc
added that his Government “had started work to erase
this impression”.
During the following days, the then Turkish Deputy Prime
Minister, Mr. Gunes, toured the new town of Famagusta
and gave the green light for the coloni;ration and settlement
of the city. This was yet another indication that all
important decisions in the occupied area of Cyprus are
taken by the Turkish Government in Ankara and not by the
Turkish Cypriot leadership.

people and thus the upkeep of the town will be taken in
hand. All non-Greeks and non-Greek Cypriots who own
properties in this area are welcome to resume their
activities there.”
According to another statement, made by Mr. Kotak, who
calls himself “Minister of the Federated Turkish State of
Cp-LlS”,
“Plans for the colonization of Famagusta were made,
and the relevant works begun, when Mr. Ecevit was in
power (in 1974) and were completed during Mr. Irmak’s
premiership. In the first phase, refugees were settled in
the western neighbourhoods of the town.”

22. Since the return of Farnagusta to its rightful owners is
one of the basic prerequisites for any agreed settlement of
the Cyprus problem-and this is well known to the Turkish
Government-the
announced colonization of Famagusta
and the commencement of this process lead to the
indisputable conclusion that Turkey is not aspiring to a
solution of the Cyprus problem through the talks. This
move of Turkey’s gives serious reason to doubt whether
Ankara ever realIy intended to make any concessions in the
intercommunal talks and puts in serious question its
sincerity towards those whom it had been assuring that it
would eventually return the new city of Famagusta to its
rightful owners.

Mr. Gunes stated on 24 July 1977:
“While I was acting as the Turkish Government’s
representative, we dealt mainly with the problem of
Maras (Varosha).“-otherwise
known as Famagusta-“The
decision to open Maras to the people will now be
implemented. . . . Everybody thought that the Maras
quarter of Magosa (Famagusta) was outside the Turkish
Cypriot sector. This erroneous conviction has probably
changed during my visit.”

23. Despite the assurances given in July by the Turkish
Government, in response to representations
made to
Ankara, that it would not proceed with the colonisation of
the cordoned-off city of Famagusta and that the decisions
of the Ecevit Government were not binding on the new
Turkish Government, the Turkish army in mid-August
opened for settlement part of the cordoned-off city known
as the Constantia area. The Greek Cypriot-owned
Constantia hotel in the area was opened as a catering
institute and plans were announced to populate, as from
1 September, 100 nearby apartments and adjoining shops.
The Greek names and street signs within the Constantia
area were removed and were replaced by Turkish names.
Even more ominous is the fact that .I. F. Kennedy
Avenue-and that is not a Greek name-the main thoroughfare of the new city of Famagusta, which is outside the
Constantia area and stretches all along the entire length of
the new city, has been renamed “Sanjar Pasha Kadesi”, and
20 street signs with this new name have been Fixed along
the avenue. Furthermore, in recent weeks, Turkish workers
have been observed within the enclosed new city busily
engaged in repairing traffic lights and telephone booths, in
an obvious effort to make the city ready to receive its new
illegal occupants.

The so-called Mayor of Famagusta, Mr. Bora Atun, said on
3 August 1977 that he “would continue to help the Turkish
Federated State authorities in rehabilitating displaced
Turkish Cypriots in Varosha”.
27. On 13 Atlgust 1977, it was published in the Istanbul
daily Giimzydin that the new town of Varosha would be
“opened to tourism and settlement in the forthcoming
days”. The same newspaper reported on 17 August that the
first out of eight sectors into which the new town of
Famagusta had been divided by the authorities, namely, the
one around the Constantia Hotel, was open to the public
for settlement, and it said, “repair operations are speedily
going on in the other sectors of the town”. The so-called
Minister of Housing and Rehabilitation of the Turkish
Federated State, as it is called, Mr. Naki Atun, confirmed
on I8 August that Varosha had been divided into eight
sectors and announced that the “town sector around the
Constantia Hotel, including a loo-flat block, would be
opened officially on 1 September 1977”--that is, tomorrow,
28. On 16 August 1977, the Turkish Cypriot leader,
Mr. De&tag, addressing Turkish Cypriots and Turks at
Famagusta,

34. The foregoing information
emanates from reliable
sources on the basis of first-hand information, as well as
from authoritatively reported statements made by Turkish
and Turkish Cypriot officials. I am certain tha the United
Nations Secretariat will be able to confirm the information
if asked to report to the Council.

“emphasized the decisiveness prevailing in connexion
with Famagusta and stated that Varosha is of equal
importance to the Turkish Cypriot community as Kyrenid
and Nicosia, and concluded by declaring that not even an
inch of their territory will be given to the Greek Cypriot
side”.

25. To enable the Council to assess better the ominous
situation, I will quote from some of the statements to
which I have referred and from certain press reports.

29. An extract from the 15 August 1977 edition of 772~
Times is also most revealing in this respect:

26. The Turkish Cypriot leader, Mr. Denktaa declared on
23 July 1977:

~!hUZdUJ7

I‘ . . * the Greek-owned Constantia Hotel, just south of
the old walled city in Famagusta, was opened as a

“Varosha is within the Turkish Federated State. It
be left as a ghost town. it will be utilized by our

CalnOt

4

catering institute and plans were announced to populate a
few large apartment blocks.

measures to arrest and reverse the process of the colonization of l:amagusta, which, among its other serious repercussions, would deprive the intercommunal
talks of any
content and would render the finding of a solution to the
Cyprus problem impossible. In this respect it would be
pertinent to refer to the statement made on behalf of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Waldheim, on 22 July:

“In fact, the Denktaa administration started popuu
lating Varosha a long time ago. Before the conflict, about
5,000 Turkish-Cypriots used to live in the old part of the
city . . .

“The Secretary-General is concerned at the statement
made by Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister, concerning
proposed steps in relation to Varosha. Such steps, if
implemented, would certainly create a serious situation
and would have a negative effect on the future of the
negotiating process.”

“Bora Atun, the city’s , . . mayor, said Famagusta’s
Turkish Cypriot population is now ‘around 25,000’. He
said the majority lived on the outskirts of Varosha in
formerly Greek homes. Around two-lifths
of the town
had thus been populated. The remainder, he said, was the
row of hotels along the beach and the shopping and
residential area behind it.

33. Before deciding urgently to raise this issue before the
Security Council, my Government had exhausted all available diplomatic means to save the city of Famagusta from
the threat of colonization. My Government resorted to the
Council only after it became abundantly clear, on the basis
of the available evidence, that the gradual but systematic
colonization of Famagusta had commenced and after
repeated representations to Ankara failed to produce the
intended results.

“ . *.
“The administration has divided Varosha into eight
districts which, officials say, will be opened step by
step”-the usual tactic of Turkey-“as
repairs progress.
The Constantia Hotel-cum-catering institute and its surroundings are the first step, they say.”
30. I have just received a cablegram containing a statement
made by Mr. CIglayangil on 30 August-that is, yesterdayon the question of Famagusta. His statement reads:

34. In all candour and seriousness, I must give a solemn
warning that the threatened colonization of Famagusta, if
allowed to proceed, will deal a mortal blow to the prospects
for a peaceful solution to the Cyprus problem. The fact
that the area at issue is not so large in size--although, of
course, in this area 50,000 people live-and that no actual
fighting is involved must not be allowed to obscure the grim
situation which will amount to the extension and accentuation of the existing aggression, in flagrant violation of
international
law, the United Nations resolutions on
Cyprus, the Geneva Conventions of 1949, the European
Convention on Human Rights-to which both Turkey and
Cyprus and signatories-and the Helsinki Conference Final
Act. Indeed, this situation presents striking similarities to
and involves the same issues and principles as, on the one
hand, the process of bantustanization in South Africa and,
on the other, the settlements in another area under foreign
occupation in the immediate vicinity of my own country,
which justifiably evoke strong protests and condemnations
on the part of many countries and in many organs of the
United Nations and elsewhere.

“It is inappropriate for the Greek Cypriots to request a
special session of the United Nations Security Council
with refercncc to the Maras Varosha district. It is difficult
to guess at the purpose of the recourse to the Security
Council in connexion with the Maras district of Cyprus,
as there is no change other than the opening of the
Constantia Hotel, undergoing repair for the past two
years, as a school of hotel management. It is inappropriate for the Greek Cypriots to resort to the Security
Council on this pretext.”
But then it continues:
“This is a district under the administration of the
Turkish Federated State of Cyprus. This district is no
different from other districts of the Turkish Federated
State.”
3 1. Let me remind the Council in this respect that, from
the very moment of its inception, the purported setting up
of this bogus State which is recognized by no one was
repudiated by the Council by its resolution 367 (1975) and
was condemned by the Conference of Foreign Ministers of
Non-Aligned Countries. The implications of Mr. ($@ayangil’s statement are self-evident, in that it clearly implies
that there is no intention not to proceed with the
responsibility
as
announced colonization.
Turkey’s
occupying Power for Famagusta, as well as for the rest of
the occupied area in Cyprus, is evident, as also are its
intentions to proceed whenever it deems proper with the
colonization of the new city of Famagusta.

35. It is my submission that this body has both the right
and the obligation to take effective measures to see that its
own resolutions and respected and implemented and to
ensure that the situation is not allowed to deteriorate
fufiher and result in a breach of peace in Cyprus and in the
region, The situation in Cyprus is very critical and fraught
with grave dangers for peace in the whole region. The
Cyprus Government believes that there is no room for
further delay in the implementation of General Assembly
resolutions 3212 (XXIX), 3395 (XXX) and 31/12 and of
Security Council resolution 367 (1975) if peace in Cyprus
is to be secured,

32. It is in the light of the ominous developments to
which I have referred that my Government has asked for an
emergency meeting of the Security Council, in the expectation that the Council will take prompt and effective

36. If further tolerance of the illegal and arbitrary Turkish
actions is shown, this will complicate the problem to the
extent that it will become insoluble, with dire consequences to peace and security in the whole area. Preventive’
5

-yet ncccssary-action
by the Security Council with regard
to Famagusta shown be the first step to be urgently taken
in the direction of the adoption of practical measures for
the implementation of the resolutions on Cyprus, and
especially of resolution 365 (1974) by which the Council
endorsed General Assembly resolution 3212 (XXIX) and
urged the parties concerned to implement it as soon as
possible. In this respect I would remind the Council of
resolution 31/12 in which the General Assembly
hope that the Security Council will
consider appropriate steps for the implementation of its
resolution365 (1974) of 13 December1974”.
“Expr’esscs

tk

37. My Government therefore appeals to the Security
Council urgently to dischargeits responsibilitiesunder the
Charter and adopt such effective measuresasare warranted
by the situation which would, first, reversethe processof
colontiation of the new city of Famagustaand, secondly,
cnsurc the immediate and effective implementation of the
United Nations resolutions on Cyprus, and particularly
those provisionsWhich call upon all States to respect the
sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of the
Republic of Cyprus, call for the cessationof all foreign
interference in its affairs and demandthe withdrawal from
Cyprus of all foreign troops and the return of the refugees
to their homesunder conditions of safety.
38. It is only through such effective action, both with
regardto the broader aspectsof the problem of Cyprus and
more specifically with reagdrdto the immediateissueraised
by the Famagusta situation, that the Council, as the
guardianof international peaceand security, will have met
its responsibilities. The wronged pcoplc of Cyprus are
anxiously waiting.
39. The PRESIDENT (imqvretution
from French): The
next speakeris the representativeof Greece on whom I now
call.

notice on the question of Cyprus becauseof the grave
deterioration of the situation in the island, owing to the
new threat of a fait accompli which, aswe see,is already
being initiated by the Turkish side. I am, of course,
referring to the grim fact of the colonization of the zone
under Turkish military occupation, and particularly to the
Turkish’s Government’s intention to colonize the town of
Famagusta.
43. The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Cyprus,
Mr. Christophides,just submitted to the Council-and in a
very convincing manner by providing specific proof-the
reasonswhich have prompted the Governmentof Cyprusto
have recourseto the Council. On behalf of my Government,
I shouldlike to state that this requestis fully endorsedby
Greece.
44. I shall not repeat what has already been said so
eloquently by Mr. Christophides.I would neverthelessbeg
the Council’s indulgence, for I must draw its attention to
the alarming situation created by the Turkish attempt to
confront LIS with a new fait accompliby colonizing the
town of Famagusta.
45. Indeed, we are forced to note that three years after
the Turkish invasion of Cyprus, which resulted in the
military occupation of 40 per cent of the territory of the
Republic and the creation of an enormousproblem of
refugeeswhose numbers exceed 200,000, Turkey, instead
of abiding by the relevant GeneralAssemblyand Security
Council resolutionshas, first, steppedup its violations of
international law and human rights and its aggression
against the non-aligned Republic of Cyprus, secondly,
deliberately placednew obstaclesin the way of negotiations
and peace and, thirdly, exacerbated the Cyprus crisis,
which, as recognized by General Assembly resoiution
3 l/l 2, is endangeringinternational peaceand security.
46. I shalldeal briefly with thesethree points.

40. Mr.

PAPOULIAS (Greece) (illterpretatioiz
front
Mr. President, allow me to extend to you my
delegation’swarmest congratulations on your assumption
of the presidency of the Security Council. Your eminent
qualities,your prestigeand your great experience in United
Nations affairs are for LIS a guaranteethat you wilI conduct
the debate successfully.My delegation and I are happy to
seethe representativeof France, a great country with which
Greece has historical ties of close and deep friendship,
presiding over the Council. I should also like to thank the
Council for having allowed me to participate in the
discussion.
I;i.erzch):

41. Addressingourselves to the delegation of Cyprus, we
should like to pay a tribute to the memory of the first
Presidentof the Republic of Cyprus, Archbishop Makarios,
whose loss has been felt by the entire international
community.

47. There is no need to enter into a lengthy explanation as
to why Turkey’s actions in the occupiedzone of the island
run counter to international law andthe UniversalDeclaration of Human Rights. The expulsion by terror of the
inhabitants from their ancestralhomesand the seizureof
their property re in themselvesa grave breach of the
provisions of the Charter and the normsand principlesof
the international community. Theseactsrun counter to the
GenevaConvention relative to the Protection of civiliansin
Time of War. They are also in flagrant violation of the
specific provisions of paragraph6 of General Assembly
resolution 3395 (XXX), which requests the parties to
refrain from all unilateral actions, including changesin the
demographicstructure of Cyprus.
48. Unfortunately, that is the intolerable situation in
Cyprus. As if that situation were not already intolerable
enough, the President, of the caretaker Government of
Turkey, Mr. Ecevit, stated on 20 July this year:

42. The Council is meeting just two months after the
seriesof meetings in June this year, during which the
mandate of the United Nations Peace-keepingForce in
Cyprus wasrencwed by resolution 410 (1977). It hasbeen
necessaryfor the Council to convene again at such short

“My caretaker Government is starting preparationsto
revive the modern section of the Cypriot port city of
Famagusta,which has been closedoff sincethe Turkish
intervention of 1974. Becausethe areawaskept closed,
6

the impression was given that Turkey had put it in a
display window as a concession for settlement of the
Cyprus problem. My Government has started work to
erase this impression.“’
49. Later, the present Government of Turkey, continuing
to employ the “salami” tactic, began to occupy buildings in
the city and to rename streets, starting with J. F. Kennedy
Avenue which became General Sanjar Avenue. Moreover,
statements were made to the effect that the systematic
colonization of the city would begin on 1 September. We
are truly astonished at the ease with which the Turkish side
feels free to appropriate enormous Greek Cypriot investments and the properties which housed and provided a
living for a Greek Cypriot population of approximately
50,000-that
is, a quarter of the present number of
refugees-just as if there were no international order, just as
if property rights were not recognized, just as if the military
force of the occupier could replace all notion of legality.
One would think that we were living not in the world that
the Charter of the United Nations wished to ensure for all
peoples but in the dark ages of the past.

hope that the irremediablecan be avoided. Nevertheless,we
should underscore that the negative attitude of Turkey
contrasts significantly with the wish expressed several
times, and recently in a letter dated 23 August 1977to the
Special Representativeof the Secretary-Generalin Cyprus,
Mr. P&rez de CuCllar, by the Greek Cypriot negotiator,
Mr. Papadopoulos, that the intercommunal negotiations
should be resumed. It also contrasts with the unremitting
efforts of the Secretary-General, to whom we expressour
appreciation and gratitude, as well as with other international efforts aimed at achieving a peaceful settlementof
the Cyprus problem.
53. Rut it would be a grave mistake if we believedthat a
solution could be imposedon Cyprus by force and by the
presence of a foreign army of occupation and the intecnational community made to accept a situation that would
be in flagrant contradiction to the principlesof the Charter,
particularly that which stipulates the non-admissibility of
the acquistion of territory by force, as well as of the
principles of the Helsinki Declaration. That could mean
postponing indefinitely the settlement of the question of
Cyprus and making even more acute a situation that United
Nations resoIutionsalready consider asendangeringinternationa1 peaceand security. In order to avoid this eventually,
we trust that the Council will condemn any attempt at the
colonization of Famagusta,or of the rest of the militaryoccupied zone of Cyprus and that it wilt demand,in taking
the necessarysteps, that the Turkish Government-since it
is that Government that is responsiblefor the future of the
occupied territory--should desist from any action of this
kind and abide by the General Assembly and Security
Council resolutions, with a view to achieving a peaceful
settlement of the problem.

50. This brings me to my second point: the effect of the
Turkish actions on community negotiations. It would be no
exaggeration to say that that effect could truly be wholly
disastrous. It is well known that the intercommunal
negotiations on the problem of Cyprus should lead, inter
da, to a settlementof the basic question concerning the
territorial aspect, which is linked to the return of the
refugeesto their homes.The five roundsof intercommunal
negotiationsheld at Vienna since April 1975 under the
auspicesof the Secretary-General, and the new seriesof
intecommunal negotiationswhich took place between 31
March and 7 April last, are nothing more than an effort to
encouragethe Turkish side to inter into seriousnegoliations on the territorial aspect of the island-something
which the Turkish side has always avoided doing, under
various pretexts that arewell known to the Council.

The PRESIDENT (htqretutim
fkorn fkwch):
The
next speaker is Mr. Vedat Cclik, whom I invite to take a
place at the Council table and to make his statement.
54.

55. Mr. CELIK: Mr. President, I should like to thank you
and every member of the Council for having given me the
opportunity today to present to the Council the viewsof
the Turkish Cypriot side on the issuesthat we are now
discussing.

51. Instead, the occupying Power has tried to perpetuate
the faits accomplisin Cyprus and to create, by delaying
tactics, so-calledirreversible situations. The fate of the
sealed-offtown of Famagustarepresentsa cardinal element
in the intercommunal negotiations. In colonizing
Famagusta,the Turkish side would only be expressingits
will to deprive from the outset these negotiations of any
meaningand to render any future dialogue pointless. The
Secretary-GeneEd
himself immediately recognized the
dangerof the Turkish action in this statementmade on his
behalf on 22 July:

56. WC have just heard two fairly lengthy statementsby
the Greek Cypriot representative and the representativeof
Greece regarding what they consider to be the prevailing
situation in the island. Under the circumstances,it leaves
me with two alternatives: either to make a lengthy
statement, taking up each and every issuethat they have
raisedand presentingin &tail the true facts in eachcast, or
to confine myself to a brief presentation of the realitiesas
they exist in Cyprus, giving the Council an opportunity to
make a sound appraisalor what the actual situation on the
islandis today.

“The Secretary-Generalis concerned at the statement
madeby Mr. Ecevit, while still Prime Minister, concerning
proposed steps in relation to Varosha. Such steps, if
implemented, would certainly create a serious situation
and would have a negative effect on the future of the
negotiatingprocess.“’

57. In view of the fact that at previous meetingsof the
Council and of the General Assembly we have always
listened to the two representatives saying the samethings
and making the same unfounded allegations, and considering that we have answeredeach and every allegation
made, I intend now to take the secondalternative and to be
asbrief aspossible.

52. We really wonder if the Turkish side is not trying to
Setup insurmountableobstaclesto intercommunal negotiations in order to make them impossible.For our part, we
1Quotedin Euglish
by the spcakcr.
7

58. First of a]~, it would be most pertinent to ask wb the
Council was asked to convef~e at this juncture to consih
once again the question of Cyprus. I fail to understand the
necessity for holding such a meeting. There appears to be
no valid reason whatsoever to take up the valuable time of
this august body merely to hear yet again what has been
repeated in this forum on many occasions over the past few
years. This practice can in no way facilitate the SOhtiOn
Of
the Cyprus problem or contribute to the holding of
meaningful intercommunal negotiations.

64. Our main aim at this juncture shouldbe to encourage
itnd foster intercommunaltalks with a view to reaching a
just and mutually acceptablesolution, and not to engagein
futile political
fi&ts
in international forums.
65. The Turkish Cypriot sidehasalwaysbeenand Still iS in
favour of the intcrcommunaltalks. We hope that, despite
recent developmeld
in the south which have caused a
temporary
interrUpti
in the negotiatingprocess,it will be
possible
for the talks to resumeon a mutually agreeddate
in the near future, and it is our ardent hope that this time
they
may
be moreconstructiveand fruitful.

59. We are no doubt all aware that there is no fighting in
Cyprus. There has not been any fighting there for over two
years now, and the fact that there is substantial stabilization with regard to the security situation has been
confirmed by the last report of the Secretary-General
/S/12342/ of 7 June 1977, as well as by a Security Council
resolution, resolution 410 (1977) of 15 June last. There is
no danger to lift, there is no threat to peace in the region,
nor has there been any advance or movement foward by the
Turkish Cypriot armed forces. llence, there can be no
question of a change of the status qtlo aMe. Why therefore
was it deemed necessaryto call this meeting of the
Council’?

66. It is interestingthat my distinguishedcolleaguefrom
the south, Mr. Christophides,hardly dwelt on this issue
today; maybe he knowns and appreciatesthat even the
presentrecourseto the Council is incompatible with the
professed readinessto resume talks. Constant Greek
Cypriot recourseto international forums, including the
Security Council, is, asI have said,incompatible with, and
doesnot createa climatesuitablefor, suchnegotiations.

67. It is also pertinent to note here that the continued
imposition of economic blockadesby the Greek Cypriot
administrationagainstthe Turkish Cypriot community and
60. The answer to this questionmay, I think, be best the inflammatory statementsthat are being made by its
perceived from a recent policy statementmade by the leadershave not helped the creation or a climate suitable
acting Greek Cypriot leader,Mr. SpyrosKyprianou, on 20 for normalization. Furthermore, our proposalsaimed al
August 1977. During an interview with the French News bringing the two communitiestogether and encouraging
Agency, he said: “Our targetis to keepour problemalways co-operationbetweenthe two administrations,such asthe
in the focus of international attention and to securethe establishmentof a joint transitional government and our
exertion of maximum pressureon Turkey”. That was a offers to tun some common servicesjointly, have all
confirmation of his earlierstatement,madeduringa speech unfortunately beenrejectedby the Greek side.
he gave at Nicosia on 22 June 1977, that “The Cyprus
problem must remainalive in the conscienceof the people 68. As regardshllaras,or Varosha, we completely fail to
understandwhy the Greek Cypriot side has chosen to
and arouseinternationalinterests”.
createsucha clamour over this issue.The fact is that Maras
is situated within the borders of the Turkish Federated
61. Therefore the ulterior motive of the GreekCypriots in
calling a meeting of the Security Council is quite clear. State of Cyprus and is subject to the exclusivecontrol and
Evidently the present recoursehas been prompted by jurisdiction of the Turkish Cypriot authorities. Our rights
internal political considerations.
It is, however,unfortunate over this area cannot be madethe subject of bargaining
that the long-terminterestsof Cyprusasa wholearc being with the Greek Cypriot side.Nevertheless,I shouldat this
like to inform the Cout~cil
sacrificed by the Greek Cypriot leadersfor short-term point and in thesecircumstances
that there is no “mass colonization” or resettlement of
personalpolitical gains.
Marasin progress,
ashasbeenclaimedby the Greek Cypriot
62. Apparently the pretext for this meetingis the imple- representativeand on which this presentrecourseis based.
mentation of the United Nationsresolutionson Cyprusand
the allegedmasscolonizationof Maras,otherwiseknown as 69. The useof onesinglehotel building in the north of the
Varosha, a town situated wholly within the bordersof the area as a catering institute, preparationsfor which began
more than two years ago, and the allocation of various
Turkish FederatedState andunderour jurisdiction.
housesandapartmentsin the vicinity to the staff and pupils
63. It is not the first time that the Greek Cypriot
of the institute shouldnot warrant an e,mcrgencymeeting
representative has brought up the questionof the imple- of the Security Council. The Greek Cypriots must realise
mentation of past resolutions.Our views and position on
that the Cyprus problem cannot be solved by undue
this subject have already been amply put on record on recourseto the United Nationsand to other international
various occasionsin the past.I haveno intention, therefore, forumsevery now and then. The Cyprus problem can best
of repeating in detail what I have saidearlier and put on
be solvedthrough meaningfulnegotiationsbetweenthe two
record. It suffices here merely to restate that these communities.
resolutions were adopted in our absencewithout a fair
hearingbeinggivento the TurkishCypriot side,and in most 70. As I have already stated, the Turkish Cypriot side is
casesthey cannot, therefore, reflect the true situation on
alwaysready andwilling to start negotiationswith a view to
the island. Many of them havebeenaffected, amendedor
finding a realistic solution. A realistic solution would
be
rcndercd obsoleteby subsequent
developments
in Cyprusas one which recognizedfor the Turkish Cypriot community,
well as by the agreements
mutually acceptedduring the the suffering party until now, rights equal to those of the
..
Greek Cypriots; it would be a solution that would ensure
8

the equal status of the Turkish Cypriot community and
provide for its effeCtiVe
and equal participation h the
government and adminjstration of the future Federal State.

Makarios. That has openedthe way to a power struggle
-which
h
not yet beenresolved,andit seems
that recourse
to the Councilis part of the tacticsdeployedby one faction
to prove that it is more activist and militant than the
others.

71. The Way towards a SOhtion will inevitably be long alld
arduous.However, with patience andperseverance,
there is
no reason WhY a mutually acceptablesolution cannot be
found for QPIUS in the nearfuture,

78. It is easy to convene a meeting of the Security
Council, but it will be very hard to prove that there has
been a seriousdeteriorationof the situationin the island.
As a matter of fact, the only evidencethat the Greek
CYPrjotShave been able to muster is the decisionby the
authoritiesof the TurkishFederatedStateof Cyprusto use
an old hotel in the southof Famagustaasa centrefor hotel
management.In putting forward such an incrediblecomPlaint they seemto forget that the north of the islandis
under the control and administration of the Turkish
Cypriot community and the southunder that of the Greek
Cypriot community They do not seemto understandand
realizethat whateverthe TurkishcommunityIs doingin the
areaunderits control isnoneof their concern.

72. I regret to =Y that the statementthe Councilheard
just now from Mr. Cluistophidesdoesnot leavemuchroom
for optimism, becauseat this late hour he stjll prefersto
refer to “1tli~lOrititX”
and “n~ajorities” in Cyprus, and he
still tries t0 rClJreSent
the Cyprus problemasone between
Ckk CYPWS and Turkey. The Cyprus problem is an
hmmnu~a~
problem, and it can besolvedonly through
negotiations on an equal footing betweenthe two cornmunitics.
73. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from French): The
next speaker is the representativeof Turkey, on whom I
now call.

79. So far as Turkey is concerned,our position hasbeen
formulated in a statementby our ForeignMinister which
hasalreadybeenquoted by the representativeof the Greek
Cypriot community,Mr. Christophides.
I do not seehowhe
can take issue with that statement. He objects to the
statementto the effect that the areais underthe control and
administrationof the Turkish FederatedState of Cyprus
and is in no way different from the other areasunder the
control of the Turkish FederatedState of Cyprus.That is a
fact, and the ForeignMinister could havesaidnothingelse
in this respect.I shouldhave thought that Mr. Christophides’ attention would rather have beenfocusedon what
Mr. Caglayangilsaidbefore that sentencewhen he pointed
out that there had beenno changesin the areaexcept for
the opening of the ConstantiaHotel, which has been
undergoingrepairs for the last two years, as a catering
institute.

74. Mr. TURKMEN (Turkey): Mr. President,first of all I
wish to say that it is a great privilegefor me to take part in
a meeting of the Security Council presidedover by you.
Your diplomatic experience and skills are widely appreciated and I am sure that under your wise guidancethe
Council will be able to conclude its deliberationsin a way
that will not hinder but, on the contrary, enhancethe
possibilities of substantial and productive negotiations
betweenthe two communitiesin Cyprus.

3
P

75. I must say that I deeplyregretthe statementmadeby
my colleague the representativeof Greece. He is indeed
ill-advised to refer to violations of humanrightsby Turkey
or to give lessonson civilized behaviour. It is already a
historical &ct that the main culprit in the continuing
tragedy of Cyprus is Greeceitself. The record of Greecefull of violence, military invasionsand aggressions,
hits
accomplis, attempted murdersand untold intriguesagainst
Cyprus-should have restrained the representative of
Greece.

80. Despitethe preposterousand ludicrousnature of the
Greek Cypriot allegations,the Turkish community, in its
desireto prevent a new obstacleto a resumptionof the
intercommunaltalks, hasacted with the utmost restraint
andmoderation,The representativeof the Turkish Cypriot
76. 1 must say that the Greek Cypriot request for an
urgent meeting of the Security Councilis, to say the least, community, the Minister in chargeof foreign affairs in the
Governmentof the Turkish FederatedStateof Cyprus,has
puzzling. The Council discussedthe situation in Cyprus in
detail only two and a half monthsago.It did soon the basis just explainedthat thereisno resettlementor rehabilitation
in progressin the tourist complex in the Marasregion.His
of the report of the Secretary-General,who pointed out
willingnessto gjve information in this respect,despitethe
that the island enjoyed quiet and calm. This is what the
grossinterference In the internal affairs of the Turkish
Secretary-Generalsaidin his report:
community by the Greekcommunity, is new proof of the
“The situation in Cyprus wasquiet during the period dedicationof the Turkish FederatedStateof CYpmsto the
searchfor a peacefulsettlement. Indeed, Mr. Celik ho
under review, especially since the meetingsbetweenthe
reiterated that the Turkish community was firmly supleaders of the two communitiesthat were held on 27
January in the presenceof my SpecialRepresentativeand porting the mission of good offices entrusted to the
on 12 February 1977 under my personalauspices.Thus, Secretary-Generaland wasready for a resumptionof the
intercommunaltalks on a date to be agreedupon by both
three years arter the eventsof 1974, a substantialtrend
to
towards stabiljzation of the security situation has communities.The Turkish Government will COntinUC
support fully the missionof the Secretary-General
witllin
developed and is beingmaintained.”/S/12342, Par@.
51.1
its presentframework,Weearnestlyhopethat the Special
Representativeof the Secretary-Generalat Nicosiawill be
77. one may ask what has happenedsince 15 Juneto
justify a request for an urgent meetingof the Council.The able to pave the way for substantiveprogressin the next
answer is “nothing”. The island continuesto enjoy un- round of talks.
precedellted calm and tranquillity. The only imPortant
Themeetirzgroseat 12.55p.m.
event that marked that period wasthe deathof ArchbIshop
9

HOW

TO OBTAIN

UNITED

NATIONS

PUBLICATIONS

United
Nations
publications
may be obtained
throughout
the world. Consult
your bookstore
Section, New York or Geneva.
COMMENT

SE PROCURER

LES

PUBLICATIONS

from bookstores
and distributors
or write to: United
Nations,
Sales

DES

NATIONS

UNIES

Les publications
des Nations
Unies sont en vente dans les librairies
et les agences
depositaims
du monde entier. Informer-vous
aupr& de votre libraire ou adressex-vow
R : Nations Unies. Section des ventes. New York ou Geneve.
ICAIC

IIOJIY’lRTh

HBAANMR

OPI’AHH

3AlWiM

OB%EAIIHEHHhIX

HAI&MH

----T.

COMO

CONSECUIR

PUBLICACIONES

DE

LAS

NACIONES

UNIDAS

Las publicaciones
de las Naciones Unidas
estin en venta en librerfas
y casas distribuidoras
en todas partes de1 mundo.
Consulte
a su librero o dirijase
a: Naciones
Unidas. Section de Ventas. Nueva York o Ginebra.
