S/2020/371

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
7 May 2020
Original: English

Letter dated 7 May 2020 from the President of the
Security Council addressed to the Secretary-General and
the Permanent Representatives of the members of the
Security Council
I have the honour to enclose herewith a copy of the briefing provided by
Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, as well as
the statements delivered by the representatives of Belgium, China, the Dominican
Republic, Estonia, France, Germany, Indonesia, the Niger, the Russian Federation,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, South Africa, Tunisia, the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, the United States of America and Viet Nam,
in connection with the video-teleconference convened on Tuesday, 5 May 2020. A
statement was also delivered by the representative of Libya.
In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter dated 2 April 2020
by the President of the Security Council addressed to Permanent Representatives
of Security Council members (S/2020/273), which was agreed in the light of the
extraordinary circumstances caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, this briefing and
these statements will be issued as a document of the Security Council.
(Signed) Sven Jürgenson
President of the Security Council

20-06489 (E) 080520 130520

*2006489*

S/2020/371

Annex I
Statement by Mrs. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International
Criminal Court
Given the exceptional circumstances in which we currently find ourselves
owing to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, I am pleased to appear
before the Security Council via video-teleconference to deliver my Office’s
nineteenth report on the situation in Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011).
I congratulate Estonia on assuming the presidency of the Security Council for
the month of May and express my gratitude to the Council for facilitating today’s
remote briefing.
Allow me at the outset also to express my condolences to Council members
and indeed all members of the United Nations family for the untimely deaths of their
respective citizens caused by this global pandemic and to convey our solidarity in
the fight to contain the spread of the virus.
Relatedly, let me also emphasize that, despite some inevitable limitations
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, my Office’s Libya team is forging ahead with
its judicial work and investigations, managing to remain active and productive in
these exceptional times. The Libya situation remains a priority for my Office, and I
take the opportunity afforded by this forum to announce that my team is working on
applications for new warrants of arrest.
The Security Council is well aware that, since my last report and briefing
(see S/PV.8660), serious violence related to the armed conflict in Libya, particularly
in and around Tripoli, has regrettably not abated. It is now over a year since the
offensive on Tripoli by the eastern-based militia known as the Libyan National Army,
headed by General Khalifa Haftar, started. My Office continues to carefully monitor
the unfolding events. Of particular concern to my Office are the high numbers of
civilian casualties, largely reported to be resulting from air strikes and shelling
operations. My team continues to gather and analyse information about incidents
that have occurred during the recent period of armed conflict that may constitute
crimes under the Rome Statute.
I reiterate that intentionally directing attacks against the civilian population or
against individual civilians not taking direct part in hostilities is a war crime under
the Rome Statute. Likewise, the Rome Statute prohibits the intentional directing of
attacks against hospitals and other buildings protected under international law, such
as those dedicated to religion or education, when they are not military objectives.
Even where military targets are involved, the principle of proportionality applies.
I have previously also brought to the Council’s attention the issue of arbitrary
detention and serious mistreatment of migrants and refugees attempting to transit
through Libya. These detentions are a grave and persistent problem, and my Office
continues to dedicate resources to investigating this matter. In particular, important
progress has been achieved through the adoption of a cooperation strategy by my
Office, which focuses on the exchange of evidence and information with relevant
States and organizations. This activity is conducted with a view to taking advantage
of synergies and supporting investigations and prosecutions in domestic jurisdictions.
These efforts, I am pleased to report, are producing helpful results.
It is worth stressing that the issue of arbitrary detention and serious
mistreatment of detainees affects not only migrants and refugees, but also thousands
of other people detained in prisons and detention centres across Libya. The latest
figures indicate that the detention of persons without due process is widespread.
Many people are being detained without lawful basis or denied their fundamental
2/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

procedural rights. Persons detained without the proper protection of the law are at
greater risk of serious forms of mistreatment, including murder, torture, rape and
other forms of sexual violence.
Information obtained by my Office indicates that such crimes are all too
common. Former detainees report brutal methods of torture. Detention-related
victims of rape and other forms of sexual violence include men, women and children.
Detainees have died from injuries sustained through torture and from the failure to
provide proper and timely medical care.
My Office is aware of allegations of serious violations in many prisons and
detention facilities throughout Libya. Of particular note are Al-Kuweifiya and
Gernada prisons located in eastern Libya. These allegations also extend to Mitiga
prison in Tripoli, which is controlled by an armed group known as the Special
Deterrence Force. This group officially falls under the authority of the Ministry of
Interior of the Government of National Accord.
Serious and urgent reforms in many Libyan prisons and detention facilities
appear necessary in order to prevent future crimes. Accountability for alleged
past violations is equally important. Primary responsibility for investigating and
prosecuting these alleged crimes rests with Libya. My Office continues to closely
follow up on these allegations.
Reports received by my Office also indicate increasing numbers of cases of
enforced disappearance, committed with close to total impunity. The crime against
humanity of enforced disappearance entails the refusal to provide information on the
fate or whereabouts of persons who have been arrested and detained by a State or
political organization, or with its authorization, support or acquiescence.
The crime of enforced disappearance inflicts severe suffering on the family
of the missing person. It can also spread terror within a society. When targeted
against prominent members of the community, such as political activists, human
rights defenders and journalists, it sends a strong message that voices of dissent will
not be tolerated. For these reasons, and others, the crime of enforced disappearance
has grave consequences for both individuals and communities.
Emblematic of this disturbing trend is the case of Ms. Siham Sergewa, a
member of the Libyan House of Representatives. Ms. Sergewa has been missing
since 17 July 2019, when armed men allegedly kidnapped her from her home in
Benghazi. Her fate and whereabouts remain unknown. Recent information obtained
by my Office may point to those responsible for Ms. Sergewa’s disappearance.
Investigations to verify this information are continuing.
Hate speech in Libya also appears to be on the rise. Derogatory and
dehumanizing language targeted at certain individuals or groups of people is now
pervasive in both traditional and social media. This is cause for concern. This type
of language generates both hatred and fear in the community and deepens divisions
within society. It sows the seeds for crimes against targeted groups and individuals
and foments conditions in which mass atrocity crimes can occur.
Under the Rome Statute, a person who instigates the commission of crimes by
others is also responsible for those crimes. Such instigation can include the making
of public statements that incite attacks on specific ethnic or social groups. Leaders
and prominent members of the community have a special responsibility to lead by
example and refrain from hate speech. Anyone who incites fear, hatred and division
in the community causes harm not only to those targeted, but also to society as
a whole.

20-064893/28

S/2020/371

I turn now to the case of Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. The second round of
litigation in relation to the admissibility of Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s case has now concluded.
On 9 March, the Appeals Chamber unanimously ruled that Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s case
is admissible before the International Criminal Court (ICC). Accordingly, the arrest
warrant for Mr. Al-Qadhafi remains enforceable. Libya continues to be under an
obligation to arrest and surrender Mr. Al-Qadhafi to the Court.
In its judgment, the Appeals Chamber found that the International Criminal
Court is barred from trying someone who has already been tried in a national
jurisdiction with respect to the same conduct only if the proceedings in the other
court are final. The Libyan domestic proceedings against Mr. Al-Qadhafi are not
final. Given that he was convicted in absentia, if Mr. Al-Qadhafi surrenders himself
or is arrested, Libyan law provides that he must be retried. If sentenced to death
for a second time, review by the Libyan Court of Cassation would be mandatory.
Furthermore, the Libyan amnesty law, Law No. 6 of 2015, does not apply to his case.
In the course of the admissibility proceedings, Mr. Al-Qadhafi stated that
he was released from detention on or about 12 April 2016. He has made no effort to
surrender himself. Mr. Al-Qadhafi is a wilful fugitive, actively evading justice both
in Libya and before the International Criminal Court. Neither case can progress, nor
can the victims of Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s alleged crimes receive justice, while he remains
at large.
The Appeals Chamber’s judgment provides valuable guidance on some
important points of international criminal law. Notably, Judge Ibáñez Carranza, in
her separate and concurring opinion, found that amnesties or similar measures that
prevent the investigation, prosecution and punishment of international core crimes
that amount to grave human rights violations and grave breaches of international
humanitarian law are incompatible with international law. Accordingly, Judge
Ibáñez Carranza found that such measures appear to be contrary to the object and
purpose of the Rome Statute, although this issue must ultimately be determined
on a case-by-case basis. This is a significant legal development with respect to the
obligation of States to investigate, prosecute and, if appropriate, punish perpetrators
of mass atrocities.
Allow me to also recall that the arrest warrants for Mr. Al-Tuhamy Khaled
and Mr. Mahmoud Al-Werfalli have yet to be executed. The Arab Republic of Egypt,
where Mr. Al-Tuhamy is believed to reside, has not arrested and surrendered him to
the Court. General Khalifa Haftar’s Libyan National Army has neither facilitated
the arrest and surrender of Mr. Al-Werfalli to the ICC nor ensured his genuine
investigation and prosecution in Libya. Mr. Al-Werfalli is reported to be under the
command of General Haftar.
While my Office continues to meet its obligations under the Rome Statute
by advancing its investigations despite resource constraints and a challenging
operational environment, the course of justice cannot make further progress without
the arrest and surrender of ICC suspects. This is a responsibility that rests neither
with my Office nor the Court, but with other actors in the Rome Statute system,
namely, States. As I have repeatedly stated before this organ, the Council and its
members also have a special responsibility to support and urge cooperation with the
Court pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), which referred this situation to my Office
back in 2011.
I would be remiss if at the same time I did not acknowledge the excellent
cooperation my Office continues to receive in support of our investigations from
numerous States and stakeholders, and in particular from the Government of
National Accord and the Libyan Prosecutor General’s office. Nonetheless, on the
4/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

most crucial cooperation matter — the arrest and surrender of ICC fugitives — the
Libyan people’s calls for justice remain unheeded. It is my sincere hope that this
state of impunity will not remain the status quo and that the victims of Rome Statute
crimes committed in Libya will obtain justice.
Justice for such crimes, including those I have elaborated upon today, is
crucial to the rule of law and stability in Libya. Where appropriate, accountability
for such crimes must extend to those in positions of authority.
I take this opportunity to once again stress that military commanders may be
held responsible for crimes committed by forces under their effective command and
control. Military commanders have a responsibility both to prevent or repress the
commission of crimes by their forces and to submit any such crimes for investigation
and prosecution.
In conclusion, international criminal justice is a necessary force of
accountability and deterrence; these are pillars upon which stability, progress
and prosperity can be built and thrive. I call on the Security Council, the States
parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court and the international
community more broadly to stand firmly by the ICC and its crucial mandate to end
impunity for the world’s gravest crimes.

20-064895/28

S/2020/371

Annex II
Statement by Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de Buytswerve,
Permanent Representative of Belgium to the United Nations
I would like to warmly welcome Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court (ICC), and thank her for her valuable briefing to the
Security Council.
Let me first reiterate Belgium’s unwavering support for the International
Criminal Court as an independent and impartial judicial institution. We express our
deep concern over recent threats made against Court officials and their families.
The ICC and its staff can count on my country to continue to uphold and defend the
principles and values enshrined in the Rome Statute and to preserve its integrity.
The continued escalation of violence in Libya resulting in multiple incidents
and attacks against the civilian population and infrastructure with total impunity
demonstrates why the ICC is needed more than ever to ensure accountability for the
most serious crimes of international concern. Justice must be brought to the victims
and is necessary also to prevent future violations of international humanitarian law.
Reports of such attacks are numerous and continue to be published frequently,
including reports of attacks against civilian homes, schools and hospitals in Tripoli.
Those attacks may constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute and should
therefore be investigated and prosecuted thoroughly by national jurisdictions or
the International Criminal Court. In that regard, Belgium welcomes the Office of
the Prosecutor’s significant progress in the ongoing investigations, including with
respect to current hostilities, and takes note that preparations are also moving ahead
for possible new applications for arrest warrants. We very much appreciate the close
attention given by the Prosecutor to certain crimes, such as the propagation of hate
speech, because of the significant impact it can have on the ground in an ongoing
armed conflict, and serious alleged crimes against the most vulnerable categories of
victims, including children, migrants and refugees.
Despite those efforts by the International Criminal Court, we all know that the
Court cannot be effective without the cooperation of all stakeholders. That is why
the Security Council decided in paragraph 5 of resolution 1970 (2011) to urge
“all States and concerned regional and other international organizations to
cooperate fully with the Court and the Prosecutor”.
Yet, the lack of sufficient cooperation is obvious. We are pleased with the
continued engagement of the competent authorities of Libya, the Government of
National Accord and some States and organizations. However, we are deeply
concerned over the information in the report that other relevant parties still fail to
cooperate significantly with the Office of the Prosecutor. That is true especially of
the execution of arrest warrants for Court fugitives by Egypt and General Haftar’s
Libyan National Army, but also of any request for assistance made by the Prosecutor.
Accordingly, my delegation once again urges all the competent authorities to facilitate
the immediate arrest of the three suspects and to surrender them to the Court. We
also ask the Security Council to closely follow up on this and to take any appropriate
measure in that respect.
Belgium still believes that the only long-term solution for Libya is political.
In that context, justice for the victims and their loved ones will most certainly be
an essential element, and the Council cannot remain silent in the face of persistent
impunity in relation to the most serious crimes that continue to be perpetrated
in Libya.
6/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex III
Statement by Yao Shaojun, Acting Deputy Permanent
Representative of China to the United Nations
I thank Ms. Bensouda for her briefing and welcome Ambassador Elsonni to
this meeting.
The conflict in Libya has been raging for many years, wreaking havoc on the
country and its neighbours, bringing enormous suffering to the Libyan people and
threatening international peace and security. The situation changes rapidly. We note
the recent announcements by relevant parties and reaffirm that there is no military
solution. China has always believed that the issue of Libya must be resolved through
a political process. We welcome any efforts conducive to a lasting ceasefire and a
response to the Secretary-General’s appeal for a global ceasefire, especially during
the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and Ramadan. China calls upon all
parties to the conflict to put the interests of the country and the people first and to
reach a permanent ceasefire as soon as possible. Under the current circumstances, the
people of Libya deserve a peaceful environment to fight the COVID-19 pandemic.
China supports a Libyan-owned, Libyan-led political settlement process
and encourages the United Nations and such regional organizations as the African
Union and the League of Arab States to continue their mediation efforts and create
synergies. We call on all Member States to strictly implement the arms embargo.
While respecting Libya’s independence, unity, sovereignty and territorial integrity,
the international community should continue to provide assistance to Libya so that
the country may achieve peace, stability and development as soon as possible.
With regard to the International Criminal Court, China’s position
remains unchanged.

20-064897/28

S/2020/371

Annex IV
Statement by Mr. José Singer Weisinger, Special Envoy to the
Security Council of the Dominican Republic
I thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report on the pending cases and the
updates on the current situation in Libya.
The Dominican Republic would like to express its condolences to all the
victims and their families of the recent violence in Libya committed during the
Libyan National Army’s offensive last month. We strongly reiterate the importance
of protecting civilians, civilian infrastructure, historical monuments and religious
buildings. Health systems around the world are collapsing due to the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic, yet hospitals in Libya are still being hit by
indiscriminate attacks. That is intolerable.
Those actions reveal the importance of strengthening the cooperation
between States and the International Criminal Court (ICC). Criminals must know
that their terrible actions have international legal consequences. We ought to
highlight the deterrent effect of that international tribunal, especially at this time
when multilateralism is facing grave challenges. The fight against impunity must
never stop.
The Dominican Republic applauds the efforts of the ICC on Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s
appeal case and takes this opportunity to reiterate its call on all Member States
to collaborate with the ICC on all pending arrest warrants. Bilateral approaches
by members of the Council are essential to moving forward in that regard, as is
cooperation with the Libyan authorities, States parties, other Member States and
other relevant entities to assist the Office of the Prosecutor in fulfilling its mandate.
We deeply regret that Ms. Sergewa remains missing after being abducted
by armed men. The Dominican Republic sees with great disappointment the
escalation in disappearances of journalists, civil society activists, lawyers and State
officials. We welcome the progress in the investigation of migrant-related crimes.
Those responsible for the atrocious acts against migrants or others in Libya must
be prosecuted and held accountable, whether by their national jurisdiction or by
the ICC.
The Dominican Republic echoes the call of Secretary-General António
Guterres for a global ceasefire. Regardless of ideological affiliation, the people of
Libya must stop fighting each other and start fighting their common enemy, namely,
the COVID-19 pandemic.
To conclude, the Dominican Republic reiterates its full support to the ICC,
as part of the rules-based international order, in its efforts to guarantee compliance
with international law.

8/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex V
Statement by Mr. Sven Jürgenson, Permanent Representative of
Estonia to the United Nations
I thank the Prosecutor for her report and today’s informative briefing.
At the outset, I would like to affirm Estonia’s strong support for the
International Criminal Court (ICC) as an independent and impartial judicial
institution and an important pillar of the rules-based international order. We
welcome the update provided by the Prosecutor on the status of current cases and the
progress achieved in the Libya investigations during the previous reporting period.
We recognize the challenges arising from the security situation and the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic that affect the Court’s work in Libya.
Regarding developments on the ground, Estonia is worried about the 45-per
cent rise in civilian casualties caused by the escalation in violence in the first quarter
of 2020. We condemn the indiscriminate use of shelling and air strikes, causing
death and injury among civilians, and the incidences of arbitrary detention, enforced
disappearance, torture and extrajudicial killings. We are further concerned about
reports of crimes against migrants and refugees in Libya. We want to recall that
attacks against civilians and civilian infrastructure may constitute a war crime under
the Rome Statute. Estonia calls on parties to the conflict to respect international
humanitarian law and international human rights law.
Like others, Estonia is highly concerned that there have not been any executions
of ICC arrest warrants in the Libya case, meaning that the three fugitives remain at
large. We recall that these three individuals are accused of the grave international
crimes of murder, torture and inhuman and degrading treatment. Executing the arrest
warrants is necessary to provide justice for the victims. Ending impunity is essential
for long-term peace. In that regard, we take note of the fact that preparations are
moving ahead for possible new applications for arrest warrants.
International criminal justice continues to rely on a collective effort. We
welcome the assistance provided to the Office of the Prosecutor by States, international
and regional organizations, civil society organizations, the Libyan authorities and
the United Nations Support Mission in Libya. But ultimately, it is we, States, that
have to show up and fulfil the clear obligation arising from resolution 1970 (2011) to
cooperate with the Court. Therefore, Estonia urges all States, including States that
are not party to the Rome Statute, to fully cooperate with the ICC in order to end
impunity and establish justice for the victims in Libya, and to demonstrate respect
for the rule of law. Finally, let me assure the Prosecutor of Estonia’s full support for
the work of the ICC in pursuing accountability in Libya.

20-064899/28

S/2020/371

Annex VI
Statement by Ms. Sheraz Gasri, Legal Adviser of the Permanent
Mission of France to the United Nations
I, too, want to thank Prosecutor Bensouda for her report and her presentation.
It is a pleasure to see her, even virtually.
France fully supports the International Criminal Court (ICC), which must be
able to act independently and impartially within the framework of the Rome Statute.
The Prosecutor and her team must be able to exercise their prerogatives without
obstruction or impediment.
Justice for victims of mass atrocities is one of the key factors to resolving the
conflict in Libya. That is why the Security Council referred the Libyan situation to
the ICC in 2011 through resolution 1970 (2011).
Unfortunately, violations of human rights and international humanitarian and
refugee law are widespread. Attacks against the civilian population and medical
infrastructure may constitute war crimes under the Rome Statute, as the Prosecutor
rightly recalled. Trafficking in persons, migrant smuggling, arbitrary detention,
mistreatment of detainees, enforced disappearance, torture and sexual violence are
unacceptable. There can be no doubt that anyone who incites or commits such crimes
in Libya today is liable to prosecution, whether by the Libyan justice system or by
the ICC.
In that regard, France welcomes the rigorous approach adopted by the Office
of the Prosecutor based on the principles of cooperation and complementarity with
domestic courts. We take note that the Appeals Chamber confirmed the admissibility
of the case against Mr. Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi. We commend the cooperation
between the Office of the Prosecutor and the highest level of the Government of
National Accord, including with regard to the execution of the requests for assistance.
However, like others, we are deeply concerned by the obstacles the Office still faces
in the execution of the arrest warrants for three fugitives. Full cooperation from
all stakeholders is required, first and foremost from the Libyan parties. France
will continue to cooperate with the International Criminal Court and calls on all
States, whether parties to the Rome Statute or not, to do the same. Moreover, France
welcomes the assistance provided to the Office by the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya. Finally, we reiterate that the most serious crimes committed in
Libya since 2011, and which continue to be committed today, must all be investigated
and prosecuted, including the crimes committed by extremist and terrorist groups
and crimes against refugees and migrants.
Only a political solution and the restoration of the rule of law can put an end
to the Libyan crisis and avert further deterioration on the ground. The Libyan parties
must immediately and sustainably cease the hostilities and engage in the United
Nations-led dialogue. In that regard, we welcome the recent proposal by the Libyan
National Army to declare a truce for the month of Ramadan. We also call on the
Government of National Accord to make the same commitment. Both parties must
endorse and sign the draft ceasefire agreement agreed by the 5+5 Joint Military
Commission on 23 February. In that context, the swift nomination of a new Special
Representative is essential.

10/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex VII
Statement by Mr. Jürgen Schulz, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany to the United Nations
The International Criminal Court (ICC) is a crucial pillar of a strong rulesbased international order. We fully support the Court, its impartial work and the
values enshrined in the Rome Statute. In 2011, the Council referred the situation in
Libya to the ICC so as to ensure accountability for the most serious crimes. Nine
years later, the security and human rights situation in Libya remains extremely
worrisome. We commend the Prosecutor for her unwavering commitment to justice
for the victims of atrocities in Libya.
We must not let impunity reign. Accountability is also essential for achieving
a lasting, peaceful solution to the crisis in Libya. We could not agree more with Ms.
Bensouda’s conclusion in her nineteenth report that:
“[i]t is regrettable that the arrest warrants issued by the Court have still not
been executed. The resulting impunity is an affront to the victims and their
loved ones, as it undermines any hope of achieving a lasting peaceful solution
to the crisis in Libya, of which justice is an essential element.”
We therefore encourage the prosecutor and the ICC to continue the
investigations with regard to Libya and urge Member States to execute the arrest
warrants. Full cooperation and assistance from Member States remains essential for
the Office of the Prosecutor to fulfil its mandate and for the Court to play the role
assigned to it by the international community to end impunity for the most serious
crimes. It is the Council’s responsibility to ensure that its referrals are followed up
and implemented. In that context, it is encouraging to hear from the Prosecutor that
her Office is working on applications for new arrest warrants.
We welcome Libya’s commitment to justice and call for it to further strengthen
its cooperation with the Court. The competent authorities are unable to prosecute the
most serious crimes under international law, so until they are, the ICC must step in
to ensure accountability.
As the fighting in Libya continues, the human cost continues to rise. The
report by the Office of the Prosecutor reminds us of some of the numbers the fighting
entails. Reports indicate that, since the offensive started in April 2019, more than
350 civilians have been killed, more than 300 have been injured and 140,000 have
been displaced. The United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) reports
that there were 57 attacks on health-care facilities in 2019, causing the death of 13
health-care workers.
Attacks on civilians constitute a breach of international humanitarian law.
Accountability for crimes under the Rome Statute and full respect for international
law are prerequisites for sustainable peace in Libya. It is the duty of the international
community to ensure that there will be consequences for the perpetrators. The
absence of accountability encourages the repetition of crimes. We are also highly
concerned about the systematic use of sexual violence, including against refugees
and migrants in Libya, as reported by the Prosecutor. Let me therefore again recall
the sanctions listing criteria introduced by the Security Council for sexual- and
gender-based violence, which clearly recognize the devastating effects of such
heinous crimes on peace and reconciliation in Libya.
We note that the armed forces associated with General Haftar are responsible
for the vast majority of attacks on civilians — more than 80 per cent, according to
a recent UNSMIL report. We also recall from earlier briefings by UNSMIL that the
vast majority of attacks on health-care facilities can be traced back to the Libyan
20-0648911/28

S/2020/371

National Army (LNA). The LNA’s continued blatant disregard for civilian lives calls
for a response from the ICC, and we also commend the ICC’s work in that regard.
Before concluding, let me state that full, continued and steadfast support for
the ICC and the efforts of the Prosecutor in establishing accountability so as to
enforce the urgently needed respect for the rule of law remains absolutely essential.
We call on the members of the Security Council, and indeed on all United Nations
Member States, to support the Court and its efforts to end impunity and ensure
accountability. Let me also again call on those States that have not yet joined the
Rome Statute to consider doing so.

12/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex VIII
Statement by Mr. Muhsin Syihab, Deputy Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Indonesia to the United Nations
Indonesia would like to thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the
International Criminal Court, for her briefing. We have taken note of the Prosecutor’s
nineteenth report to the Security Council pursuant to its resolution 1970 (2011),
on Libya.
More than a year has passed since the new conflict in Libya started, and the
situation on the ground remains grim. Allow me to focus on the following points.
First, Indonesia calls for the immediate cessation of hostilities in Libya. We
should continue the path of political dialogue, since there will never be a military
solution in Libya. We join the call by the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) for all parties to immediately halt all military operations and resume the
5+5 Joint Military Commission talks during the month of Ramadhan, also in line
with the call of the Secretary-General for a global ceasefire.
Secondly, Indonesia calls for the expansion of humanitarian corridors during
the month of Ramadhan and welcomes the increased efforts made by the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees through a series of extra
emergency distributions in Tripoli.
Nevertheless, we remain concerned about the fact that, in the first quarter of
2020, the number of civilian casualties in Libya increased by 45 per cent as compared
to the last quarter of last year, amounting to at least 131 civilian casualties. During
the same period, attacks on schools and health-care facilities persisted. Attacks
against health facilities will severely impact Libya’s ability to fight the coronavirus
disease pandemic. We call on all parties to fully respect international humanitarian
law and to take measures to protect all civilians.
That leads me to my last point. Indonesia is committed to pursuing justice in
Libya as a part of the wider efforts to achieve long-lasting and sustainable peace in
the country. Indeed, peace cannot be complete without justice, and justice cannot
prosper in the absence of peace. The rule of law must be respected.
To that end, we further extend our support to the work currently being done by
UNSMIL. I fully share the view that it is Libya’s obligation to ensure accountability
for crimes committed on its territory. We need to empower the Libyan judicial
authorities to enable them to exercise their full sovereignty.
That is why the referral of the situation in Libya to the International Criminal
Court should not disarm the Libyan competent authorities from invoking their
jurisdiction to investigate gross violations of human rights and bring the perpetrators
to justice.
For Indonesia, it is clear that the priority at hand is to save lives. Actions by the
international community must be made through careful decisions to avoid provoking
more violence, resulting in more loss of lives and jeopardizing the quest for peace.

20-0648913/28

S/2020/371

Annex IX
Statement by Mr. Abdou Abarry, Permanent Representative of the
Niger to the United Nations
Allow me first of all to welcome the holding of this briefing devoted to the
consideration of the nineteenth biannual report on the activities of the International
Criminal Court (ICC) in Libya and to congratulate Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor
of the Court, for her accurate and edifying presentation. The Niger would like to
assure her of its full support and to urge all States, including those that are not parties
to the Rome Statute, to cooperate fully with the ICC in order to combat impunity.
My country therefore deplores the intensification of serious human rights
violations because of the deterioration of the security situation in the country, which
must continue to draw the attention of the Security Council and the ICC. Indeed, only
in a stable security environment will there be more effective cooperation between
Libya and the ICC.
We note with regret that arrest warrants for Libyan nationals have not been
executed to date, owing in particular to the current security context. We therefore
call on the Libyan authorities, the States parties to the Rome Statute and regional and
international organizations to comply with resolution 1970 (2011) by cooperating
fully with the ICC in order to bring the alleged perpetrators of crimes before the
competent international courts.
My delegation holds the belief that the fight against impunity must be an
integral part of the national reconciliation process in order to create the conditions
for lasting peace in Libya.
According to the reports referred to by the Prosecutor of the Court, migrants
and refugees in Libya continue regularly to be victims of arbitrary detention,
assassinations, enforced disappearances, torture, sexual and gender-based violence,
kidnapping for ransom, extortion and forced labour. We therefore call on the
competent Libyan authorities and the Office of the Prosecutor to continue to conduct
investigations to establish responsibility for ensuring justice for the victims.
The security situation in Libya has deteriorated considerably due to the
continued fighting between the forces of General Khalifa Haftar and those of the
Government of National Accord, led by Prime Minister Faiez Serraj, despite the
current coronavirus disease pandemic.
My delegation is concerned about reports of attacks that have resulted in the
loss of civilian lives in Libya and the destruction of civilian infrastructure.
We reiterate our call for compliance with the arms embargo. The arms that
are pouring into Libya not only contribute to prolonging the Libyan conflict but also
fuel other sources of insecurity, as is the case in the Sahel and the Lake Chad basin.
My delegation would like to join in welcoming the appointment of Ms.
Stephanie Turco Williams as Acting Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNMIL), and
to commend Mr. Ghassan Salamé for the many actions undertaken and dedicated
effort during his tenure. We commend the excellent work done by UNSMIL, which
is providing valuable assistance to the ICC investigations.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reiterate its congratulations
and support for Prosecutor Bensouda and her Office for their dedication to the
fight against impunity, the establishment of the rule of law and the deterrence of
new crimes.
14/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

We would also like also to call on the United Nations — particularly on the
Security Council — the African Union and other stakeholders to join their efforts
to bring about a swift end to the clashes so that peace can be restored in Libya and
in the Sahel.

20-0648915/28

S/2020/371

Annex X
Statement by Mr. Gennady Kuzmin, Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Russian Federation to the United Nations
We took note of the briefing by the Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), Ms. Bensouda, as well as her nineteenth report on the progress in the
investigation into the situation in Libya.
We are concerned that the situation in Libya remains tense and efforts to
stabilize it have stalled. We are convinced that a military solution is not an option
for Libya. But there is no easy way to settle the conflict, which has already gone on
for nine years. It is rooted in the events of 2011, when the Security Council resolution
was grossly distorted and violated, leading to the destruction of Libyan statehood
and the continued suffering of civilian population.
It is our firm conviction that the way forward is returning to impartial diplomatic
work, cooperation and mutual support to help parties engage in negotiations. In this
regard, we would like to recall that it must be a Libyan-owned dialogue, and no
decisions should be imposed from outside. In our work, we should be guided by the
principles of respect for Libya’s sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity.
It is up to the Libyans to determine the future of their country.
At the same time, it is impossible to overestimate the importance of the United
Nations central role in the settlement in this country. We pay tribute to Ghassan
Salamé and call on the Secretary-General to appoint his new Special Representative
as soon as possible for the sake of the Libyan peace process.
We would also like to take this opportunity to call on all parties to the conflict
in Libya for a cessation of hostilities in order to enable joint approaches to the
coronavirus disease pandemic and respect for international humanitarian law.
Turning back to the Prosecutor’s report, a major question remains: what is the
role of the ICC in helping restore peace in Libya and bringing perpetrators of crimes
to justice? The ICC has been handling the situation for nine years. We recall that the
activity of the Prosecutor was once very vigorous, during the short period of time
in 2011 before the foreign invasion of Libya. Once Mr. Al-Qadhafi was ousted, the
ICC identified a couple of fugitives and mostly lost interest in the situation. If one
starts to evaluate the situation in Libya on the basis of the ICC Prosecutor’s reports,
one may discover that a number of parties to the armed conflict go unnoticed and
apparently excused. The coalition’s bombing and destruction are still invisible to the
Prosecutor. Even Da’esh fighters, whose destructive role in Libya was recognized by
the Council, somehow fall outside the ICC scope of engagement.
The activities of the ICC in Libya become increasingly irrelevant. We are
convinced that the international community and the Security Council should
concentrate their efforts on helping restore peace in Libya. When peace is firmly
established, Libyans can decide for themselves how to address the issue of justice.

16/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex XI
Statement by Ms. Inga Rhonda King, Permanent Representative
of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the United Nations
My delegation expresses its gratitude to Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court (ICC), for her presentation on the nineteenth report
to the Security Council pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011), as well as the work of her
Office vis-à-vis the situation in Libya.
In 2002, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines ratified the Rome Statute of the
ICC. Our position then, as it is now, was premised on the conviction that the ICC
had a fundamental role to play in our collective quest for peace and justice. As we
uphold the integrity of the ICC and the principles of international law, we stress
the importance of investigating genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity,
ending impunity for perpetrators of these atrocities, and bringing justice to
the victims.
The situation in Libya remains extremely worrisome and risks being further
exacerbated by recent developments, including the coronavirus disease pandemic.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines renews its call for all warring parties to commit to
a ceasefire and engage in an inter-Libyan dialogue to resolve the conflict peacefully.
The escalation of violence — in particular the indiscriminate attacks against
civilians and civilian infrastructure — only aggravate the suffering of the Libyan
people, especially the most vulnerable groups. We categorically condemn these acts
of violence and demand the safety and protection of the civilian population in Libya.
We also reiterate the importance of consolidating the United Nations threepoint plan and the work of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya, and
encourage all influential external actors to assist in this regard.
The difficulties faced in Libya today, as underscored in the ICC’s report,
are made evident by the challenges encountered by the Office of the Prosecutor in
effectively executing its mandate. Saint Vincent and the Grenadines emphasizes the
importance of cooperation and the principle of complementarity of the Rome Statute,
which are essential for the Court to assume its functions. Accordingly, we call on all
States to respect their treaty obligations, cooperate with the ICC and adhere to the
purposes and principles of the Charter of the United Nations. We also respectfully
encourage those States not yet having done so to ratify the Rome Statute. The ICC
remains at the centre of our international criminal justice system and is a primary
mechanism to provide restitution to the victims and families of mass-atrocity crimes.
In conclusion, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines stands in solidarity with the
people of Libya and reiterates its commitment and support to the ICC, which remains
a bastion of hope and justice that is critical for building and sustaining peace.

20-0648917/28

S/2020/371

Annex XII
Statement by Mr. Jerry Matjila, Permanent Representative of
South Africa to the United Nations
South Africa expresses its appreciation to the Prosecutor, Ms. Fatou Bensouda,
for the briefing she provided today on the situation in Libya.
South Africa continues to support the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011), which, apart from imposing a vital arms embargo, also mandates the
International Criminal Court (ICC) to investigate war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in the context of Libya since 15 February 2011.
We note with concern that the non-execution of arrest warrants for ICC
fugitives remains the greatest obstacle faced by the Prosecutor. Cooperation between
the Security Council and States parties to the Rome Statute is vital to advancing those
cases and will send a message to the people of Libya and to the world underscoring
the important role of international cooperation. South Africa ardently supports
strengthening complementarity through the development of domestic institutions to
investigate and prosecute the most serious crimes.
South Africa commends the Prosecutor’s efforts to promote the investigation
and prosecution of international crimes committed in Libya in its domestic
jurisdiction where viable and appropriate. South Africa believes that cooperation
with the ICC remains imperative, and it is encouraged by the continued engagement
of the Libyan authorities and their commitment at the highest level to cooperating
with the Office of the Prosecutor. We further welcome the assistance provided to the
Prosecutor’s Office by international and regional organizations, civil-society groups
and private individuals.
South Africa believes that progress in the Libyan peace process is vital in
order to address the concerns that necessitated the implementation of resolution 1970
(2011), of which the ICC process is part. We remain concerned over the ongoing
fighting in Libya, including the resultant displacement of people, indiscriminate
attacks that cause damage to civilian property and infrastructure, and civilian deaths
and injuries, in particular the deaths of and injuries to children.
We have noted with deep concern reports on the escalation of abductions and
enforced disappearances of journalists, civil-society activists, lawyers, migrants
and State officials by armed groups during this coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
outbreak, which have a negative effect in terms of the spread of the virus to those
affected. South Africa is also concerned about reports of migrants being subjected
to arbitrary detention, unlawful killing, enforced disappearance, torture, sexual and
gender-based violence, abduction for ransom, extortion and forced labour.
We are concerned about the prevailing environment and challenges faced by
the people of Libya and the Office of the Prosecutor as a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, which will require a pragmatic and condition-based approach for the
expeditious finalization of investigations and the prosecution of international crimes
committed in Libya.
South Africa welcomes the efforts undertaken to implement strategic goal 6
of the Office of the Prosecutor’s Strategic Plan for 2019-2021 of actively engaging
with States and the relevant organizations to exchange evidence and information,
which supports national authorities in investigating and prosecuting migrant-related
crimes in their respective jurisdictions.
South Africa calls on all parties and stakeholders to recommit to all efforts to
build durable peace in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue as the only
18/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

viable means of achieving sustainable peace in the country. We also acknowledge
and emphasize the role of the Security Council in promoting political dialogue and
supporting all efforts to bring about a peaceful settlement of the conflict.

20-0648919/28

S/2020/371

Annex XIII
Statement by Mr. Kais Kabtani, Permanent Representative of
Tunisia to the United Nations
I thank Ms. Fatou Bensouda, Prosecutor of the International Criminal
Court (ICC), for her nineteenth report and her informative briefing today. I also
acknowledge the presence of the Permanent Representative of Libya and welcome
him to the Council.
Let me begin by expressing Tunisia’s unwavering commitment to the Rome
Statute and voicing our support for the ICC in the fight against impunity. The advent
of the only permanent international criminal court has been a major achievement
in the development of the international criminal justice architecture. Supporting
its independent and impartial work is essential to bring to account individuals
responsible for the worst crimes known to humankind and so to help prevent the
commission of such crimes in future.
Nearly a decade after the Council referred the Libyan situation to the ICC’s
Prosecutor, prospects for justice and lasting peace in Libya remain regrettably
elusive. Tunisia remains gravely concerned about the endemic cycle of violence,
atrocities and impunity in Libya, which is causing unspeakable suffering for the
brotherly Libyan people.
The report of the ICC Prosecutor lists a wide-ranging spectrum of crimes
allegedly perpetrated in Libya, including indiscriminate attacks on civilians,
unlawful killing, torture, abduction, enforced disappearance, unlawful detention
and other serious human rights abuses, including against migrants and refugees.
Tunisia reiterates its call on all parties to respect the key international
humanitarian law principles of distinction, proportionality and precaution and to
take constant care to protect civilians and civilian infrastructure during military
operations. A sustained period of calm leading to a permanent ceasefire in Libya
cannot be overemphasized.
Tunisia appreciates the ongoing mandated efforts of the ICC’s Prosecutor
and her Office in Libya, pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) and the Rome Statute,
in deterring would-be perpetrators, thus contributing to the prevention of future
atrocities.
While being mindful of the apparent lack of enforcement of ICC arrest
warrants and the impact of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) on its fieldwork,
Tunisia appreciates the progress that the Office of the Prosecutor has made towards
bringing additional submissions before the ICC concerning migrant-related crimes,
based on a flexible and evidence-based process.
The drafters of the Rome Statute mandated the ICC to be complementary of
States, acting as a last resort — giving the primary responsibility to national courts
where they are willing and able to genuinely prosecute international crimes.
Tunisia supports the ICC Prosecutor’s efforts to actively encourage Libyanled prosecutions of crimes within the ICC’s jurisdiction, in accordance with the
complementarity scheme and taking into consideration the humbling realities of
Libya’s transition.
We welcome Libya’s commitment to justice and the continued engagement
of its competent authorities with the ICC as set out in the ICC Prosecutor’s report,
including on assistance requests. It is essential that the international community
provide all assistance and support needed for empowering Libya’s judicial system
so as to enable genuine and consistent national proceedings according to the
20/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

highest standards, thus further strengthening the principles of cooperation and
complementarity with the Court.
In this delicate context, the most pressing priority in Libya remains a
commitment by the Libyan parties to a permanent ceasefire, creating conditions
conducive to the political process and the fight against the COVID-19 pandemic.
Tunisia reiterates its call for a comprehensive and lasting political solution
based on an intra-Libyan dialogue, free of any foreign intervention, that would
preserve Libya’s territorial integrity and sovereignty and spare its people the effects
of conflict and chaos.
In closing, let me say that Tunisia believes that in transitional contexts,
peace and accountability must be seen as mutually reinforcing in a way that uses
appropriate mechanisms and ultimately promotes conflict transformation, victim
healing and social harmony.

20-0648921/28

S/2020/371

Annex XIV
Statement by Mrs. Susan Dickson, Minister Counsellor and Legal
Adviser of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland to the United Nations
It is a pleasure to see the Prosecutor, Ms. Bensouda, with us today, albeit
in a slightly different format from what we are used to. I would like to thank the
Prosecutor for briefing us today on her nineteenth report to the Security Council on
the situation in Libya.
The United Kingdom strongly supports the work of the International Criminal
Court (ICC) to tackle impunity and hold accountable those responsible for the most
serious crimes in Libya. The Court’s work is of vital importance, especially given
the continued, flagrant breaches of international humanitarian law, including the
ongoing targeting of civilian infrastructure and violations and abuses of international
human rights law. It is particularly appalling, at a time when countries are facing
an unprecedented shared threat from the coronavirus disease (COVID-19), that
health-care facilities are among the civilian infrastructure that is apparently being
deliberately targeted. Civilians, including migrants and refugees, are paying an
unacceptable price with their lives during this conflict.
The United Kingdom is clear in its view that civilians should be protected
in armed conflict and that when they are targeted — including through sexual and
gender-based violence — those responsible for violations of the law should be held
accountable. The United Kingdom will continue to support the ICC in the crucial role
it has to play in making this happen. We welcome the progress that the Prosecutor is
making in her investigations, including her work on new warrants.
The United Kingdom is grateful for the Prosecutor’s updates on the cases
against Mr. Al-Qadhafi, Mr. Al-Werfalli and Mr. Al-Tuhamy. We note the rejection
of Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s appeal by the ICC Appeals Chamber, when it upheld the decision
of the Pre-Trial Chamber and dismissed Mr. Al-Qadhafi’s admissibility challenge.
We note with particular concern reports of Mr. Al-Werfalli’s continued involvement
in serious crime three years after the first arrest warrant was issued for him.
We continue to support the Prosecutor’s call for all relevant States, including
States parties to the Rome Statute and non-party States, to cooperate with the ICC in
the arrest and surrender of warranted individuals.
We note the reports of escalating violence in and around Tripoli leading to
the death, injury and displacement of significant numbers of civilians. Reports of
shelling and airstrikes that may constitute a violation of international humanitarian
law are especially worrying. It is not acceptable that civilians, including migrants
and refugees, remain at risk; that is why it is imperative that all parties cease fighting.
The United Kingdom notes the references in the Prosecutor’s report once
again to indiscriminate abductions, arbitrary detentions and extrajudicial killings;
these are unacceptable. We are particularly concerned at the fact that member of the
House of Representatives Siham Sergewa remains missing, and we are pleased that
the ICC’s investigations continue.
It is clear that the ongoing conflict is having an unacceptable impact on the
humanitarian and human rights situation in Libya. We continue to urge the Libyan
parties to cease fighting and to engage in constructive dialogue. An inclusive political
solution, as set out by the Berlin Conference, offers the best hope for the stability
and future prosperity that the Libyan people need and deserve. We continue to call

22/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

on all parties to the conflict to comply with their obligations under international law,
including international humanitarian law.
Support for international criminal justice remains central to the United
Kingdom’s foreign policy. We continue strongly to support the mission of the ICC,
including getting justice for victims, and are committed to continuing to provide our
full support to the Prosecutor and her team in their ongoing investigations in Libya.

20-0648923/28

S/2020/371

Annex XV
Statement by Mr. Mark Simonoff, Minister Counsellor of the
United States of America to the United Nations
It is shameful that several of the most notorious perpetrators of crimes against
the Libyan people this past decade continue to enjoy impunity. Saif Al-Islam AlQadhafi, Mahmoud Al-Werfalli, Al-Tuhamy Mohamed Khaled and Abdullah AlSenussi should face justice for their alleged crimes. We call on those who harbour
Saif Al-Islam Al-Qadhafi and Mahmoud Al-Werfalli to deliver them to the Libyan
authorities immediately. We also call on those who shelter Al-Tuhamy Mohamed
Khaled, the former head of Libya’s notorious Internal Security Agency, to end their
protection of this perpetrator. We are monitoring the status of the Supreme Court of
Libya’s case against Abdullah Al-Senussi.
Accountability for the architects of Libya’s darkest days would bring justice
to the victims of these atrocities and their families and help ensure that they are not
forgotten. It would also deliver a powerful deterrent message to potential future
abusers and to those involved in the current conflict who may be guilty of atrocities.
The United States Government continues to receive other reports of human rights
abuses in Libya occurring today. Accounts include arbitrary killings, forced
disappearances, unlawful detention, torture, human trafficking and sexual violence.
The conflict in Libya is destabilizing the region and has displaced many, including
migrants and refugees.
Libyan militia groups and security forces on all sides, as well as their
international backers, stand accused of perpetrating those human rights abuses. We
are deeply alarmed and continue to call for de-escalation and a ceasefire to end those
abuses and permit Libyans to address the threat posed by the coronavirus disease
pandemic. Libya’s political and security instability has created an environment
conducive to the commission of human rights abuses. In an effort to address that
environment, the United States continues to oppose foreign military intervention
in Libya and to support a rapid return to a political process, and we thank Acting
Special Representative Stephanie Williams and her team for their ongoing efforts to
secure a negotiated political solution to the crisis.
The United States has historically been, and will continue to be, a strong
supporter of meaningful accountability and justice for victims of atrocities through
appropriate mechanisms. Perpetrators of atrocity crimes must face justice, but we
must also be careful to use the right tools for each situation.
I must reiterate our long-standing and principled objection to any assertion of
International Criminal Court (ICC) jurisdiction over nationals of States that are not
party to the Rome Statute, absent a Security Council referral or the consent of such
States. Our concerns regarding the ICC and the situation in Libya are well known.
Our position on the ICC in no way diminishes the United States’ commitment to
supporting accountability for atrocity crimes, violations of international humanitarian
law and gross violations of human rights.

24/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

Annex XVI
Statement by Mr. Pham Hai Anh, Deputy Permanent
Representative of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam to the
United Nations
We continue to pay close attention to the situation in Libya. We are concerned
that despite the agreement on the humanitarian truce in March, the security situation
in Libya has worsened.
Attacks on civilians continued to take place, especially targeted ones and
those on schools and health-care facilities, as mentioned in the first-quarter report
of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) on civilian casualties.
The ongoing hostilities will only exacerbate the sufferings of the Libyan people,
especially in the context of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
Viet Nam is further concerned about the recent lack of progress towards a
peaceful political solution in Libya. The best hope for long-term peace and stability
in Libya is to achieve a political, peaceful and long-term solution on the basis of
respect for Libya’s independence and sovereignty and through an inclusive Libyanled and -owned process in line with the three tracks — political, military and
economic — set out in the resolution 2510 (2020) on the Berlin Conference on Libya.
In this difficult time of COVID-19, we reiterate the importance of dialogue
over warfare and of the implementation of the arms embargo. The role of the United
Nations, UNSMIL, regional organizations and the neighbouring countries of Libya
will continue to be crucial to promoting peace in Libya. In that connection, Viet
Nam wishes to stress the following.
First, in the spirit of the month of Ramadan, the relevant parties in Libya
should immediately stop the ongoing hostilities, uphold their commitment to the
truce, fully respect international humanitarian law, stop targeting civilians and
civilian objects, allow unhindered humanitarian access to assist those in need and
combat the COVID-19 pandemic.
Secondly, peace talks under the political, security and economic tracks should
be resumed as soon as possible. All support should continue, including through
remote means if necessary. A new Special Representative of the Secretary-General
for Libya should be appointed as soon as possible to effectively assist that process.
Thirdly, Viet Nam reiterates its consistent position that the State has the
primary responsibility for the implementation of international humanitarian law and
the prevention and suppression of serious criminal acts such as war crimes, crimes
against humanity and the crime of aggression. The establishment of accountability
for serious criminal acts and violations of international humanitarian law shall be
conducted in accordance with the fundamental principles of international law on the
independence and sovereignty of States.
In conclusion, Viet Nam would like to reaffirm our strong support for the
pursuit of peace, stability, development and the national unity of Libya.

20-0648925/28

S/2020/371

Annex XVII
Statement by Mr. Taher Elsonni, Permanent Representative of the
State of Libya to the United Nations
At the outset, I would like to congratulate the President of the Security Council
for this month and wish him every success in his tasks. I would also like to thank Ms.
Bensouda for her briefing today.
Achieving justice throughout Libyan territory is a responsibility that falls
under Libyan sovereignty and national jurisdiction. However, in accordance with the
relevant Security Council resolutions, we also reaffirm our continued cooperation
with and support of the complementing role of the International Criminal Court
(ICC), as highlighted by Ms. Bensouda on many occasions and in various reports.
We believe in the mandate of the national judiciary system to prosecute the accused
in accordance with the Libyan penal code, in furtherance of Libya’s sovereignty over
its territory and citizens. In addition, the Libyan judiciary is committed to ensuring
a fair and impartial trial for all its accused, including fugitives and outlaws.
The national judiciary system is determined to prosecute all those who have
committed violations of any type on Libyan soil. Their crimes shall not be subject to
a statute of limitations. In that regard, we would like to emphasize that the Libyan
judiciary system monitors all violations and crimes, particularly those committed
by war criminal Khalifa Haftar since the attack on Tripoli and its outskirts on 4
April 2019. Those include the numerous violations he has committed in other Libyan
cities, such as kidnapping, killing and public executions in Benghazi in the east,
the Murzuq massacre in the south, the massacre of the military school students in
Tripoli and many other violations.
In that regard, the military prosecutor in Libya has issued warrants for the
arrest of a number of criminals and outlaws — first and foremost of war criminal
Khalifa Haftar and other leaders under his command. We also wish to inform
the Council that my Government is finalizing its third report, to be issued by the
Joint Committee for Monitoring and Documenting Human Rights Violations, in
accordance with Government of National Accord decree 735-2019. The report will
soon be shared with the ICC and the Council.
As stated in Ms. Bensouda’s briefing today, which covers the past six months,
and her previous seventeenth and eighteenth reports, Mr. Haftar’s forces are explicitly
accused of numerous war crimes, from air strikes and the indiscriminate bombing
of civilians and civilian facilities to other serious violations, the latest of which
was the 7 April bombardment of Al-Hadaba General Hospital in Tripoli, which was
treating patients who had contracted the coronavirus disease (COVID-19). That led
to several iterations of the closure of the hospital and terrified patients and medical
staff. In addition, the provision of water, gas, and electricity to the city had to be
shut off. Those violations were firmly condemned by the Secretary-General and
many countries. At a time when the entire world is facing anxiety and panic due
to the pandemic, this tragedy exacerbates the current crisis faced by civilians in
my country.
As for the concerns expressed in the report about the situation of illegal
migrants, we would like to emphasize that my Government has taken a number of
swift measures to protect them, such as expediting their transfer from conflict areas,
and is cooperating with specialized United Nations agencies to monitor their living
and medical conditions. However, that may not be enough. As mentioned in a recent
report on the implementation of resolution 2437 (2018) (see S/2019/711), an air strike
against a migrant detention centre in Tajoura in July 2019 killed 53 migrants and
26/28

20-06489

S/2020/371

injured 130 — an example of how Mr. Haftar and his militias deliberately target
these detention centres.
We thank Ms. Bensouda for her reports and findings, which, as she has
consistently said, seek to uncover war crimes and crimes against humanity in Libya
and to hold their perpetrators accountable. The questions on the table now are: What
is next? What are we going to do with all the findings and evidence provided today
and in previous reports? What is the ICC waiting for to hold accountable all those
responsible for the violations mentioned today and perpetrated by the so-called
National Army? Who is ultimately responsible?
According to article 28 (a) of the Rome Statute of the ICC,
“A military commander or person effectively acting as a military
commander shall be criminally responsible for crimes within the jurisdiction
of the Court committed by forces under his or her effective command and
control, or effective authority and control as the case may be, as a result of his
or her failure to exercise control properly over such forces”.
Swift action was taken against Mahmoud Al-Werfalli — who, incidentally,
is being promoted by Mr. Haftar and is fighting in the outskirts of Tripoli as we
speak — for his crimes, based on the evidence found. We might ask, what is the
difference between his crimes and Mr. Haftar’s massive crimes against humanity
and human rights violations, which targeted and killing thousands of innocent
people, if Mr. Haftar and his commanders have publicly claimed responsibility for
many of those crimes?
According to Article 7 of the Rome Statute, a crime against humanity
“means any of the following acts when committed as part of a widespread or
systematic attack directed against any civilian population, with knowledge of
the attack: (a) Murder; (b) Extermination; (c) Enslavement; (d) Deportation or
forcible transfer of population”.
And these are only some of the crimes Mr. Haftar has committed, as confirmed
in the report. Another question emerges. What about the countries and officials
outside Libya who support and finance those grave violations? Does that not entail
joint responsibility? What about the use of mercenaries from several nationalities
to carry out such violations, as mentioned by name in reports of the Council’s
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya? What
about the countries that finance and provide the arms needed to perpetrate such
human rights violations?
I remind Ms. Bensouda that the ICC is not a human rights organization created
to simply list violations and crimes. The Court is also mandated to investigate and
prosecute. We therefore hope that, in consideration of my statement and the questions
I have just posed, the ICC will work in cooperation with the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya and its Panel of Experts to
ensure that the evidence and findings are consistent and that the accused are clearly
and explicitly identified and held to account.
Although this is an ICC briefing, I would like to remind the Council of its
responsibility towards my country and of the importance of taking a firm stand for
justice and accountability. As everyone is aware, the aggressor continues his attacks
despite his false announcement of a humanitarian truce, immediately after which he
deliberately targeted civilians in the centre of Tripoli and elsewhere. In the area of
Zenata, for example, he killed and wounded dozens, ignoring and disregarding the
efforts, initiatives and calls of Moscow, Berlin and others. Furthermore, one week
ago, he announced a coup against the political agreement and all the legitimate State
20-0648927/28

S/2020/371

institutions and proclaimed himself the supreme military ruler and tyrant of the
country in an outdated farcical performance.
In the light of the recent events, is anyone still hesitant to consider him an
obstructionist and spoiler of the peace process and the resolutions of the Council? Is
anyone still hesitant to call out and shame this aggressor and war criminal by name?
When will he be held accountable? We still only hear general words of condemnation
as if the perpetrator were a ghost.
We continue to reserve our legitimate right to self-defence, to protect our
people and to combat aggressors and outlaws who threaten the safety of our civilians.
After more than a year, it is obvious that this warlord’s military adventure has failed.
Thanks to our Libyan National Army, our valiant forces and the resilience of our
people, the world has seen the beginning of the process of curing the country from
the real pandemic that is threatening peace and stability in Libya and the region.
Meanwhile, we continue to reach out to all Libyans across the country who have
embraced the path of peace and stability, and strive towards a democratic, civil State.

28/28

20-06489
