UNITED
NATIONS

AS
General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.
GENERAL
A/52/504
S/1997/812
21 October 1997
ORIGINAL:

GENERAL ASSEMBLY
Fifty-second session
Agenda item 50
REPORT OF THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL
FOR THE PROSECUTION OF PERSONS RESPONSIBLE
FOR GENOCIDE AND OTHER SERIOUS VIOLATIONS
OF INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW
COMMITTED IN THE TERRITORY OF RWANDA AND
RWANDAN CITIZENS RESPONSIBLE FOR GENOCIDE
AND OTHER SUCH VIOLATIONS COMMITTED IN THE
TERRITORY OF NEIGHBOURING STATES BETWEEN
1 JANUARY AND 31 DECEMBER 1994

ENGLISH

SECURITY COUNCIL
Fifty-second year

Identical letters dated 15 October 1997 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President of
the General Assembly and the President of the
Security Council

I am attaching, for your consideration and that of the members of the
Security Council and the General Assembly, a letter dated 1 August 1997 from the
President of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda. In his letter,
President Kama raises the problem faced by the Tribunal owing to the increase in
the number of individuals detained at the Tribunal's Detention Facility in
Arusha, in anticipation that all or most of them will be indicted by the
Tribunal.
President Kama notes that, taking into account its current capacity and
depending on the number of persons who will be indicted, the Tribunal might
require considerable time to complete all the trials. Such a development would
negatively affect the right of the accused to be tried without delay and
certainly disappoint the expectations of the Rwandan people and the
international community. With a view to addressing the above requirements,
President Kama suggests that a third Trial Chamber of the Tribunal, staffed by
three additional judges, be established.

97-28052 (E)

211097

/...

A/52/504
S/1997/812
English
Page 2

It will be recalled that by its resolution 955 (1994) of 8 November 1994,
which incorporates the statute of the Tribunal, the Security Council established
two Trial Chambers composed of three judges each. The Council, in paragraph 7
of the resolution, expressly reserved the possibility of increasing the number
of judges and Trial Chambers should this become necessary.
The establishment of a third Trial Chamber would require the amendment of
articles 10 and 11 of the statute by the Security Council. Following such
amendment, the General Assembly would be requested to approve the related
increase in the budget of the Tribunal. Finally, the Security Council and the
General Assembly would have to elect three additional judges in accordance with
the statute of the Tribunal.
The Registry of the Tribunal estimated the costs of establishing the third
Trial Chamber at $5,582,000 for the year 1998. More detailed estimates will be
made available to the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary
Questions and the Fifth Committee.
I would appreciate it if you would bring the present letter and its
attachment to the attention of members of the Security Council and the General
Assembly for their approval of the request for the establishment of an
additional Trial Chamber for the Tribunal.

(Signed)

Kofi A. ANNAN

/...

A/52/504
S/1997/812
English
Page 3

ANNEX
Letter dated 1 August 1997 from the President of the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda addressed
to the Secretary-General

I have the honour to bring to your attention the following problem facing
the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda so that it may be considered for
presentation to the Security Council.
Following the arrest of 8 people by the Kenyan authorities, at the request
of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, and their transfer to the
Detention Facility in Arusha, 20 detainees are currently incarcerated in the
Facility. Given that 14 of these persons have already been indicted and that
the 6 others may be indicted, we have had to envisage a revision of our judicial
calendar in order to render expeditious justice, so as to meet the expectations
of the Rwandan people and the international community, and furthermore, to
ensure the respect of the fundamental right of the accused to be tried without
undue delay.
A cursory assessment shows that if all of the incarcerated suspects were
indicted, it would take us at least 88 months to conclude the trials of the
persons detained in Arusha alone. This calculation is based on an average trial
length not exceeding four months per person, although our experience has shown
us that proceedings before international criminal courts require more time, as
we have noted both in the three ongoing trials in Arusha and in the case of the
International Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, where the Tadic trial took
more than one year.
It will obviously be difficult, if not impossible, for us to judge these
people between now and the end of our mandate in May 1999 if we are to continue
with only six judges, notwithstanding the fact that, by virtue of rule 15 of our
rules of procedure and evidence, a judge is disqualified from hearing a case on
the merits each time he or she has considered the indictment or indictments
related thereto. Hence, in our view, there is an overwhelming necessity to
increase the number of judges, in order to compose a third Trial Chamber, as
provided in paragraph 7 of Security Council resolution 955 (1994). Indeed, the
Council, in that resolution, decided to consider increasing the number of judges
and Trial Chambers of the International Tribunal if it becomes necessary.
Since it is my belief that you share this point of view, I would be very
grateful if you would kindly notify the Security Council of this matter as soon
as possible.

/...

A/52/504
S/1997/812
English
Page 4

Finally, allow me to take this opportunity to thank you on behalf of my
colleagues and on my own behalf for all the initiatives you have personally
taken in the interest of the Tribunal, since your arrival at the head of the
Secretariat, and to reiterate our firm determination to do everything so that
justice may be done.

(Signed)

-----

Laïty KAMA
President
