S/PV.9048

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9048th meeting

Thursday, 26 May 2022, 4.45 p.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. Costa Filho
Mr. Zhang Jun
Mr. De Rivière
Ms. Koumby Missambo
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Tirumurti
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco
Ms. Juul
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-36333 (E)
*2236333*

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

ICBM tests for five years. But its ICBM launches in
recent months have tested the integrity and the will of
the Council to carry out its commitments. Thus far, we
have not done so.

The meeting was called to order at 4.45 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Japan and the Republic of Korea to
participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2022/431, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by the United States of America.
I now give the floor to those members of the Council
who wish to make statements before the voting.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of the United States.
Today’s vote could not be clearer. Here are the facts.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s 25 May
launch of three ballistic missiles included yet another
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch. The
United States assesses that this is the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s sixth ICBM launch since
the beginning of 2022. That is a threat to the peace and
security of the entire international community.
It is undeniable that the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea continues to illustrate its commitment
to advancing its weapons of mass destruction and
ballistic-missile programmes in violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. The Council made
a commitment to respond to exactly that kind of
escalation. We cannot allow the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to normalize those unlawful and
destabilizing actions, nor can we let the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea divide the Security Council
and exhaust our capacity to respond decisively.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has
now conducted six ICBM tests without any response
from the Security Council, despite the commitment
that the Council made in resolution 2397 (2017) to take
further measures in the event of an additional ICBM
launch. Following that commitment by the Council,
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea suspended
2/15

26/05/2022

We cannot let this become the new norm. We cannot
tolerate such dangerous and threatening behaviour.
Some Council members have argued that a
presidential statement is the appropriate response to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s ICBM
launches. May I remind my fellow Council members
that we have tried to propose press elements and a press
statement following many of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea’s launches this year, including the
24 March ICBM launch. We were told, however, that any
such statement could lead to escalation or destabilize
the Korean peninsula.
In fact, the exact opposite has happened. The
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has taken the
Council’s silence as a green light to act with impunity
and escalate tensions on the peninsula. It has engaged
in an unprovoked series of 23 — let me repeat that — 23
ballistic-missile launches since the beginning of the
year and is actively preparing to conduct a nuclear test.
Council action is not the reason for the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s escalation, because
Council inaction is certainly enabling it. Today’s vote
is the Council’s opportunity to stand by its word. It
is the Council’s responsibility to act in response to
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s ICBM
launches. Only through a resolution can we deliver
on the commitment made by the Council in resolution
2397 (2017).
With the adoption of this draft resolution, we
can send a message to all proliferators that we will
not stand for any actions on their part that seek to
undermine international peace and security. We took
a deliberate and Council-wide approach to negotiations
to ensure that all members have a voice in this draft
resolution. That certain Council members refused to
engage, despite our commitment to and demonstration
of inclusivity throughout this process, is their choice,
and it is their choice alone.
If adopted, this action-oriented draft resolution
will restrict the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s ability to advance its unlawful weapons of
mass destruction and ballistic-missile programmes,
streamline sanctions implementation and further
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

facilitate the delivery of humanitarian aid. It also
takes an urgently needed step towards addressing
the concerning coronavirus disease outbreak in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea.
We ask all Council members to stand with us against
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s unlawful
actions and vote for the adoption of the draft resolution.
This should continue to be an area of Council unity, and
now is the time to act.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, France, Gabon, Ghana, India,
Ireland, Kenya, Mexico, Norway, United Arab
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, 2 against and no abstentions. The draft
resolution has not been adopted owing to the negative
vote of one permanent member of the Council.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation voted against the draft resolution
contained in document S/2022/431, submitted by the
United States, which is intended to impose additional
sanctions on the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. That is a prudent decision made by China after
it repeatedly weighed the pros and cons of the issue
on the basis of its consistent position on the Korean
peninsula nuclear issue, comprehensively analysing the
circumstances surrounding the current escalation of
tensions on the peninsula, and fully taking into account
the negative consequences that could arise once the
draft resolution has been adopted, including for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s domestic
response to the coronavirus disease.
As a close neighbour of the peninsula, China is
extremely concerned about the situation there and has

S/PV.9048

always insisted on maintaining its peace and stability,
working for its denuclearization and resolving issues
through dialogue and consultation. For a long time,
China has been making unremitting efforts to that
end. In dealing with the recent manifestations of the
persistent tensions on the peninsula, China has called
on all the parties to exercise calm and restraint and
refrain from actions that could increase tension and
lead to miscalculations. With regard to the peninsula
issue, the Security Council should play a positive and
constructive role, and its actions should help de-escalate
the situation and prevent it from deteriorating and even
spiralling out of control.
With its ups and downs, the peninsula issue
has remained unresolved for decades. Events have
repeatedly demonstrated that dialogue and negotiations
are the only viable way to resolve the problem. As a
main stakeholder in the peninsula question, the United
States is directly responsible for promoting dialogue and
negotiations. In 2018, the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea took a series of measures to denuclearize and
de-escalate the situation, and its leaders and those of
the United States met in Singapore, where they reached
an important consensus on establishing a new phase in
their relations, including building a peace mechanism
and advancing the denuclearization process on
the peninsula.
Regrettably, the United States has not reciprocated
the positive initiatives taken by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in accordance with the principle of
action for action. Talks between the two countries have
remained at an impasse, as has the denuclearization
process, and the tensions on the peninsula continue
to rise. The situation has evolved into its current state
primarily owing to the United States’ flip-flopping
policies and failure to abide by the outcomes of previous
talks. That is an irrefutable fact.
The facts have also shown that reliance on sanctions
will not help to resolve the peninsula issue. Security
Council sanctions are a means, not an end in themselves.
The Council has so far adopted 10 sanctions resolutions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea,
establishing an extremely harsh and complex sanctions
regime while at the same time working to move in
the right direction, aimed at resolving the peninsula
issue through dialogue. China firmly believes that the
Security Council resolutions on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea are an integral whole and should
be implemented comprehensively, thoroughly and

22-363333/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

accurately. The countries concerned should not have a
one-sided emphasis on the implementation of sanctions
alone but should also work to promote a political
solution and ease sanctions where appropriate. The
starting point of the draft resolution on the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea jointly proposed by China
and Russia in the Council is the alleviation of the
impact of humanitarian difficulties and those related to
livelihoods in the country and to inject momentum into
achieving a political settlement on the peninsula.
In the current situation, additional sanctions
against the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
will not only fail to resolve the problem but will lead to
further negative consequences and an escalation of the
confrontation. Their humanitarian impact will also be
worse, especially against a backdrop of the emerging
coronavirus cases in the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea. Additional sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea will only add to the misery
of its people, and therefore neither just nor humane.
Under the provisions of the draft resolution proposed
by the United States, the supply of crude oil and refined
petroleum products to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea would each be reduced by 25 per cent. The
export by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
of related products would be further restricted. Those
measures have no relevance to settling the nuclear issue
on the peninsula, and the only conceivable result would
be to sever a lifeline for the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and worsen their plight. It
is obviously self-contradictory to push for increasing
sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea while claiming to be willing to provide
humanitarian assistance, and China does not endorse
that approach.
China attaches great importance to the unity and
cooperation of the Council. In order to reduce the level
of contention and reflect the Council’s constructive
role, China has always called on all parties to adopt a
cooperative attitude to the peninsula issue. We support
the necessary action taken by the Council, but the
goal should be to promote dialogue and negotiations
and create a favourable environment for a political
solution. With regard to the draft resolution proposed
by the United States, China has repeatedly expressed
the hope that the United States would consider issuing
a presidential statement instead, as the best way to
garner consensus among Council members and avoid
confrontation, an approach endorsed by most Council
4/15

26/05/2022

members, with the United States alone dissenting. The
United States has insisted that the Council should take
action if the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
were to launch another intercontinental ballistic missile,
as stipulated in previous Security Council resolutions.
But the kind of action that the Council should take
should be decided through consultations, not dictated
by a single member.
In the current circumstances, the Council should
consider what is actually impeding peace and stability
on the peninsula and should be concerned about the
real difficulties regarding the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and their livelihoods,
with a view to injecting an impetus into resolving
the peninsula issue. We call on the Security Council
to play an active role in providing humanitarian and
anti-epidemic assistance to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea rather than creating obstacles.
Regrettably, China’s reasonable proposal was rejected.
In the circumstances, we had no choice but to vote
against the draft resolution.
Peace and stability on the Korean peninsula are
related to the common interests of the countries of
the region and therefore require joint efforts by all
countries. The security of all countries is indivisible,
and the security of one country cannot be based on
the insecurity of others. The developments on the
peninsula that have led to the current situation deserve
our reflection. The United States has recently been
vigorously promoting an Indo-Pacific strategy that is
of necessity linked to the latest developments on the
peninsula. It has been promoting cooperation on nuclear
submarines with certain countries that carries serious
risks of nuclear proliferation. With much fanfare it
has been developing offensive-weapon systems, such
as hypersonic weapons, and has sold cruise missiles
capable of carrying nuclear warheads to other countries,
thereby significantly undermining the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime.
The United States also continues to promote
and expand military exercises, strengthen military
alliances with certain countries involved in the region
and engineer small, exclusive circles. One particular
politician from a certain country concerned has made
frequent pro-nuclear statements and has advocated
nuclear sharing with the United States. Those moves
all send the wrong message and have had a negative
impact on the resolution of the nuclear issue involving
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. We advise
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

the countries concerned to prioritize international and
regional peace and security, abandon their Cold War
mentality and refrain from going any further down the
wrong path.
The situation on the peninsula is at a dangerous
juncture. China once again calls on all the parties
to exercise calm and restraint and urges the United
States to meaningfully reflect on its policy towards
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, adhere
to the overarching principle of finding a political
settlement, take meaningful action to respond to the
legitimate and reasonable concerns of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and create conditions for
the de-escalation of the situation and a resumption of
dialogue and negotiations. China will continue to play
a constructive role in maintaining the peninsula’s peace
and stability and achieving its denuclearization.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): Russia voted against the draft resolution
(S/2022/431) proposed by the United States. We are
sorry that our American colleagues ignored the frequent
clarifications we made during the drafting of the text in
consultations and at recent Security Council meetings.
We said we would not support this kind of document.
Our appeals for it to be issued as a presidential statement
instead went unheeded.
As a matter of principle, we have repeatedly said
that imposing new sanctions against the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is a dead end, and we
have emphasized the fact that increasing the sanctions
pressure on Pyongyang is mistaken, ineffective
and inhumane. Many restrictive resolutions have been
adopted regarding Pyongyang since 2006. However, as
history has shown, the sanctions route has been able
neither to guarantee security in the region nor regulate
issues related to missile and nuclear non-proliferation.
The security issues in the region, which also directly
affect Russia, cannot be resolved through primitive
and unsubtle means that have serious collateral
consequences for ordinary people.
In the past year the situation on the peninsula
has only got worse. Our Western colleagues are
accustomed to shifting all the blame onto the North
Korean authorities, but they completely ignore the
fact that Pyongyang’s repeated calls for the United
States to cease its hostile activities — which would
open up opportunities for dialogue — have not been
taken seriously. We hear nothing from our American

S/PV.9048

colleagues except about the need for sanctions. The
steps that Pyongyang took in 2018 and 2019 to meet us
halfway and send positive signals have constantly been
called into question, and the Council has been unable
to find the strength to respond to them appropriately,
while alternative pathways to a political and
diplomatic settlement, including the Russian-Chinese
humanitarian draft resolution, have been rejected. We
are now suffering the consequences of the West’s shortsighted policies. We are unfortunately witnessing a
continuing deterioration in the potential of the political
and diplomatic process thanks to the hard-line policy
led by the United States, which has basically destroyed
the positive progress made on the Korean peninsula a
few years ago.
Strengthening the sanctions pressure on Pyongyang
is not only futile but extremely dangerous considering
the humanitarian consequences of such measures. The
sanctions package adopted against Pyongyang in 2016
and 2017 primarily affected the lives of ordinary North
Koreans. Even before the start of the pandemic, there
was a serious shortage of medicines in the country, the
economy was stagnant and the banking and financial
restrictions effectively cut off North Koreans’ ability to
buy consumer goods. I want to emphasize that all of that
began even before the country closed down in the face
of the threat of the spread of the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) in 2020. Unfortunately, a few weeks ago
COVID-19 did manage to penetrate the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea and the epidemiological
situation there is now a very difficult one. We believe
it is completely irresponsible to propose new sanctions
when the North Koreans are dealing with a challenge
that should rather lead us to consider ways of helping
their country overcome it. The urgency of expanding the
humanitarian exemptions from the sanctions measures
that we and our Chinese colleagues have proposed has
only become greater.
It has long been obvious to anyone genuinely
concerned with resolving the situation in North Korea
that it is futile to expect unconditional disarmament
from Pyongyang under the threat of a sanctions spiral
and so-called guarantees based on unsubstantiated
promises. And the creation of new military blocs in the
region, such as the union of the United States, the United
Kingdom and Australia known as AUKUS, raises
serious doubts about their good intentions, including on
the part of Pyongyang, and is counterproductive from
the point of view of establishing a dialogue. We also

22-363335/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

heard threatening statements about Pyongyang during
President Joe Biden’s recent tour of the countries of
the region.
In general, what we are seeing is that the primacy
of finding political and diplomatic solutions to conflicts
all over the world is paralysed. Preventive diplomacy,
whose praises many Member States, including the
author of the draft resolution, love to sing, is cast aside
as soon as it comes to countries that are not considered
part of the so-called civilized world. It seems that our
American and other Western colleagues are suffering
the equivalent of writer’s block, given that they have no
response to crisis situations other than the imposition
of sanctions. Russia has always considered such
measures to be the most extreme possible response,
requiring constant fine-tuning and calibration. I am not
even discussing unilateral sanctions here, which make
it impossible to implement Security Council resolutions
and undermine our ability to respond collectively and
multilaterally, including in the case of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea.
We would like to emphasize once again that Russia
opposes any military activity jeopardizing the security
of the Korean peninsula and the countries of North-East
Asia. However, security issues that directly concern
our country, among others, cannot be resolved through
the primitive use of a sanctions cudgel, as they can have
serious collateral effects. We firmly believe that the
quest for mutually acceptable political and diplomatic
solutions is the only possible way to reach a peaceful
solution to the Korean peninsula question and establish
robust security mechanisms in North-East Asia. Only
the involvement of all players in the region in the process
on an equal footing, without attempts to monopolize it,
can have positive results. That should be our main task,
whose resolution will make it possible to normalize the
situation in the region. At the same time, we should
point out that the lack of progress on the political track
threatens to further increase tensions on the peninsula,
and regrettably we are already witnessing that.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): Kenya voted in favour of
adopting draft resolution S/2022/431. The Security
Council’s resolutions have been clear, but unfortunately
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea has chosen
not to comply with them. Instead, its missile launches,
particularly in the past five months, have undermined
the stability of the Korean peninsula. Added to the
launches, one of which threatened the territorial
integrity of a Member State, are the statements it has
6/15

26/05/2022

been making about its accelerated development and use
of nuclear weapons.
What we have learned in the past few months is that
actions undermining international peace and security
concern not only the countries immediately affected
but even the most distant. Today we are suffering from
rapidly rising food and energy costs as a result of a
conflict that is far from our borders. The undermining
of the security and stability of the Korean peninsula
risks escalating into a crisis that would directly harm a
region that is linked to Africa through a great history
of trading and investment at a time when development
is key to our own peace and security. For that reason,
we must appeal to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea to end its current posture and seek a dialogue
that leads to a lasting solution.
We also regret the current policy of protracted
sanctions, which continue to cause extensive suffering
and underdevelopment in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, and we appreciate the willingness
of some delegations to seek a statement by the
President of the Security Council that would have
demanded consensus among its members. While we
encourage consensus and unity, they must be robust
enough to send a clear signal about the importance of
halting any further undermining of the stability of the
Korean peninsula.
We believe that the diplomatic avenues available
to the stakeholders in the immediate security situation
should be used with more determination to find
compromises. Lacking the willingness to compromise
in negotiation, we will remain trapped in the risky
ground between provocation and blockade.
Instead, we encourage all relevant parties to
undertake trust-building initiatives. The missile
launches should cease, and there should be a review of
the sanctions against the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea, which have had adverse effects on civilians.
Finally, Kenya reaffirms its long-standing
commitment to nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation
and a world free of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Gómez Robledo Verduzco (Mexico) (spoke
in Spanish): The continued launches by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea of ballistic missiles,
including of intercontinental range, pose a clear threat
to international peace and security. That is why Mexico
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

voted in favour of draft resolution S/2022/431, which
we just considered.
Such tests, as well as the intention of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to strengthen
its nuclear capabilities, are in clear violation of Security
Council resolutions and the nuclear disarmament and
non-proliferation regime.
The text of the draft resolution contained important
provisions expressing the commitment to a peaceful and
diplomatic solution and to achieving the complete and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
We therefore regret that the draft text was not adopted
due to the veto of two permanent members.
In the light of the recent adoption of General
Assembly resolution 76/262, we now look forward to
the convening of a meeting of that organ, as well as the
special report to be prepared by the Council, in order for
the highest international organ to hear those permanent
members discuss the issue and take the decisions that it
deems appropriate.
Regardless of today’s outcome, we urgently call for
a return to the negotiating table.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): Albania voted in favour of
draft resolution S/2022/431. We regret the outcome of
the vote.
We believe that the Security Council missed
a precious opportunity to come together and give
a robust response to the continuous and persisting
violations of its own resolutions by the regime of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is
utterly disappointing. There is nothing more harmful
to international law, Security Council resolutions and
international norms than when they be disrespected.
There is nothing more damaging to the credibility and
relevance of the Security Council than its inability to
deliver because it is blocked. There is hardly anything
more worrisome than when the Council fails to take its
responsibility to contribute by action to the maintenance
of peace and security because it is divided.
All those who have lost trust in the United Nations
and its bodies have another reason to be unhappy
and critical. The message that the Council conveyed
today with this result is to tolerate those that breach
the provisions of documents that were adopted for
providing and guaranteeing safety and security.

S/PV.9048

As we all know, just yesterday the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea launched another
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) — its sixth
ICBM launch this year and the twenty-third in less than
five months.
We reiterate our condemnation of those provocations,
which violate Security Council resolutions, but also put
openly at threat the global and regional security of the
Korean peninsula.
We have seen it more than once: what happens
somewhere may have an impact everywhere. Therefore,
a tolerance for the dangerous course of the militarization
and nuclear proliferation of a country is licence to do
the same, if not more, for any other rogue State.
We deplore the use of the veto to prevent the
Council from acting, which can be translated only as
support for such illegal activities.
Let me conclude by reiterating our call for the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to stop its
destabilizing activities and give peace a chance through
engagement in meaning dialogue, without preconditions.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I would like to deliver
an explanation of vote regarding Ireland’s position on
this issue.
Ireland voted in favour of today’s draft resolution
S/2022/431, following the launch of an intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) by the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, in contravention of Security
Council resolutions.
The actions of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea threaten peace and stability on the Korean
peninsula and the wider region, as well as undermining
the global disarmament and non-proliferation
framework. Given the continued destabilizing activities
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the
Council must be clear, determined and united in
answering those actions. The draft resolution is a
necessary and balanced response by the Council.
It is deeply regrettable that this draft resolution was
blocked, in the face of such clear violations of Council
resolutions, and given the Council’s earlier decision,
under resolution 2397 (2017), that it would take action
should the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
conduct further ICBM launches. That sends a deeply
negative message regarding the Council’s willingness
to uphold its own resolutions, as well as regarding

22-363337/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

global disarmament and non-proliferation objectives.
It undermines the aim of the complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization of the Korean peninsula.
The use of the veto to block Council action on
this draft resolution is deeply regrettable, as indeed
it is whenever it occurs. We know that our frustration
is shared by the wider United Nations membership, as
demonstrated by the consensus adoption of the veto
initiative resolution 76/262 by the General Assembly
in April. We look forward to the swift issuance of a
special report by the Security Council, in accordance
with Article 24, paragraph 3, of the Charter of the
United Nations.
In concluding, I want to repeat that Ireland has long
called for an end to the use of the veto and for reform of
the Security Council. We reiterate that call today.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): The situation in
the Korean peninsula is concerning for global peace
and security. As members of the Council, we have
a responsibility to the wider membership to act in
moments when acting proactively can help prevent
destabilization of international peace and security.
It is in that context, and mindful of previous
resolutions, that Ghana voted in favour of draft
resolution S/2022/431, on the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea. Although the draft resolution was
not adopted, the expressed position of 13 members
of the Council shows an overwhelming convergence
of the international community’s position on the
matter and sends a clear message to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea that the 23 missiles that
it has launched this year alone, and the ones that it
launched in previous years, are unacceptable to the
international community and are in blatant violation of
its international obligations, as expressed in multiple
Security Council resolutions.
By today’s action in the Council, it should be clear
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea that its
reported intention to accelerate the development of
its nuclear capabilities at the highest possible pace, as
well as its threat to use nuclear weapons if its national
interest is threatened, would be deemed as contrary to
its obligations under the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and the principles of the Charter of
the United Nations, which enjoin all States Members to
be peace-loving.
8/15

26/05/2022

While we regret the lack of unanimity on this draft
resolution, the balance of views is that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is obliged to take up the
offer of unconditional dialogue by the United States
and to take concrete, immediate and urgent steps to
de-escalate the tensions on the Korean peninsula.
The humanitarian situation in the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which was already dire, has
been exacerbated by the outbreak of the coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) pandemic in the country. We
are informed by the World Health Organization and
other partners that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea has yet to accept offers of millions of doses
of COVID-19 vaccines under the COVID-19 Vaccine
Global Access (COVAX) programme and other
bilateral arrangements. It is important that we help the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea overcome its
mistrust in order to avoid the needless loss of innocent
lives and plug into the international cooperative
arrangements that can support it in saving the lives of
its people through access to the COVID-19 vaccines,
therapeutics and other medical equipment that it needs
to fight the virus.
We also encourage the Government of the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to streamline its
internal processes to enable much-needed medical and
other humanitarian supplies to reach its people. We urge
its leaders to allow the United Nations humanitarian
agencies back into the country and support efforts by
the United Nations system to re-establish the banking
channel with the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea. We hope that in future the Council will be able
to act in a united manner to preserve peace on the
Korean peninsula.
Ms. Juul (Norway): Norway strongly condemns
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s recent
series of ballistic-missile launches, including the
launch of an intercontinental ballistic missile, in clear
violation of several Security Council resolutions.
We are also deeply concerned about the disturbing
rhetoric we are hearing about nuclear weapons and
developments in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s nuclear programme. Norway therefore voted
in favour of draft resolution S/2022/431 in response to
those developments and the threat that the actions of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea poses to
both regional and international peace and security.
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

The proposed draft resolution would have broadened
the humanitarian exemption mechanisms considerably.
That would have been a timely update given the
critical humanitarian needs in the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, especially in the wake of the recent
reports of the spread of coronavirus disease throughout
the country. We regret that the use of the veto prevented
the Security Council from fulfilling its mandate and
taking necessary action on this very serious and
escalating security and humanitarian situation.
We recognize that in accordance with its consensus
resolution 76/262, the General Assembly will now
take up this issue for discussion in line with its own
responsibilities with regard to international peace
and security. And we expect the Council to comply
with the provision of resolution 76/262 inviting it to
submit a special report on the issue for the Assembly’s
consideration. We call on the Secretariat to produce
such a report in consultation with the Chair of the
Informal Working Group on Documentation and Other
Procedural Questions, and to annex to it the précisverbal from this meeting.
The current path of the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea is not only a threat to regional and
international peace and security, but it also aggravates
an already dire economic, humanitarian and human
rights situation for the people of the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. The United Nations
cannot remain silent simply because of the veto in the
Security Council.
Mr. Costa Filho (Brazil): As a country committed
to the international disarmament and non-proliferation
regime, as well as to the Charter of the United Nations
and the decisions of the Security Council, Brazil voted
in favour of draft resolution S/2022/431.
Brazil condemns in the strongest possible terms the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch of a
series of ballistic missiles, and in particular its launch
of intercontinental ballistic missiles, in violation of
multiple Security Council resolutions. In that regard,
it was critical for the Council to demonstrate unity
in order to send a clear message to the Democratic
Republic of Korea that the body that bears the primary
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security would not tolerate the violation of
its decisions or disregard for the Charter of the United
Nations. And if it had been adopted, the draft resolution

S/PV.9048

would also have sent a powerful deterrent message to
other potential proliferators.
We would like to express our appreciation to you
and your team, Madam President, for the transparent
and inclusive manner with which you led the
negotiation process for the draft resolution. Taking into
consideration the concerns of various Council members
with regard to technical, security and humanitarian
aspects of the text helped us to achieve a more robust
and legitimate result. The draft resolution outlines
important and innovative elements, such as those
related to measures to combat malicious cyber activities
and to establishing a list of well-defined categories of
items for humanitarian purposes, taking into account
the recent outbreak of the coronavirus disease that the
North Korean population is dealing with. Although we
share the concerns about the humanitarian impact of
sanctions and their effectiveness in changing States’
behaviour, especially in cases of comprehensive
sanctions regimes that tend to last indefinitely, we
understand that the Security Council cannot turn a
blind eye to its responsibilities. We need firm and
timely responses to violations of Council decisions, or
we risk becoming irrelevant.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): The United
Kingdom deeply regrets that the adoption of draft
resolution S/2022/431 was blocked by Russia and China.
North Korea’s resumption of intercontinental
ballistic missile (ICBM) testing, including an ICBM
test yet again this week, is a serious escalation and a
significant threat to international peace and security.
It is clear that there is wide support in the Council and
beyond for seeing the Council speak up and deliver
on its responsibilities. It has been almost five years
since the Council responded to North Korea’s repeated
tests of banned weapons. The fact that two members
have kept the Council silent only serves to embolden
the North Korean authorities. We are concerned about
the possibility that the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea may resume its testing of nuclear weapons.
The Security Council has a particular responsibility to
address that serious threat to peace and security. North
Korea must not be allowed to test missiles and other
weapons with impunity.
The votes against this draft resolution today also
represent a missed opportunity to better support the
delivery of humanitarian assistance to the people of
North Korea, including urgently needed humanitarian

22-363339/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

26/05/2022

assistance related to the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19). We encourage the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea to take up the offer of vaccines from
the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) and of
assistance from international partners, and to respond to
the United States’ offer of new talks without conditions.

In conclusion, we reiterate how urgent it is to resume
negotiations with North Korea with the aim of finding
a lasting solution that guarantees peace and stability
on the entire peninsula. We call on all the parties to
engage in diplomatic negotiations on the basis of what
was agreed in 2017.

I would like to thank the United States for the
consultative process that this text went through.
Our United States colleagues made every effort to
accommodate the views of other Council members
within the draft resolution.

Mr. De Rivière (France) (spoke in French): On
24 May North Korea once again fired three ballistic
missiles, and there is every indication that it is preparing
for another nuclear test. The speed and gravity of
North Korea’s provocations since the beginning of the
year are unprecedented. In the face of that escalation,
we have spared no effort to ensure that the Security
Council speaks with one voice, because we cannot
allow North Korea to pursue the development of its
nuclear and ballistic programmes with impunity and
to violate all of the Security Council’s unanimously
adopted resolutions.

Ms. Koumby Missambo (Gabon) (spoke in
French): I welcome the Ambassadors of Korea and
Japan to this meeting.
North Korea has once again launched more ballistic
missiles, in addition to the significant number it has
launched since the start of the year, only worsening
tensions and increasing the risks to peace and stability
on the Korean peninsula and well beyond. My country
condemns those launches, as well as all demonstrations
of force that might increase security risks on the
Korean peninsula and undermine regional stability. We
are also concerned about the potential of this trend to
make nuclear threats more acceptable, which does not
bode well for collective peace and security.
Since we began our term on the Security Council,
my country has consistently advocated for a resumption
of negotiations with North Korea aimed at finding a
diplomatic solution to the situation, putting an end
to the escalation, easing tensions and leading to
peaceful coexistence. We now reiterate that appeal
because the status quo right now is neither acceptable
nor satisfactory. The peoples of the region, including in
North Korea, have a right to live without that constant
threat. We must do everything we can to bring all
the parties to the negotiating table, and the Security
Council cannot continue to meet to take note of
statistics and issue futile condemnations. That inaction
will undermine the Council’s credibility.
My country is very concerned about the increasing
tensions, as well as about the fact that the North Korean
people are prisoners of this crisis, which has lasted far
too long, and that many of North Korea’s neighbours
live in dread of a potential threat with irreparable
consequences. We supported draft resolution S/2022/431
as it was submitted to the Security Council because we
will never understand the logic of missile launches.
10/15

France believes firmly that the sanctions regime
must be strengthened and updated in new areas. That
was the objective of draft resolution S/2022/431,
presented today, which we supported unhesitatingly.
Today we deeply deplore the result of the voting, which
shows how the Council is divided. The use of the veto
amounts to protecting the North Korean regime and
giving it a blank cheque to launch even more weapons.
The Council was not up to the challenge of this major
proliferation crisis today. France will continue its efforts
to ensure that the Council is able to act and can regain
the unity it has had on this issue since the adoption of
resolution 1718 (2006), more than 15 years ago. At the
same time, the relaunch of a genuine political process
is more urgent than ever. Continuing to do nothing
will pose a major risk to regional stability and to the
international non-proliferation architecture.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
It goes without saying that this is a disappointing
day for the Security Council. It has refused to take
action in response to the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s unlawful launch of intercontinental ballistic
missiles. I wish that I could say I am surprised. We have
been circulating the text of draft resolution S/2022/431
for nine weeks. In that time, the countries that vetoed
the draft resolution have refused to engage on it, despite
our commitment to inclusivity and flexibility during
consultations. Before today, the Security Council had
a remarkable record of consensus and collective action
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

on this issue, going back many years. In 2016 and again
in 2017, the Council unanimously responded to the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s provocations
with resolutions that imposed sanctions and brought
collective condemnation of a very real threat to peace
and security. Today, two permanent members of the
Security Council chose to veto rather than act. And so,
we may ask, what has changed?
It is not the gravity of the threat that has changed.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea is still
expressing its intention to advance its programme
for weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and
ballistic missiles, and it has flagrantly violated the
Security Council’s resolutions 23 times this year
alone by launching ballistic missiles, including six
intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBM) — a missile
system that in the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s hands poses a grave threat to international
peace and security and to Council members. The
world is facing a clear and present danger from the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. That is why 13
of us supported this draft resolution — because it is,
and was, the right thing to do.
It is not the Security Council’s clear mandate
that has changed either. In 2017 the Security Council
unanimously and unambiguously decided that the
Council would impose further restrictions in the event
of another the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
ICBM launch. And as I mentioned earlier, restraint and
silence on the part of the Council has not eliminated or
even reduced the threat. If anything, the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has been emboldened by
its inaction.
It is not the dire humanitarian situation that has
changed. The people of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea are suffering, and even though the United
States has offered urgent humanitarian and coronavirus
disease (COVID-19) relief to the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea in good faith and independent of the
lack of progress on denuclearization, those offers of
assistance have gone unanswered.
It is not the willingness of the United States to
engage in diplomacy with the Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea and others that has changed. We
have made serious, sustained efforts, publicly and
privately, to pursue diplomacy with the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea without preconditions. And
we have urged China and Russia to engage with the rest

S/PV.9048

of the Security Council on this text, offering sincere
flexibility. As Secretary Blinken said just this morning,
“It is in all of our interests to uphold the rules, norms
and treaties that have reduced the spread of weapons of
mass destruction”.
So what is it? What has changed? The only thing that
has changed is the refusal of permanent members of the
Security Council to do their job. That has resulted in the
Council’s failure to fulfil its responsibilities to maintain
international peace and security by negotiating on the
text of today’s draft resolution, as well as the failure
of those members to preserve the Council’s unity and
credibility. They have decided to shield a proliferator
from facing the consequences of its actions, and they
have demonstrated the worthlessness of their word by
giving an explicit nod of approval to the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. For that, they will have to
explain themselves to the General Assembly. And I fear
that in the coming weeks they will have to explain why
they have enabled the further provocations that will
surely come.
Today’s reckless outcome means that the threat from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea will continue
to grow. It will continue to grow more dangerous, and
it sends a clear message to other proliferators that they
can act with impunity. The Council must stand up to
the threat of WMD proliferation, whether it comes from
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea or anyone
else. I also want to make it clear that sanctions are not
responsible for the dire humanitarian situation in the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. It is the result
of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s own
policies of spending resources on a WMD programme
to the neglect of its own people. And we will continue
to offer humanitarian assistance, including COVID-19
assistance, as I mentioned earlier. The Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea has only to accept it.
We resolve to continue to work to restrict the
development of the Democratic People’s Republic
of Korea’s unlawful WMD and ballistic-missile
programme together with the countries that are willing
to stand up for the international non-proliferation
regime and that refuse to ignore the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s repeated violations of
Security Council resolutions.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Japan.

22-3633311/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

26/05/2022

Mr. Ishikane (Japan): Japan deeply regrets the
result of the voting.

Given the state of affairs in the Council today, I
would like to conclude with three clear points.

I carefully listened to the explanations of vote by
the members of the Security Council who voted against
draft resolution S/2022/431. Still, the reasons behind the
objection to the draft resolution remain totally unclear
and unconvincing

First, existing Security Council resolutions
continue to be in effect. Today’s veto does not negate
the need for their strict implementation. Japan urges all
Member States to fulfil their obligations in that regard.
Japan also expects that the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1718 (2006) will continue to be
fully functional.

In December 2017 when Japan presided over the
Council, it unanimously adopted resolution 2397
(2017), which stipulates that further restrictions on
oil will be imposed in the event of a North Korean
intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) launch. All
permanent members of the Council agreed to that
stipulation at the time. It is deeply regrettable that, at
this time, the agreement was not respected by some of
those members. Such inconsistent behaviour seriously
undermines the credibility of the Council.
North Korea continues its destabilizing nuclear and
missile activities, including repeated ICBM launches,
in violation of numerous Council resolutions. Those
actions gravely threaten the peace and security of
the region and beyond. Yet we have seen no Council
resolutions adopted as a result of those activities. We
cannot help but ask: What is the veto for? What is the
Security Council for?
Yesterday North Korea again launched ballistic
missiles, including an ICBM-class ballistic missile.
Japan strongly condemns North Korea’s continued
provocative acts and believes that they further reinforce
the need for the Council to adopt a new sanctions
draft resolution.
Today’s draft resolution, put forward by the United
States, was indeed a well-considered one. While it
sought to update and strengthen sanctions, including
in key areas such as oil and the cyberdomain, it also
incorporated humanitarian perspectives and duly
reflected the situation of the ongoing pandemic in
North Korea. Japan would like to pay its deep respects
to the tireless efforts by the United States and other
Council members that have patiently engaged in serious
consultations to bring this balanced text to the table. The
draft resolution also expressed deep concern about the
grave hardship to which the people in North Korea are
subjected. In that context, we urge North Korea to take
concrete measures towards the immediate resolution of
the abductions issue.
12/15

Secondly, the Security Council needs to continue
to explore ways to address the ever-growing threat of
North Korea’s nuclear and missile activities. The most
appropriate way to address that serious challenge to
the maintenance of international peace and security
remains the adoption of a new draft resolution by a
strong and unified Council.
Thirdly, at the formal meeting of the General
Assembly to be held in 10 working days following
the exercise of today’s veto, Japan hopes to see all
Member States raise their voices against the illegal
and destabilizing activities by North Korea and the
non-fulfilment of the responsibilities of the Security
Council due to the exercise of veto — despite the
repeated violations of Security Council resolutions by
North Korea.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Cho Hyun (Republic of Korea): I would like
to thank you, Madam President, for convening this
meeting. I am grateful for having been invited to take
part in this important meeting.
We all vividly remember that we gathered here in
the Chamber on 11 May (see S/PV.9030) in response
to the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s launch
of an intercontinental ballistic missile in March. Along
with other delegations at that time, my delegation
condemned the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea’s ballistic-missile launches and called upon
North Korea to choose a path of engagement instead of
one of confrontation and escalation.
Almost every member of the Security Council
urged the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
to cease its provocations and stressed the need for
dialogue. Unfortunately, our continued call for dialogue
and engagement fell on deaf ears, and the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea once again responded with
additional launches.
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

Against that backdrop, the Republic of Korea
again condemns in the strongest terms the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea’s ballistic-missile launches,
which constitute a flagrant violation of multiple
Security Council resolutions. These provocative actions
by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea threaten
the peace and security of the Korean peninsula, the
region and beyond. Furthermore, if left unchecked,
such actions will also undermine the very foundation
of the global non-proliferation regime.
It is simply shocking to see that, even in the face
of the country’s recent massive coronavirus disease
outbreak, which its State media described as, “the
greatest upheaval in our history since the founding of
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea”, the country
does not relent in the development of its weapons
of mass destruction (WMDs) and ballistic-missile
programmes. Instead of fully committing to curbing
the pandemic, the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea is still preoccupied with its nuclear and ballistic
capabilities, diverting its scarce resources to be vainly
blown up in the sky.
Following the news of the outbreak, we were
the first to immediately offer help. We extended
our hand of unconditional assistance to tackle the
pandemic, yet the country’s response was a clenched
fist of ballistic-missile launches. Those launches,
particularly amid the ongoing pandemic, distinctly
demonstrate where the Pyongyang regime places its
national priorities — in weapons of mass destruction
and ballistic-missile programmes over its own people.
Indeed, we watch in horror as the people starve and
suffer. But we also clearly see that the money is spent
on weapons and that this is where the regime’s attention
remains. This cannot, and should not, go on; and we
must act accordingly.
In that context, it is with deep regret that the
Council failed to adopt draft resolution S/2022/431,
which is long overdue. My delegation is concerned
that this could send the wrong signal to both the
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and other
potential WMD-proliferators — that they can do
whatever they want with impunity. As I emphasized
earlier, unchecked provocations will only embolden
the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea’s continued
escalatory behaviour. Right now, we are looking at the
possibility of another nuclear test by the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea. At the same time,
Pyongyang recently released statements threatening

S/PV.9048

the pre-emptive use of nuclear weapons. All of those
developments are a cause for significant concern and
clearly indicate the direction that the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea is headed. I truly hope
that today’s decision will not be taken as carte blanche
for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to do
whatever it wants.
The Democratic People’s Republic of Korea
should realize that it will gain nothing from continued
provocations. As such, we urge Pyongyang to positively
respond to the call for dialogue to establish peace on
the Korean peninsula through complete, verifiable and
irreversible denuclearization. The Republic of Korea
remains committed to the denuclearization of the
Korean peninsula and will continue to offer dialogue
with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea to
that end.
The President: The representative of China has
asked for the floor to make a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): In her
earlier statement, the representative of the United States
levelled a slew of accusations, echoed by a non-Council
member, against China’s position. China categorically
rejects those accusations. We must point out that they
are entirely unfounded.
China has been a responsible member of the
Security Council and has engaged responsibly in
the Council’s work. My country has worked hard to
maintain Council unity. We have been facilitating
greater cooperation within the Council in order to
enable it to fulfil its mandate, as enshrined in the
Charter of the United Nations.
Such is the weight of the Security Council’s mandate
that each and every decision made in the Chamber has
profound and far-reaching implications. It is precisely
for that reason that China has been extremely prudent
and responsible when casting its vote whenever a draft
resolution is put to a vote. It is important to highlight
that voting in favour or against a draft text, or abstaining
in the voting, is China’s prerogative as a member of the
Security Council. China’s position is independently
self-determined and does not need to be aligned
with that of the United States. Such an alignment is
not required under the Council’s rules of procedure.
China’s voting position is based on its assessment as to
whether a proposal contributes to a solution, whether
it helps maintain international and regional peace and

22-3633313/15

S/PV.9048

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

security and whether it can head off greater tensions or
a broader disaster.
Those considerations also constitute an important
yardstick by which to measure the Council’s work.
The function of the Council is not to adopt draft
resolution after draft resolution and make statement
after statement ad infinitum, or to assert its authority
through sanctions and the use of force. In fact, if
the Council — with no regard for principles — were
to adopt certain draft resolutions that lead to dire
consequences and catastrophes for the sanctioned
countries and territories, it would be nothing but an
act of irresponsibility and dereliction of duty. In that
regard, it is useful to reflect upon the tragedies that are
playing out in Libya and elsewhere. The Council has
some painful lessons to learn in that regard, with the
benefit of hindsight.
The reason draft resolution S/2022/431 was not
adopted is very clear. It is not China’s fault in the
slightest. If the United States had accepted the proposals
of China and some other members of the Council,
this situation could easily have been averted. In fact,
perhaps some people wanted this very situation to come
about, in line with their cynical intentions.
China is a close neighbour of the Korean peninsula,
whose peace and stability is a matter of international
peace and security as well as China’s own security.
In order to ensure the peninsula’s peace and stability,
China must discharge its own responsibility in that
regard. We shall continue working to safeguard
the peace and security of the peninsula, ensure the
peninsula’s non-nuclearization and find a political
solution to the issue.
The President: I shall now make a further
statement in my capacity as the representative of the
United States.
In response to my colleague from China, we do not
ask China to align with the United States, but rather
to support Security Council resolutions that they have
already agreed to.
Draft resolution S/2022/431 failed today because
China and Russia vetoed it. We do agree that this is
a threat to security. It is a threat to our security, the
security of our partners in the region and to China and
Russia. That is why we thought it necessary to move
forward with the draft resolution.
14/15

26/05/2022

There has been some discussion over several
days about a proposal for a presidential statement
submitted by China, about which we were asked
various questions. I want to be clear that we never saw
any draft of that proposal. China said that it would
consider a presidential statement but, when pressed, it
said that the only acceptable provision was to update
the weapons-control list, which the Council already has
authorization to do, pursuant to previous resolutions.
I will therefore go back to where I started
by stating that this veto protects the Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, which has launched six
intercontinental ballistic missiles since the beginning
of the year, in explicit violation of multiple Security
Council resolutions.
China and Russia can therefore explain their actions
to the General Assembly in that regard.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
The representative of China has asked for the floor
to make a further statement.
Mr. Zhang Jun (China) (spoke in Chinese): I do
not want to take up too much of the Security Council’s
time, as time is a precious resource and I do not want to
prolong our discussions.
In fact, after my explanation of vote and supplemental
intervention, I gave a comprehensive explanation of
China’s position. I only wish to further point out that
the United States representative enumerated numerous
reasons to illustrate its position and to demonstrate that
its position has not changed.
However, a review of the most recent period and an
examination of what senior United States officials said
and did, including during their visit to North-East Asia,
points to the fact that the way that the United States
approaches the Korean peninsula is, in fact, changing.
That change is what has led to today’s complex situation.
How shall we go about solving the issue of the
Korean peninsula? The answer does not hinge on
whether or not the Council adopts a new draft resolution.
The crux of the matter is whether or not anyone wants
to use this issue as a card in their so-called Indo-Pacific
strategy or treat it as a chess piece on the chessboard of
that strategy. That is the nature of the issue.
As far as China is concerned, we have
consistently advocated for a political solution to the
22-36333

26/05/2022

Non-proliferation/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea

issue — the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula
and the maintenance of peace and stability in the region.
That position has not changed. If the position of other
countries has also not changed, it is very possible for us
to join hands and work together in the pursuit of peace
and stability on the Korean peninsula.
However, if some are covertly devising other plans,
with the end result being the spread of the flames of

S/PV.9048

war to North-East Asia and the Korean peninsula,
China would have no choice but to take stern and firm
action to defend the peace and stability of the peninsula
and that of the Asia-Pacific region — because that is
what we have to do in order to meet our responsibilities.
The meeting rose at 6.05 p.m.

22-3633315/15
