United Nations

S/PV.6063

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fourth year

6063rd meeting
Thursday, 8 January 2009, 9.15 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Kouchner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Burkina Faso . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Costa Rica . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Croatia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayr-Harting
Mr. Kafando
Mr. Zhang Yesui
Mr. Urbina
Mr. Jurica
Mr. Takasu
Mr. Shalgham
Mr. Heller
Mr. Yakovenko
Mr. Babacan
Mr. Butagira
Mr. Miliband
Ms. Rice
Mr. Le Luong Minh

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

09-20414 (E)

*0920414*

S/PV.6063

The meeting was called to order at 9.15 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East, including the
Palestinian question
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Egypt, Israel and Saudi Arabia, in
which they request to be invited to participate in the
consideration of the item on the Council’s agenda. In
conformity with the usual practice, I propose, with the
consent of the Council, to invite those representatives
to participate in the consideration of the item, without
the right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
On behalf of the Council, I welcome His
Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Egypt, and His Royal Highness
Prince Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Saudi Arabia.
In accordance with the request made in a letter
dated 8 January 2009 from the Permanent Observer of
Palestine to the United Nations, to be issued as
document S/2009/24, I propose, with the consent of the
Council, to invite the Permanent Observer of Palestine
to participate in the present meeting in accordance with
the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I welcome the presence of the Secretary-General,
His Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon, at this meeting.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2009/23, which contains the text of a draft
resolution submitted by the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland.
It is my understanding that the Council is ready
to proceed to the vote on the draft resolution before it.

2

Unless I hear any objection, I shall put the draft
resolution to the vote now.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as
Minister for Foreign Affairs of France.
Despite the difficulties, we are meeting in the
Security Council for the joint purpose of achieving a
ceasefire. The draft resolution that has been submitted
is commensurate with the very grave situation in the
Middle East today. The mobilization of the Council and
of such a large number of ministers from the region
attest to that.
Gaza is facing an unprecedented humanitarian
crisis. The toll of the violence has been extremely
heavy. Our thoughts tonight are with many victims of
this tragedy and with the bereaved families on both
sides. The immediate cessation of the fighting is the
overriding priority.
Like many others here, the European Union,
France and President Sarkozy have worked
continuously for the past 10 days to find a way out of
this situation.
We do not place States on the same level — and
of course I am referring to the State of Israel as well as
to the Palestinian State that we so desire — as
movements whose sole ambition is to destroy the peace
process through violence.
The draft resolution includes the framework
principles for a way out of the crisis, namely, an end to
the launching of rockets and to Israeli military
operations and a permanent ceasefire, which includes
in particular the opening of crossing points and
effective measures against weapons trafficking.
European Union ministers proposed that framework at
their meeting in Paris on 30 December. The President
of the French Republic negotiated it with the States of
the region during his visit to the Middle East.
Following that initiative, President Mubarak proposed
a peace plan to which the leaders of the region
responded positively. That plan provides us with the
sole viable way out of the crisis and the only hope for
peace. We are pleased that the draft resolution
encourages those efforts. The ongoing contacts
between the Israelis and the Egyptians give us a
measure of hope.

09-20414

S/PV.6063

Tonight, as a country that has always advocated
the essential role in the Middle East of the United
Nations and the Security Council, we have but one
regret, namely, that, despite our persistent calls, it has
not been possible for the Council to find a bit more
time to consider the points of view of the negotiators
on the ground and to endorse the results of the
negotiations under way to achieve a permanent
ceasefire. That message of hope must be heard without
delay. The ongoing negotiations to which I have
referred must be concluded very quickly. Peace is
essential.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I shall now put the draft resolution to the vote the
draft resolution contained in document S/2009/23.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Austria, Burkina Faso, China, Costa Rica,
Croatia, France, Japan, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya,
Mexico, Russian Federation, Turkey, Uganda,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Viet Nam
Against:
None
Abstaining:
United States of America
The President (spoke in French): The result of
the voting is as follows: 14 votes in favour, none
against and 1 abstention. The draft resolution has been
adopted as resolution 1860 (2009).
I now give the floor to His Excellency SecretaryGeneral Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: For the past two weeks,
people around the world have observed with grief and
horror the escalating violence and suffering in Gaza
and southern Israel and have looked to the United
Nations to put an end to the fighting. I am heartened
and relieved at the adoption by the Council today of a
resolution to bring an end to that tragic situation. The
Council’s decision signals the will of the international
community. It must be fully respected by all parties to
this conflict.
The resolution calls for an immediate and durable
ceasefire in and from Gaza. That will open the way for

09-20414

the United Nations to resume urgently the delivery of
humanitarian aid, food and medical supplies. All
parties in Israel and Gaza will need to respect that
humanitarian effort.
We also need to turn quickly to the process of
rebuilding what has been destroyed in the fighting. The
United Nations stands ready to assist in and support
that process.
An immediate and durable ceasefire is the first
step. However, we also all know that more will be
needed and that a political way forward is required to
deliver long-term security and peace.
My visit to the region next week will focus on
helping to ensure that the ceasefire is implemented and
that urgent humanitarian assistance reaches those in
need and on encouraging the diplomatic efforts
currently under way.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Council who wish to make statements following the
voting.
I give the floor to His Excellency Mr. David
Miliband, Secretary of State for Foreign and
Commonwealth Affairs of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Mr. Miliband (United Kingdom): Let me, first of
all, Sir, start by praising your presidential efforts over
the past three days to bring us together, as well as those
of the President of France for all that he has been
attempting to do to bring forward the goals that we
seek together.
We have been brought together over the past
three days first by the gravity of the situation that
currently exists in Gaza. Statistics do not do justice to
the situation there, but the word “crisis”, which is
sometimes overused, is wholly appropriate, in my
view, in that context. However, we have also been
brought together, I believe, by clarity of vision for the
future. The only way to secure dignity and security for
Israelis and Palestinians alike is for that dignity and
security to be for both of them.
The heart of this resolution, I believe, shows a
genuine consensus on a clear set of objectives. The
first is an immediate, durable and fully respected
ceasefire. The wording of the resolution is clear on that

3

S/PV.6063

point. The second is the humanitarian needs of the
Palestinian people in Gaza — in the short-term through
increased aid and then through the opening of
crossings, as per the 2005 Agreement. The third, the
security needs of Israelis, needs to be tackled through
the new measures on the illegal trafficking of arms.
The fourth is the political needs of Israelis and
Palestinians alike for a strong Palestinian Authority,
speaking for all Palestinians and negotiating in good
faith with Israel for the only solution to the conflict in
the Middle East: the two-State solution.
I believe that, tonight, the United Nations has
served its purpose of speaking loudly, clearly,
authoritatively and unequivocally. But we all have
further responsibilities: responsibilities for the parties
on the ground, responsibilities for regional States —
some of which, such as Egypt, are working so hard on
the practical measures that are now essential — and
responsibilities, too, for the whole international
community, because this crisis in the Middle East
affects us all and that is why it belongs in the Security
Council.
I said on Tuesday that our responsibility was to
chart a course back to resolution 1850 (2008). Today, I
believe we can do so with the route map set out in
resolution 1860 (2009) — not as a substitute for the
decisions that need to be made on the ground, but as a
complement to them. Our job is to turn the words of
the resolution into reality, and that is a task to which
the United Kingdom will remain wholly committed. To
that extent, our work does not finish; it must carry on
with renewed vigour.
The President (spoke in French): I call on Her
Excellency Ms. Condoleezza Rice, Secretary of State
of the United States of America.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): I am
pleased to join the members of the Council for this
important discussion tonight. It is obviously a very
serious situation in Gaza. And while our goal must be
the stabilization and normalization of Gaza through the
implementation of a durable and fully respected
ceasefire and an end to all terrorist activities, I think
that resolution 1860 (2009) shows that the Council and
the United Nations are indeed seized of the matter.
The resolution is a step towards our goals. It
reflects the international community’s concern about
the circumstances in Gaza and its desire for a
sustainable peace in Gaza.

4

I want especially to note that, while much work
remains to be done, there is important work under way.
In that regard, the work of Egyptian President Mubarak
in the mediation efforts of Egypt are to be not just
applauded, but supported. I believe that it is those
efforts that will ultimately help to lead to a durable
ceasefire, and that will lead not only to a durable
ceasefire but to a sustainable peace in Gaza, and we
must all support the Egyptian efforts.
Obviously, there are many tasks to be done to
root out the causes of the hostilities, including dealing
with the provision of rockets and the smuggling of
weapons, securing the borders so that we can lay the
basis for the reopening of crossings based on the
principles of the 2005 Agreement on Movement and
Access, and providing security for the Israeli people
and a better life for the people of Gaza.
We must establish an international consensus that
Gaza must never again be used as a launching pad for
rockets against Israeli citizens, because it is important
to remember how this crisis began. Violence in Gaza
was instigated by Hamas, a terrorist group that has
called for the destruction of Israel. Eighteen months
ago, Hamas took over the Gaza Strip in a coup, and
since then thousands of guns, rockets and mortars have
been smuggled into Gaza. Hamas refused to extend the
tahdiya, and continued armament is a root cause of the
current situation and has gravely endangered the
residents of both Gaza and southern Israel. Hamas’s
commitment to violence is an attack not only on Israel,
but also on the two-State solution.
We require principled resolution of the situation
in Gaza, and the resolution that we have adopted
tonight in fact gives us a basis on which to do this.
Of course, it is not just a matter of resolving the
situation on the ground. There will need to be a
principled resolution also of the political challenges in
Gaza that re-establishes the Palestinian Authority’s
control, including over borders, and facilitates the
normal operation of the Rafah and Kerem Shalom
crossings, as the resolution recognizes, and in time, the
opening of other crossings.
And we support President Abbas as he carries out
his responsibilities both with respect to governance and
in negotiations to establish a State of Palestine.
Regional States have previously recognized the
importance of this, notably in the 26 November Arab
League resolution.

09-20414

S/PV.6063

As we strive for a sustainable ceasefire, the
United States remains deeply concerned about the
innocent Palestinians who are suffering in Gaza, and
the United States will undertake, maintain and continue
the humanitarian efforts that we are making to support
the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East and the
non-governmental organizations that are working there.
Let me say, too, that the United States recognizes
the right of Israel, like other States, to exercise its right
of self-defence, and we have said to Israel that it is
obligated to take feasible steps to minimize the impact
of any actions on civilians. I want to remind the
Council also that Hamas continues to hold Israel
Defense Forces soldier Gilad Shalit, and he must be
released.
Finally, let me just note that, while we are dealing
with the current situation in Gaza, we must keep our
eye on the goal of resolution 1850 (2008), which we
adopted in this Chamber a short time ago. That is the
goal of establishing an enduring commitment to mutual
recognition; freedom from violence, incitement and
terror; and a two-State solution, building upon previous
agreements and obligations. All United Nations
Member States bear a responsibility to promote these
principles and to help the parties towards the
establishment of a State of Palestine to live in peace,
side by side with the State of Israel.
The United States thought it important to see the
outcomes of the Egyptian mediation efforts in order to
see what resolution 1860 (2009) might have been
supporting, and that is why we chose to abstain tonight.
But after a great deal of consideration, we decided that
the resolution — the text of which we support, the
goals of which we support and the objectives of which
we fully support — should indeed be allowed to go
forward. I believe that, in doing so, the Council has
provided a road map for a sustainable, durable peace in
Gaza.
The President (spoke in French): I call on His
Excellency Mr. Abdurrahman Mohamed Shalgham,
Secretary of the General People’s Committee for
Foreign Liaison and International Cooperation of the
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya.
Mr. Shalgham (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) (spoke
in Arabic): Before the hundreds of people being killed
every day in Gaza; the thousands being wounded; the
total destruction by naval, air and ground

09-20414

bombardment; and the long-standing siege of our
people in Gaza, we have sought urgently to put an end
to the Israeli aggression, lift the siege and provide the
Palestinian people with humanitarian assistance,
medicines and food. To that end, we submitted an Arab
draft resolution and stepped up our contacts with the
members of the Security Council in order to mobilize
support for it. In that respect, we thank those member
States that responded positively to our efforts.
After several meetings and lengthy discussions
with the United States of America, France, the United
Kingdom and Arab ministers currently present at the
United Nations, we formulated a draft resolution,
submitted by the United Kingdom, that the Arab Group
believes to meet our minimum requirements, including
an immediate ceasefire, the withdrawal of the Israeli
forces of aggression, the opening of the crossing points
and guarantees for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We therefore voted in favour of resolution
1860 (2009).
We believe, however, that the situation on the
ground in Gaza requires a speedier response and a
stronger resolution commensurate with the scope of the
tragedy. Although we do not agree with some of its
provisions, we voted in favour of the draft resolution.
Beyond this tragedy, another tragedy exists today:
that of the 11,000 Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails,
some of them elected members of the Legislative
Council. Yet we hear unending talk about one Israeli
prisoner, a soldier: just one soldier compared to 11,000
civilians, including children, women and members of
parliament. Yet nobody defends them.
But the important and urgent thing now is to
implement the provisions of the present resolution in
such a way as to put an end to the Israeli massacre in
Gaza and to halt the Israeli destruction machine.
Working to ensure the implementation of this
resolution will be a test for us and our credibility. It
will also be a test for peace. This Israeli crime must not
continue.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ali Babacan, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Turkey.
Mr. Babacan (Turkey): After three days of
negotiations, we finally managed to reach agreement
on the resolution just adopted. We may not be fully
satisfied with the text before us, but, after all, it is a

5

S/PV.6063

compromise representing the will of the Security
Council. Therefore, I thank everyone who made this
possible.
The crucial task for the Security Council at this
stage was to make a strong appeal to stop the
bloodshed and halt all military activities. The
resolution we have just adopted achieves this, with its
clear call for an immediate ceasefire and a full
withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza. The
unequivocal call for unimpeded access for
humanitarian assistance throughout Gaza and the
emphasis on the sustained and regular flow of goods
and people to Gaza are equally important and strong
messages of this resolution. This is in fact a call for the
lifting of the blockade in all aspects.
Now, of course, we have to focus on the
immediate implementation of the terms of this
resolution, without any delay. Full and effective
implementation of this resolution is a must in order to
put an end to this tragedy and to the suffering of the
people of Gaza. Right after the ceasefire, it will be
vital to concentrate our efforts on the national
reconciliation of Palestinians.
For its part, Turkey will exert every effort for the
implementation of all aspects of this resolution. We
will continue to work with our friends and partners in
the region and beyond to secure lasting calm and
stability in the region.
Finally, I would like to take this opportunity to
reiterate the need to have a viable and comprehensive
peace on all tracks of the Middle East peace process.
Turkey will lend its full support to all endeavours in
that direction.
The President (spoke in French): I now call on
His Excellency Mr. Alexander Yakovenko, Deputy
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation.
Mr. Yakovenko (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation supported the
adoption of the present resolution, guided by Russia’s
fundamental position in favour of an immediate end,
by all parties, to hostilities and a resumption of fullfledged diplomatic processes aimed at finding a
comprehensive and lasting solution to the many
problems regarding Gaza. We welcome the fact that, as
a result of collective efforts by members of the
Security Council and Arab delegations, we have been

6

able to adopt a balanced and, we hope, effective
solution.
We continue to believe that the situation in and
around Gaza cannot be resolved by the use of force or
hostilities in the region — which can only exacerbate a
situation which is already unbearable for civilians in
the Gaza Strip. The fact that all members of the
Council have come out in favour of a durable ceasefire
in Gaza does not mean that our work is done. It is
important to support efforts by various parties,
including Russia, aimed at overcoming the crisis in and
around Gaza.
In conclusion, I reaffirm that developments in
recent hours have underscored the need for an
immediate response by Security Council members to
the crisis in the region. We strongly urge the parties to
heed the views expressed by the Security Council.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Costa Rica.
Mr. Urbina (Costa Rica) (spoke in Spanish): As
we said only two days ago, resolution 1850 (2008) and
the President’s statement to the press of 28 December
2008 (see press release SC/9559) were not sufficient to
halt the continuing deterioration of the humanitarian
situation and the escalation of violence and their
appalling consequences for the civilian population of
the Gaza Strip. Nor were they sufficient to ease the
fear experienced by the Israeli population because of
the launching of rockets into their territory by
Palestinian factions, including Hamas militants.
Today, after much apprehension and travail, the
Council has adopted a resolution which, while not
having received all the necessary political support, has
tremendous moral force. The Council has adopted a
resolution calling on the parties to the conflict to bring
about an immediate cessation of hostilities. The
resolution unequivocally reflects the overwhelming
resolve of the international community, which has
followed the work of the Council with great attention.
It is appropriate now to underscore the legally
binding nature of this resolution. Compliance by all
parties to the conflict is mandatory. The parties must
understand clearly that failure to comply could, and
should, entail serious consequences.
My delegation has advocated that the Security
Council should make an active contribution to peace in
the Middle East. Today, I believe that we are

09-20414

S/PV.6063

contributing to the attainment of that lofty goal. We
harbour the hope that the Council will also be
consistent with the decision it has taken today and that
it will use its authority in order to ensure respect for
that decision.

Japan hopes that this resolution will help create
conditions to renew efforts for putting the peace
process back on track, in accordance with the
principles laid out in resolution 1850 (2008) to achieve
a comprehensive, just and lasting peace.

I hardly need say that my delegation will work
with all other members of the Council to make an
effective contribution to peace and well-being for all
inhabitants of the Middle East.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Mexico.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Japan.
Mr. Takasu (Japan): Japan was pleased to join in
the adoption of resolution 1860 (2009), which we
believe will contribute to the cessation of violence in
and around the Gaza Strip. We consider it important
that the Security Council was able to discharge its
heavy responsibility by taking, with the broadest
political support, a formal decision on the grave and
serious situation in Gaza, after intensive consultations
over the past few days.
We applaud in particular the tireless efforts and
leadership of Arab foreign ministers and the foreign
ministers of France, the United Kingdom and the
United States of America, which made it possible to
achieve this important outcome.
The resolution above all stresses the urgency of
the situation and calls for an immediate, durable and
fully respected ceasefire. It also calls for the
unimpeded provision and distribution of humanitarian
assistance.
In the meantime, we were shocked to hear today
about a tragic incident — an attack against a United
Nations vehicle, killing United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
(UNRWA) contract workers and injuring others and
forcing UNRWA to suspend its operations. We extend
our deepest condolences to their families.
This incident, along with other similar incidents,
underlines the need for the ceasefire to be put in place
immediately and permanently. The calls for a ceasefire,
humanitarian assistance and intensified efforts for
arrangements and guarantees for a ceasefire in Gaza, as
contained in the resolution, must be heeded and
implemented immediately and faithfully by all
concerned in order to stop the cycle of violence and
restore calm, normalcy and safe living conditions in
and around Gaza.

09-20414

Mr. Heller (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Faced
with the tragic developments in the Gaza Strip since
December, which have caused destruction, distress and
many deaths, in particular among the civilian
population, the Security Council, being charged with
the maintenance of international peace and security,
has an obligation to act and to contribute to an end to
hostilities and to re-establishing calm in the region. It
is finally doing so tonight.
Over the past three days, the Security Council,
with the vital assistance of Arab countries and their
ministers, who are represented here, has undertaken
substantial efforts to achieve the best possible
agreement in order to bring about an immediate,
durable and fully respected ceasefire, humanitarian
access to the area and the optimum conditions for a
return to the peace process.
Mexico has emphatically stressed the need for the
action of the Security Council to be expressed in the
most united fashion possible. Mexico therefore decided
to support the adoption of, resolution 1860 (2009),
which was negotiated through intensive consultations
in the expectation that its provisions would be applied
immediately on the ground.
The resolution that has been adopted has its
merits. It promotes, in a balanced manner, the
conditions for a durable ceasefire, allows for
unrestricted humanitarian access through the
establishment of corridors for the delivery of assistance
and seeks the resumption of negotiations as the only
possible way to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
It is a question not of going back to the immediate past,
but of building the best possible foundation for the
future.
However, my delegation would have preferred the
resolution that we have just adopted to incorporate an
explicit reference to the importance of respecting the
provisions of international humanitarian law. Likewise,
we should have liked to see a direct reference in the
text to the establishment of an international mechanism

7

S/PV.6063

for monitoring all measures to be agreed upon in the
context of the diplomatic negotiations under way.
The United Nations through the Security Council,
needs to endorse that process and continue to promote
its further development and ensure its rigorous
implementation. By adopting this resolution with a
view to the future, the Security Council has fully
shouldered its responsibilities and manifested its
support for the need to resume the peace process so as
to bring about the establishment of a Palestinian State,
living side by side with Israel in peace, within secure
and recognized borders, in accordance with resolution
1850 (2008).
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of China.
Mr. Zhang Yesui (China) (spoke in Chinese): We
wish to thank the parties concerned for their tireless
efforts to reach a consensus on the text of resolution
1860 (2009). Since the outbreak of the conflict, we
have consistently supported swift action by the Council
to adopt a resolution urging the parties concerned to
bring about an immediate ceasefire, open border
crossings and ease the humanitarian crisis in Gaza.
While we believe that the resolution we adopted
this evening is not totally satisfactory, we nevertheless
voted in favour, given the gravity and urgency of
developments on the ground. The resolution reflects
the shared expectations and common aspirations of the
international community.
We urge the parties concerned to achieve an
immediate ceasefire and to implement the resolution in
a comprehensive and effective manner so as to avoid
causing more civilian casualties and a humanitarian
crisis. We hope the international community will work
to bring the parties concerned back to the track of
negotiations and to achieve a just and durable solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian question.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Uganda.
Mr. Butagira (Uganda): Uganda voted in favour
of the resolution because of the urgency of the need to
put an end to the hostilities and to the humanitarian
tragedy. We believe that the resolution is balanced and
provides for an immediate, durable and fully respected
ceasefire, the protection of civilians and humanitarian
access.

8

During the past few days, Uganda has called for
the Council to maintain its unity, and today’s outcome
reflects a consensus resolution, which is an indication
that the Council is aware of its important responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
Recent developments are a reminder that the Council
should remain fully engaged in seeking a
comprehensive peace in the Middle East through the
two-State solution, with Palestine and Israel living in
peace with one another. Finally, we urge the parties
involved to move very quickly to implement the
provisions of this resolution.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Viet Nam.
Mr. Le Luong Minh (Viet Nam): My delegation
would like to have seen a resolution with more clearcut language, providing for an immediate ceasefire and
an immediate withdrawal of Israeli forces from Gaza,
which we consider essential for putting an early end to
the current crisis and relieving the innocent Palestinian
people of their suffering and numerous hardships.
However, we are aware of the urgency of the
situation and the urgent need for action by the Council
in the face of the continuously deteriorating situation,
especially the humanitarian situation on the ground.
We also note that the resolution we have just adopted
does contain measures that are comprehensive and
balanced and that, if implemented with good faith,
would contribute to the resolution of the ongoing crisis
and restore or otherwise create conditions conducive to
bringing the Middle East peace process back on track
towards a lasting solution based on the existence of
two States, Israel and Palestine, living side by side in
peace, with secure and recognized borders, in
accordance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. Therefore, Viet Nam decided to support
and vote in favour of resolution 1860 (2009). We look
forward to contributing to efforts to ensure its effective
implementation.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Burkina Faso.
Mr. Kafando (Burkina Faso) (spoke in French):
My delegation welcomes the Security Council’s
adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) regarding the
present serious situation in the Middle East.
The Council could not remain indifferent to the
tragedy under way in Gaza, especially in the light of its

09-20414

S/PV.6063

mandate, but also of the serious humanitarian
consequences. We believe that the Council should have
acted earlier, but, as the expression goes, better late
than never. That is why we joined the consensus, which
reflects the will of the Security Council to contribute to
putting an end to the suffering of the civilian
population. We feel that the message could have been
more clearly articulated, but we also know that the
sense of urgency required compromise. Now, we need
to do our utmost to ensure effective implementation of
this important resolution.
We would like once again to welcome the spirit
of compromise and the sense of responsibility
demonstrated by various parties, in particular the
Group of Arab States. We hope that the resolution we
have just adopted will contribute to the success of
other initiatives under way, ultimately achieving a
lasting political solution to the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict.
From that standpoint, we would like to express
our support for and encouragement of the SecretaryGeneral, who has proposed to visit the region next
week.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Austria.
Mr. Mayr-Harting (Austria): Austria believes
that there was an urgent need for this formal call by the
Council for an immediate, permanent and fully
respected ceasefire. We also believe that it was
essential to preserve the unity of the Council regarding
this important matter that is of concern to the entire
world. We therefore are grateful for the efforts
undertaken, in particular by the United Kingdom,
France, the United States, Libya and the group of Arab
countries represented here, which made this consensus
possible.
There must be an unconditional halt to all rocket
attacks out of Gaza on Israel, as well as to all military
action by Israel in Gaza. For this reason, Austria
believes that today’s decision must be followed up as
rapidly as possible by the establishment of the
guarantees and arrangements mentioned in today’s
resolution. We actively support the international efforts
under way to make this possible.
Another priority is the lasting and sustained
opening of the border crossings so that we can come to

09-20414

grips with the ever more desperate humanitarian
situation affecting the population in Gaza.
Finally, like Mexico, Austria would draw the
Council’s attention to one point not explicitly
mentioned in today’s resolution but that is of key
importance: the obligation of all parties to respect
human rights law and humanitarian law. The
developments of recent days and of today in particular
have shown how important that is.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Croatia.
Mr. Jurica (Croatia): Let me begin by expressing
our appreciation for all efforts to come up with a clear
Council response to the situation in Gaza. We
commend the intense personal engagement of the
ministers, which has made it possible to adopt this
important resolution, which has our full support. The
resolution reflects a number of substantive messages
that have emerged from the thorough diplomatic
engagement in New York and in the region over the
past days.
In view of the ongoing conflict, an immediate,
permanent and effective ceasefire is a necessity — a
ceasefire that will be credible and implemented by all,
one that will eradicate conditions that have led to the
current state of escalation and will end both the
suffering and deprivation in Gaza and the persistent
terrorist threat under which the population of southern
Israel lives. It is important that it does not allow for the
return to the status quo. Only if the conditions on the
ground are suck that they can guarantee a ceasefire that
will be fully respected by both sides, that Israel can be
assured that its population will not be exposed to the
continuing terror of rocket attacks and that weapons
smuggling by Hamas will not be tolerated can we hope
to have a sustainable solution to the crisis. In the
interest of a lasting state of calm, it is imperative that
there be confidence in the mechanisms on the ground.
As intense diplomatic activity in the region continues,
let me reiterate our support for the efforts that Egypt
and others are investing in the process.
Finally, I would like to reiterate Croatia’s belief
that political dialogue is the only way to achieve a
lasting peace based on a two-State solution. It is
essential that the Council remain guided by the
objectives reaffirmed by resolution 1850 (2008) in its
efforts to find a solution to this unfolding crisis.

9

S/PV.6063

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Mr. Riyad al-Malki, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Palestinian National Authority.
Mr. Al-Malki (Palestine) (spoke in Arabic): The
adoption of resolution 1860 (2009) was delayed several
days despite the humanitarian crisis and the appalling
loss of lives among civilians in Gaza. More than 760
Palestinian martyrs have fallen, 40 per cent of them
women and children. More than 3,000 persons have
been wounded, and vast damage has been done to the
basic infrastructure in the district, including United
Nations installations, in flagrant breach of international
humanitarian law.
After days-long consultations to reach this
binding resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire,
Israel must now put an end to its aggression against the
Palestinian people and fully withdraw Israeli forces
from the Gaza Strip. The resolution calls for the lifting
of the blockade and the opening of the crossings in
accordance with the 2005 Agreement on Movement
and Access, and calls for guarantees ensuring the
sustained opening of those crossings.
In that regard, we would like to express our
thanks to all our Arab brethren in the Arab Ministerial
Council, chaired by His Royal Highness Prince Saud
Al-Faisal, for their principled and united position. This
played a fundamental role in achieving, together with
friendly countries, the adoption of the resolution.
Now Israel, the occupying Power, must
immediately implement this resolution. Aggression
must cease so that we all may have the opportunity to
work to heal our people’s wounds and to rebuild what
the brutal Israeli war machine has destroyed in Gaza.
The President (spoke in French): I now invite
His Royal Highness Prince Saud Al-Faisal, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Saudi Arabia, to take the floor.
Prince Al-Faisal (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in
Arabic): Today raises our hopes for a new path in the
work of the Security Council. The Security Council has
shouldered its responsibility to put an end to the
tragedy taking place in Gaza. It is our hope that the
step taken this evening will pave the way to resolving
it. By adopting resolution 1860 (2009), the Security
Council is restoring confidence in the machinery of
peacemaking. We hope that all parties will see this as
an achievement for international peace and security
and that it will serve as a model for addressing any

10

future crises that may arise. However, the real joy is
not what we have achieved here but that which will be
felt in Gaza, where it is hoped that our achievement
today will save many human lives.
We must always remember that the Security
Council has served the people, alleviated their
suffering and contributed to their well-being, and that
it is not a device to be manipulated by States. What the
Security Council achieved today is the result of the
efforts and goodwill of all participants. Yet, when we
recall the high cost and the loss of human lives, it
limits our sense of pride in this accomplishment.
Success always has a price and in this case it was a
little too high. Thus, we hope that this achievement
will be blessed and built upon.
In conclusion, we hope that all parties will abide
by the resolution so that we can build a durable and
just settlement to a conflict that has bedevilled the
Middle East and cost it heavily for so long.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Ahmed Aboul Gheit,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Egypt.
Mr. Aboul Gheit (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): I
should like to express our deep thanks and gratitude to
you — my friend, Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner —
and your friendly country for the efforts that you have
undertaken. I would like to say that we are truly and
completely satisfied and reassured that the Council has
finally succeeded in adopting this resolution.
President Mubarak initiated steps by assuming
Egypt’s historical responsibilities towards the
Palestinian question and by offering a comprehensive
road map three days ago to settle the situation in Gaza.
Today’s resolution welcomes that initiative, which was
submitted at Sharm El-Sheikh in the presence of the
French President, Mr. Sarkozy. President Mubarak
personally welcomes the resolution that we have
adopted today. We believe that it offers significant and
crucial support for the Egyptian effort. The people of
Egypt and other Arab peoples, who are closely
following today’s important development hope that the
Council will ensure the immediate implementation of
the resolution in order to avoid further bloodshed and
the killing of innocent civilians.
In thanking the Council and its members, we
would particularly like to thank His Excellency the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the United Kingdom

09-20414

S/PV.6063

and Government and delegation, who worked tirelessly
and sincerely with us from the very beginning and
provided a proposal that constituted the basis on which
we reached the resolution that we have adopted
tonight.
Egypt, which is mentioned twice in the
resolution, assures the Council that it will spare no
effort, working with all the sincerity that our brothers,
the Palestinians, and the international community have
witnessed in our dealings with all parties to restore
calm and to provide the necessary environment for the
peace process to continue, so as to establish a
Palestinian State with Jerusalem as its capital, as it
makes every possible effort to restore the unity of the
Palestinian people and to achieve Palestinian national
reconciliation. I wish to underscore that all
Palestinians, for all their political differences, are part
of the same intrinsic whole. They have one cause, one
just cause, and Egypt will make every effort to bridge
the gaps between them so as to achieve the supreme
Palestinian interest.
Finally, let us establish an immediate ceasefire
and Israeli withdrawal from Gaza. Let us alleviate the
suffering of the people of Gaza, put an end to the
blockade and implement the resolution as soon as
possible, in such a way as to restore the tahdiya to the
Gaza Strip and open the way for the reconciliation that
we began to work for a month ago.

09-20414

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Israel.
Ms. Shalev (Israel): In 2005, when Israel left
Gaza, we hoped that we would never have to return.
But eight years of continuous rocket attacks by the
Hamas terrorist organization, Hamas’ refusal to extend
the period of calm and its smuggling of weapons
during that period left Israel with no choice but to act
in self-defence.
Responsibility for the current hostilities lies
squarely with Hamas. The international community
must focus its attention on the cessation of Hamas’
terrorist activity and make it clear that a terrorist
organization can never be a legitimate leadership.
The past eight years of terror and the period of
so-called calm have taught us that any arrangement
must be fully respected and secured, including the total
cessation of rocket fire and smuggling, in order to be
durable and to allow the possibility of lasting peace.
The President (spoke in French): There are no
further speakers inscribed on my list. The Security
Council has thus concluded the present stage of its
consideration of the item on its agenda.
The meeting rose at 10.15 p.m.

11
