A/RES/73/204

United Nations

General Assembly

Distr.: General
9 January 2019

Seventy-third session
Agenda item 83

Resolution adopted by the General Assembly
on 20 December 2018
[on the report of the Sixth Committee (A/73/555)]

73/204.

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts
The General Assembly,
Recalling its biennial resolutions on the status of the Protocols Additional to the
Geneva Conventions of 1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts, including its resolution 71/144 of 13 December 2016,
Having considered the report of the Secretary-General, 1
Reaffirming the continuing value of established humanitarian rules relating to
armed conflicts and the need to respect and ensure respect for those rules in all
circumstances within the scope of the relevant international instruments, pending the
earliest possible termination of such conflicts,
Stressing the need to consolidate the existing body of international humanitarian
law through its universal acceptance and the need for wide dissemination and full
implementation of such law at the national level, and expressi ng concern about all
violations of the Geneva Conventions of 1949 2 and the Additional Protocols, 3
Calling upon Member States to disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law as widely as possible, and calling upon all parties to armed conflict
to apply international humanitarian law,
Noting with satisfaction the increasing number of national commissions and
other bodies involved in advising authorities at the national level on the
implementation, dissemination and development of international hu manitarian law,
Noting with appreciation the meetings of representatives of those bodies
organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross, together with relevant

__________________

A/73/277.
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 75, Nos. 970–973.
3
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513, and vol. 2404, No. 43425.
1
2

18-22496 (E)

110119

*1822496*

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/73/204

partners such as national Red Cross and Red Crescent societies, to facilitate the
sharing of concrete experience and the exchange of views on their roles and on the
challenges they face,
Stressing the possibility of making use of the International Humanitarian Fact Finding Commission in relation to an armed conflict, pursuant to article 90 of
Protocol I 4 to the Geneva Conventions,
Stressing also the possibility for the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission to facilitate, through its good offices, the restoration of an attitude of
respect for the Geneva Conventions and Protocol I,
Taking note of the fact that the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding
Commission conducted its first operational mission in 2017,
Taking note also of the fact that, in paragraphs 8 and 9 of its resolution
1894 (2009) of 11 November 2009 on the protection of civilians in armed conflict,
the Security Council noted the range of existing methods used, on a case -by-case
basis, for gathering information on alleged violations of applicable internationa l law
relating to the protection of civilians, underlined the importance in that regard of
receiving information that is timely, objective, accurate and reliable, and considered
the possibility, to that end, of using the International Humanitarian Fact -Finding
Commission established by article 90 of Protocol I,
Noting with appreciation the role of the International Committee of the Red
Cross in facilitating and offering protection to the victims of armed conflicts,
Noting with appreciation also the continuing efforts of the International
Committee of the Red Cross to promote and disseminate knowledge of international
humanitarian law, in particular the Geneva Conventions and the Additional Protocols,
Noting the special responsibilities of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies, as auxiliaries to the public authorities of their respective States in the
humanitarian field, to cooperate with and assist their Governments in the promotion,
dissemination and implementation of international humanitarian la w,
Welcoming the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949,
Emphasizing the fundamentally non-discriminatory character of international
humanitarian law, including as reflected in the preamble to the 1977 Additional
Protocol I to the 1949 Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, relating to the
Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts, which, inter alia, reaffirms
that the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and of Additional
Protocol I must be fully applied in all circumstances to all persons who are protected
by those instruments, without any adverse distinction based on the origin of the armed
conflict or on the causes espoused by or attributed to the parties to the conflict,
Recalling the imperative need to improve compliance with international
humanitarian law, recognized by all States at the thirty-second International
Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 8 to
10 December 2015,
Welcoming the continued engagement of States in the intergovernmental
process, and recalling its State-driven and consensus-based character, aimed at
finding ways to enhance the implementation of international humanitarian law,
__________________
4

2/5

Ibid., vol. 1125, No. 17512.
18-22496

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/73/204

Noting the close cooperation between the International Committee of the Red
Cross and States to further strengthen international humanitarian law protecting
persons deprived of their liberty in relation to armed conflict,
Welcoming efforts by States to implement their obligations under international
humanitarian law, as well as programmes and other measures of States and their
armed forces that promote or ensure compliance with international humanitarian law,
Noting the work undertaken by States and by the International Committee of the
Red Cross in relation to sexual and gender-based violence in armed conflict,
Noting also the work undertaken by States, the International Red Cross and Red
Crescent Movement and other actors in the “Health Care in Danger” project to
improve the protection of the provision of and access to health car e,
Noting with appreciation Security Council resolution 2286 (2016) of 3 May
2016, and in this regard calling upon all parties to armed conflict to respect and
protect the wounded and sick, as well as health-care personnel, humanitarian
personnel exclusively engaged in medical duties and their means of transport and
equipment, as well as hospitals and other medical facilities, in armed conflict, in
accordance with their obligations under international humanitarian law,
Noting the serious concern expressed by States regarding the humanitarian
impact caused by cluster munitions, and noting the entry into force of the Convention
on Cluster Munitions 5 on 1 August 2010,
Noting also the entry into force of the Arms Trade Treaty 6 on 24 December 2014,
Welcoming the important contribution to the protection of victims of armed
conflicts made by the significant debate generated by the publication in 2005 of the
study by the International Committee of the Red Cross on customary international
humanitarian law, as well as other recent initiatives by the Committee, welcoming
also its efforts to update regularly its customary international humanitarian law
database, and looking forward to further constructive discussion on the subject,
Acknowledging the fact that the Rome Statute of the International Criminal
Court 7 covers the most serious crimes of international concern under international
humanitarian law and that the Rome Statute, while recalling that it is the duty of every
State to exercise its criminal jurisdiction over those responsible for such crimes,
shows the determination of the international community to put an end to impunity for
the perpetrators of such crimes and thus to contribute to their prevention,
Noting the amendments to article 8 of the Rome Statute of the International
Criminal Court, relating to war crimes under the Rome S tatute, adopted on 10 June
2010 at the Review Conference of the Rome Statute, held in Kampala from 3 1 May
to 11 June 2010,
Acknowledging the usefulness of discussing in the General Assembly the status
of instruments of international humanitarian law relevant to the protection of victims
of armed conflicts,
1.
Welcomes the universal acceptance of the Geneva Conventions of 1949, 2
and notes the trend towards a similarly wide acceptance of the two Additional
Protocols of 1977; 8

__________________

Ibid., vol. 2688, No. 47713.
See resolution 67/234 B.
7
United Nations, Treaty Series, vol. 2187, No. 38544.
8
Ibid., vol. 1125, Nos. 17512 and 17513.
5
6

18-22496

3/5

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/73/204

2.
Calls upon all States parties to the Geneva Conventions that have not yet
done so to consider becoming parties to the Additional Protocols 3 at the earliest
possible date;
3.
Calls upon all States that are already parties to Protocol I,4 or those States
not parties, upon becoming parties to Protocol I, to make the declaration provided for
under article 90 of that Protocol and to consider making use, where appropriate, of
the services of the International Humanitarian Fact-Finding Commission in
accordance with the provisions of article 90 of Protocol I;
4.
Calls upon all States that have not yet done so to consider becoming parties
to the Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed
Conflict and the two Protocols thereto, 9 in the context of the upcoming twentieth
anniversary of the Second Protocol to the Hague Convention of 1954 for the
Protection of Cultural Property in the Event of Armed Conflict, and to other relevant
treaties on international humanitarian law relating to the protection of victims of
armed conflict;
5.
Calls upon States to consider becoming parties to the Optional Protocol to
the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the involvement of children in armed
conflict; 10
6.
Calls upon all States parties to the Protocols Additional to the Geneva
Conventions to ensure their wide dissemination and full implementation;
7.
Affirms the necessity of making the implementation of international
humanitarian law more effective, and supports its further strengthening and
development;
8.
Notes with appreciation the 10 resolutions adopted at the thirty-second
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, held in Geneva from 8
to 10 December 2015, in particular resolutions 1 to 4, recalls their importance, as well
as the recommendations for further actions therein, in strengthening internation al
humanitarian law, and notes with appreciation in this regard resolution 2, entitled
“Strengthening compliance with international humanitarian law”, in which the
Conference, inter alia, recommended the continuation of an inclusive, State -driven
intergovernmental process based on the principle of consensus and in line with the
guiding principles of the consultation process to find agreement on features and
functions of a potential forum of States and to find ways to enhance the
implementation of international humanitarian law using the potential of the
International Conference and international humanitarian law regional forums;
9.
Calls upon Member States to actively participate in the thirty-third
International Conference of the Red Cross and Red Crescent, to be held in Geneva
in 2019;
10. Welcomes the activities of the Advisory Service on International
Humanitarian Law of the International Committee of the Red Cross in supporting
efforts made by Member States to take legislative and administrative action to
implement international humanitarian law and in promoting the exchange of
information on those efforts between Governments, and reminds Member States of
the availability of the manual on domestic implementation of international
humanitarian law;
11. Also welcomes the increasing number of national commissions or
committees for the implementation of international humanitarian law and their work
__________________
9
10

4/5

Ibid., vol. 249, No. 3511, and vol. 2253, No. 3511.
Ibid., vol. 2173, No. 27531.
18-22496

Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 1949
and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts

A/RES/73/204

in promoting the incorporation of treaties on international humanitarian law into
national law and disseminating the rules of international humanitarian law, and
encourages Member States that have not yet done so to consider establishing national
commissions or committees with the support of national Red Cross and Red Crescent
societies where relevant, to advise and assist Governments in implementing and
disseminating knowledge of international humanitarian law;
12. Commends the International Committee of the Red Cross for organizing
the universal meeting of national committees and similar bodies on international
humanitarian law, held in Geneva from 30 November to 2 December 2016, and invites
the International Committee of the Red Cross to continue to organize this meeting;
13. Requests the Secretary-General to submit to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session a comprehensive report on the status of the Additional Protocols
relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts, as well as on measures taken
to strengthen the existing body of international humanitarian law, inter alia, with
respect to its dissemination and full implementation at th e national level, based on
information received from Member States and the International Committee of the
Red Cross;
14. Encourages Member States and the International Committee of the Red
Cross, in transmitting information to the Secretary-General, to focus on new
developments and activities during the reporting period;
15. Encourages Member States to explore ways of facilitating the submission
of information for future reports of the Secretary-General and, in this context, to
consider the convenience of using a questionnaire as drafted by Member States, with
the assistance of the International Committee of the Red Cross and, as appropriate, in
consultation with the Secretariat, for submission to the General Assembly at its
seventy-fifth session;
16. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its seventy-fifth session
the item entitled “Status of the Protocols Additional to the Geneva Conventions of
1949 and relating to the protection of victims of armed conflicts”.
62nd plenary meeting
20 December 2018

18-22496

5/5
