S/2023/76

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
1 February 2023
Original: English

Sixteenth report of the Secretary-General on the threat
posed by ISIL (Da’esh) to international peace and security
and the range of United Nations efforts in support of
Member States in countering the threat
I. Introduction
1.
In adopting its resolution 2253 (2015), the Security Council expressed its
determination to address the threat posed to international peace and security by
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant 1 (ISIL, hereinafter referred to as “Da’esh”) 2 and
associated individuals and groups and requested that the Secretary -General provide
an initial strategic-level report on the threat, followed by updates every four months.
In its resolution 2610 (2021), the Council requested that the Secretary-General
continue to provide, every six months, strategic-level reports that reflect the gravity
of the threat posed by Da’esh to international peace and security and the range of
United Nations efforts in support of Member States in countering the threat.
2.
The present report is the sixteenth such report. 3 It was prepared by the Analytical
Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 (2004) and
2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al-Qaida and the Taliban and associated
individuals and entities, 4 the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate
and the Office of Counter-Terrorism, in close collaboration with other United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact entities.
3.
During the second half of 2022, the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates to
international peace and security remained high and increased in and around conflict
zones where the group was present. The convergence of global threats, in particular
the complex and interconnected relationship between armed conflict, terrorist attacks
and transnational organized crime, was a development that must be taken into account
for counter-terrorism efforts targeting Da’esh. While the United Nations continued to
support Member States in countering Da’esh and other terrorist groups, including
through the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact,

__________________

Listed as Al-Qaida in Iraq (QDe.115).
In line with General Assembly resolution 75/291.
3
See S/2016/92, S/2016/501, S/2016/830, S/2017/97, S/2017/467, S/2018/80, S/2018/770,
S/2019/103, S/2019/612, S/2020/95, S/2020/774, S/2021/98, S/2021/682, S/2022/63 and
S/2022/576.
4
The present threat assessment is based in part on the Monitoring Team’s thirty -first report.
1
2

23-00963 (E)

070223

*2300963*

S/2023/76

multilateral cooperation remained essential for the integrated and balanced
interpretation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy.

II. Threat assessment
A.

Overview and evolution of the threat
4.
As observed in previous reports, the threat posed by Da’esh and its affiliates
was high and increased in particular in conflict zones and neighbouring countries.
The geographic spread and incidence of terrorist violence by Da’esh increased across
the African continent, where Da’esh, its affiliates and other terrorist groups continued
to exploit local conflict dynamics and fragilities in order to advance their agendas.
The situation in the Sahel, in particular, deteriorated significantly, with increased
terrorist violence, especially against civilians, and armed confrontations between
government forces and non-State armed groups. In Afghanistan, the Da’esh affiliate
Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan (QDe.161) remained the Taliban’s main
antagonist, demonstrating an ability to mount operations in a variety of areas.
5.
Member States expressed concern about Da’esh’s continued objective to project
a threat outside conflict zones, including by seeking to inspire attacks by individuals
or small cells that had been self-radicalized by Da’esh propaganda. This threat was
further compounded by foreign terrorist fighters with battlefield experience
relocating to their home or third countries, as terrorist attacks committed by such
individuals had proven to be particularly sophisticated and lethal.
6.
Da’esh continued to use information and communications technologies (ICT),
including the Internet and social media platforms, to spread its propaganda. Such
efforts have become more sophisticated and prolific. The content often promotes
conflict with other groups, competition for sources of revenue and other efforts to
attract new followers and incite adherents to violence.

1.

Da’esh leadership
7.
On 30 November, Da’esh announced the death of its former leader, Abu
al-Hassan al-Hashemi al-Qurashi, during counter-terrorism operations from 15 to
17 October in Jasim in the Syrian Arab Republic, and immediately identified Abu
al-Husain al-Husaini al-Qurashi as its new leader. The true identities of both men
remained unknown, which was a preoccupation for Member States during the
reporting period. One Member State indicated that Juma’a Awwad Ibrahim al -Badri
(not listed) had been detained along with, or shortly after the arrest of, Bashar Khattab
Ghazal al-Sumaida’i (not listed), ruling out both as the true identity of the former
Da’esh leader. One Member State characterized the new leader as an Iraqi national
and Da’esh veteran who was likely to continue the same strategy as his predecessor.
Da’esh regional affiliates expect and value the continuity in leadership that its core
delivers, and Member States noted numerous immediate pledges of allegiance to the
new leader without specific knowledge of his identity or qualities as a leader.
8.
The Da’esh leadership branch in the Syrian Arab Republic was affected by the
death of its leader, Maher al-Agal (not listed), in July and one of his deputies in
October, following counter-terrorism operations by the United States of America.
Several other Da’esh leaders or facilitators were killed or captured, including through
arrests by Türkiye. Although the attrition of leadership weakened the Da’esh core,
Member States assessed that the group remained resilient. Moreover, the pool of
potential leaders in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic with the desired lineage and
operational experience was sufficiently deep to withstand leadership losses in the

2/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

short term, as manifested by the group’s activity levels generally and the number of
attacks that it claimed globally.
2.

Da’esh finances
9.
Member States estimated that Da’esh cash reserves held in Iraq and the Syrian
Arab Republic remained in the range of $25 million to $50 million, down from
historic highs but in line with the amounts indicated in previous reports, with several
Member States assessing that the reserves were depleting. Da’esh financial resources
were used to fund recruitment and propaganda operations and support its affiliates
and members around the world, including to secure the release of fighters from
prisons, camps and other detention facilities. Da’esh’s largest expenses, which may
total hundreds of thousands of dollars annually, continued to be payments to fighters
and financial assistance to the families of deceased or imprisoned fighters.
10. While recent leadership losses had not significantly affected Da’esh finances,
they contributed to a decline in revenues. Counter-terrorism operations also placed
revenue streams under pressure, as the expenses of the Da’esh core for weapons,
ammunition, training and salaries outpaced its income. Moreover, the scarcity of
resources reportedly resulted in declining morale. These factors rendered revenue
generation and fundraising critical for Da’esh. While methods varied depending on
the geographic location of the affiliate, funds were increasingly raised primarily
through extortion, looting, donations and kidnapping for ransom. Da’esh controlled
illegal commercial routes, on which it taxed smugglers of weapons and narcotics as
well as human traffickers. Some Member States co ntended that oil smuggling
continued as a revenue source in some locations, such as Libya and the Syrian Arab
Republic. One Member State reported that Da’esh had begun to launder money
through investments in legitimate businesses such as hotels and real estate in Iraq and
the Syrian Arab Republic. Da’esh had reportedly also used livestock theft to raise
money.
11. Unregistered informal cash transfer (hawala) networks and mobile money
services continued to be the dominant means by which Da’esh moved money, along
with cash couriers, currency exchanges, secure payment systems and virtual assets.
Da’esh increasingly used virtual currencies, especially so-called stable coins, and
continued to fundraise on social media platforms, often using creative means such a s
the exchange of video gaming points into fiat currency.

3.

Da’esh access to weapons
12. Member States were concerned about Da’esh’s continued access to various
weapon systems, including the abundance of small arms and light weapons in the
Middle East, Africa and Afghanistan. Illicit arms trade between terrorist groups such
as Da’esh and transnational criminal networks was a concern as it could contribute to
destabilization in neighbouring countries. Da’esh increasingly used unmanned aerial
systems that were commercially available at a low cost for surveillance and
reconnaissance and to attack targets with a high degree of accuracy and efficiency.
Authorities in Mozambique reported shooting down two Da’esh surveillance drones.
In West Africa, Da’esh affiliates used reconnaissance drones for surveillance.
Unmanned aerial systems were also used by the Allied Democratic Forces in the
eastern part of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
13. The proliferation of conventional and improvised weapons among Da ’esh
affiliates in Africa was noted by Member States. Da’esh in Somalia acquired illicitly
trafficked weapons from intermediaries in the Puntland region, who smuggled
weapons from Yemen to Somalia on dhows and supplied both Da’esh and Al-Shabaab
with arms. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, weapons used by the Allied

23-00963

3/17

S/2023/76

Democratic Forces were captured mostly from attacks on the Armed Forces of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. In Mozambique, the Da’esh affiliate Ahl al-Sunna
wal-Jama‘a (not listed) seized weapons from police armouries in towns that it had
attacked, with police units in Nangade suffering several such attacks recently.
Member States noted the construction of improvised explosive devices by both
groups, and there was evidence that remote detonators for the devices were being
assembled in their camps.
4.

Da’esh fighters and their family members in Iraq and Syrian Arab Republic
14. Despite limited progress with repatriation, Member States noted no significant
improvement in the volatile situation in camps and detention facilities holding Da’esh
fighters and children and women believed to be associated with Da’esh, in particular
in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. Da’esh remained active in the area and
was intent on freeing its fighters and followers, highlighting the increasingly grave
security, legal, human rights and humanitarian risks of this precarious situation,
including acute concerns that children in the camps were potentially exposed to
Da’esh indoctrination efforts through its “Cubs of the Caliphate” programme, which
remained active.
15. Prison break operations led by Da’esh to replenish its cadres remained a seri ous
risk. However, one Member State assessed that, despite between 100 and 300
detainees escaping in the attack by Da’esh on the Sina’a prison in Hasakah in January
2022, the group had lost significant military capabilities, which it was still working
to rebuild.
16. The Syrian Democratic Forces launched an operation in late August to eradicate
Da’esh facilitation networks in the Hawl camp, which resulted in over 200 arrests as
well as the discovery of tunnels, the confiscation of weapons and the liberation of
several women apparently held as slaves. While the operation degraded Da’esh
capabilities in the camp, the group continued to use it for recruitment purposes.

B.

Regional developments

1.

Africa
Central and Southern Africa
17. In Mozambique, the deployment of forces to Cabo Delgado Province by
Member States in the region had a significant impact on the Da’esh affiliate Ahl
al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a, disrupting its leadership, command structures and bases.
Member States in the region estimated that the number of Da’esh-affiliated fighters
in Mozambique has been reduced from an initial 2,500 fighters to 280 adult male
fighters and that between 70 and 120 fighters and commanders had died between
1 June and 1 December 2022. On 14 July, regional forces captured the Sheik Assane
base, an important Da’esh camp in Macomia, killing its leader, Sheik Assane, and
freeing 600 hostages.
18. Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a nevertheless demonstrated strategic and tactical
coordination, overstretching regional forces by launching attacks against civilians and
internally displaced persons, as well as mining companies in northern, central and
southern Cabo Delgado. Its fighters moved further south than ever before, opening a
new theatre of operations in Ancuabe and Chiure districts, which had never previously
experienced attacks, causing the displacement of 161,046 persons in June and July
alone. The group launched attacks as far south as Nampula Province, while attacks
continued to be launched in the northern districts of Mac omia, Nangade and
Muidumbe. Although Member States were of the view that there was no clear

4/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

evidence of command and control orders from its core, Da’esh recently referred to
Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a as a separate affiliate.
19. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo, some factions of the Allied
Democratic Forces pledged allegiance to Da’esh. The Allied Democratic Forces
continued to be dispersed into smaller units following joint military operations by
Congolese and Ugandan forces in eastern parts of the co untry. Following raids on its
camps, the Allied Democratic Forces pulled out of strongholds near the Ugandan
border and was headed west, widening the theatre of conflict from the Ugandan border
to western Ituri, with attacks taking place as far west as Mam basa territory in Ituri
and as far south as Goma in North Kivu.
20. The Allied Democratic Forces also increased attacks in and near Butembo in
North Kivu. It carried out a successful prison break in the city on 10 August, freeing
800 prisoners. The majority were forcibly assimilated into the group, which was
assessed to have between 1,500 and 2,000 fighters after the prison break, constituting
a significant increase. Under the leadership of Seka Baluku (alias Musa Baluku; not
listed), the Allied Democratic Forces had notably fractured into two groups over
Baluku’s strong allegiance to Da’esh. Despite Baluku’s pledges and joint propaganda
efforts, in which Da’esh claimed responsibility for attacks carried out by the Allied
Democratic Forces, several Member States in the region reported having no
information to indicate any command and control links between the Allied
Democratic Forces and the Da’esh core.
East Africa
21. Da’esh in Somalia is now estimated to have between 200 and 250 fighters in
Puntland, down slightly from the 200 to 280 estimated in the previous report. Its
presence in Somalia was still important to the group owing to the presence of its
so-called Al-Karrar office, which continued to act as a financial hub for transmitting
funds to other regional affiliates. Abdul Qadir Mumin (not listed), a former leader
within Al-Shabaab who had pledged allegiance to Da’esh in October 2015, remained
head of the group. While Member States assessed that Da’esh in Somalia generated
up to $100,000 per month through extortion of the shipping industry and illicit
taxation in Puntland, they had not presented definitive information on the exact source
of the financial flows. The limited numbers of its fighters as well as the continued
armed clashes with both Somali government forces and Al-Shabaab prevented Da’esh
from carrying out territorial expansions or large-scale sophisticated attacks.
West Africa
22. While the Da’esh affiliate in the Sahel (Islamic State in the Greater Sahara,
QDe.163) had experienced a slowdown in its operations in 2021 due to attrition within
its command structure, several Member States reported a sharp increase in violence
after the appointment of the new leader, Abba al Saharawi (not listed), in May 2022.
The Da’esh central media arm (Al-Furqan) capitalized on claims by its regional
affiliate of operational success against the regional Al-Qaida affiliate (Jama’a Nusrat
ul-Islam wa al-Muslimin, QDe.159), for instance during the assault on Talataye in
September. Da’esh increased recruitment within local communities by exploiting the
frustrations and differences among those communities. One Member State assessed
that the Da’esh regional affiliate in the Sahel had gained capacity.
23. Taxes and donations funded the operations of the Da’esh affiliate in the Sahel
and the recruitment of its new fighters, and it was able to seize weapons during attacks
on army barracks. However, apart from the counter-terrorism pressure that the
security forces of countries in the Sahel had applied, Da’esh also faced opposition

23-00963

5/17

S/2023/76

from the regional Al-Qaida affiliate as well as local militias owing to its expansion,
increased activity and the local tensions that it consequently fuelled.
North Africa
24. The Da’esh affiliate in Libya (QDe.165) was further confined to the southern
territory of the country, with a decrease in its area of operations following strikes
against its positions in southern Libya, which eliminated important field commanders.
The group redeployed to several cities in the south and to mountainous areas such as
Akakus and Haruj al-Aswad. It nevertheless remained present, exploiting the
protracted political impasse and economic decline in the south while cooperating with
tribal elements involved in smuggling and illicit trade that attracted new members.
The Da’esh affiliate in Libya is led by Abdulsalam Darkullah (not listed). He recently
changed the group’s deployment strategy in southern Libya, dividing its fighters into
six main cells of 30 to 40 individuals and using foreign fighters from Ghana, Kenya,
the Niger, Nigeria and the Sudan. The group financed itself from arms and oil
smuggling in Libya, taxes on illicit trade routes and kidnapping for ransom, in
addition to revenue from small and medium-sized enterprises in towns in the Sahel
run by Da’esh sympathizers, especially in western Libya.
25. While counter-terrorism pressure by Egypt in the Sinai reduced the presence of
the Da’esh-affiliated Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis (not listed), the group remained active
and continued to target local communities and Egyptian security forces. Its strength
is now assessed by Member States at around 1,000 fighters, concentrated mainly in
the north, a significant increase from the 500 fighters noted in the previous report.
Some Member States noted that Ansar Bayt al-Maqdis had improved its capability of
perpetrating terrorist acts, such as in the village of Jalbanat in August and by targeting
the Egyptian 26th Military Brigade in July.
26. In the rest of North Africa, Da’esh-affiliated groups remained largely
constrained, owing mainly to counter-terrorism measures, in particular in Algeria and
Tunisia, as well as the relocation of some fighters to front lines in the Sahel.
2.

Middle East
Iraq and the Levant
27. Following sustained counter-terrorism operations by Member States, Da’esh is
now estimated to have 5,000 to 7,000 members and supporters spread between Iraq
and the Syrian Arab Republic, roughly half of whom are fighters. In the Syrian Arab
Republic, Da’esh maintained hideouts west of the Euphrates River and spread cells
of around 15 to 30 individuals across the country, including in the south, notably in
Dar‘a. The group continued its guerrilla warfare tactics, waging asymmetric attacks
against Syrian government forces as well as the Syrian Democratic Forces and
civilians, with operations concentrated in Dayr al-Zawr and Homs Governorates. The
central (Badiyah) desert continued to have strategic importance to Da’esh for
remobilization and training purposes.
28. In Iraq, the Da’esh insurgency remained active despite Iraqi counter-terrorism
efforts, which succeeded in killing approximately 150 Da’esh operatives in 2022. The
group operated in rural mountainous areas, leveraging the porous Iraqi -Syrian border
and retaining manoeuvrability to evade attacks by Iraqi forces. Da’esh maintained its
ability to perpetrate attacks in Iraq, with a slightly abated frequency during the
reporting period. According to some Member States, the reduced frequency stemmed
from a deliberate effort by Da’esh to reduce its visibility in order to rebuild and
recover from losses.

6/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

29. Da’esh activities in Iraq were concentrated in a “logistical theatre” in Anbar,
Ninawah and Mosul and an “operational theatre” comprising Kirkuk, Diyala, Salah
Al-Din and northern Baghdad. Attacks in these areas underscored the importance of
maintaining enhanced cooperation between Iraqi and Peshmerga forces. Da’esh
continued to target Iraqi security forces, community leaders and civilians, mainly in
the form of armed assaults and with improvised explosive devices.
30. Despite recent setbacks, the risk of a Da’esh resurgence in the core conflict zone
remained, with neighbouring countries similarly vulnerable to attacks directed or
inspired by Da’esh. One Member State reported that on 26 October a Da’esh fighter
had attacked the Shah Cheragh shrine in Shiraz in the Islamic Republic of Iran, killing
15 people, including three children. Da’esh claimed responsibility for the attack in its
weekly magazine.
Arabian Peninsula
31. Da’esh elements in Yemen claimed one attack in July after slipping into near
obscurity. While some fighters pledged allegiance to the new Da’esh leader, the group
was expected to continue to decline in Yemen, overshadowed by Al-Qaida in the
Arabian Peninsula (QDe.129). The group had no local leader, and internal disputes
appeared significant. One Member State assessed Da’esh strength in Yemen at around
250 fighters, consisting mostly of Al-Qaida defectors.
3.

Europe
32. Member States described the threat of terrorism in Europe as endogenous,
stemming mainly from self-radicalized individuals with the potential to plan and carry
out attacks. They assessed that Da’esh propaganda had lost some momentum and peer
influence. However, Member States flagged the threat of returning foreign terrorist
fighters engaging as recruiters to form homegrown cells in Europe and expressed
concern that terrorists might have entered Europe undetected. Most of them are
reportedly individuals with direct links to Da’esh central commands in conflict zones.
33. Some Member States noted that some Western European countries had
experienced cases of female returnees indoctrinating others, especially children,
which put into question the effectiveness of existing rehabilitation and reintegration
programmes.

4.

Asia
Central and South Asia
34. The activities of Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan remained a
significant terrorist threat in Central and South Asia, and the group retained ambitions
to conduct external operations. It had positioned itself as the primary rival to the
Taliban and was reportedly set to portray the Taliban as incapable of providing
security in the country. By targeting diplomatic missions, Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan also sought to undermine the relationship between the Taliban
and Member States in the region. The attack on 5 September on the Embassy of the
Russian Federation in Kabul was the first against a diplomatic presence in
Afghanistan since the takeover by the Taliban. In December, Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan claimed attacks against the Embassy of Pakistan and a hotel
frequented by Chinese nationals. The group also threatened to launch terrorist attacks
against the Embassies of China, India and the Islamic Republic of Iran in Afghanistan.
Apart from high-profile attacks, Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan
conducted near daily attacks targeting Shia minorities, which also served to
undermine the Taliban’s authority and challenge their nascent security agencies.

23-00963

7/17

S/2023/76

35. Member States in the region estimate the current strength of Islamic State in
Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan at between 1,000 and 3,000 fighters, of whom
approximately 200 are of Central Asian origin. Other Member Stat es believe that
these numbers may be as high as 6,000. The group was concentrated primarily in
eastern Kunar, Nangarhar and Nuristan Provinces, but a large cell remained active in
Kabul and its environs. Balkh, one of the most economically developed provin ces in
the north, is of primary interest to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant -Khorasan in
terms of revenue generation. One Member State reported that the group had started
to smuggle narcotics, which would represent a new development.
36. The Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan media organization Voice of
Khorasan released propaganda in Pashto, Persian, Tajik, Uzbek and Russian with the
goal of recruiting from ethnic groups in the region to strengthen the group’s
capabilities.
37. One Member State noted the cooperation between the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement (QDe.088), also known as the Turkistan Islamic Party, and Islamic State
in Iraq and the Levant-Khorasan, even though historically the former had aligned
itself with Al-Qaida. According to the Member State, such cooperation included
jointly published Uighur-language propaganda posters, the exchange of personnel,
military advice and planned joint operations, such as the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement sending members to join the operational unit of Islamic State in Iraq and
the Levant-Khorasan responsible for tracking and carrying out attacks against
Chinese nationals. On 29 July, the two groups reportedly plotted to purchase weapons
and conduct terrorist attacks against Chinese targets in Afghanistan. The same
Member State reported that the Syrian branch of the Eastern Turkistan Islamic
Movement had actively recruited Chinese nationals from Da’esh in the Syrian Arab
Republic.
South-East Asia
38. Terrorist activity in South-East Asia remained low during the reporting period,
notwithstanding the sizable presence of terrorist groups associated with Da’esh,
including the Abu Sayyaf Group (QDe.001). In Malaysia, curfews on the Sabah coast
curbed incursions by the group. Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant in South-East
Asia (QDe.169), one of the Da’esh affiliates in the region, remained heavily reliant
on funds from the Da’esh core to ramp up propaganda activities and carry out attacks.
39. In the Philippines, collaboration between former insurgent groups and security
forces resulted in the arrest in July and August of four Da’esh militants from the
Maute Group (not listed) and the arrest of two Da’esh members of the Hassan Group
(not listed). Counter-terrorism pressure, the lack of funds, food and shelter, and
limited support among the local population in Mindanao resulted in the surrender of
eight militants from the Maute Group and one from the Hassan Group, who received
amnesty from the Government. In November, counter-terrorism operations led to the
surrender of 150 members of the Abu Sayyaf Group in Mindanao in exchange for
amnesty.

III. Updates on responses to the evolving threat
A.

Overview
40. The United Nations continued to support Member States in countering the threat
posed by Da’esh, including through the broad resumption of in -person activities as
restrictions related to the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic were lifted.
These included efforts in regions facing an elevated threat from Da’esh and its

8/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

affiliates, where attacks continued to pose significant challenges to adequately and
safely addressing terrorism, international crimes and their related implications.
41. While some Member States renewed efforts to repatriate their nationals, in
particular women and children, stranded in Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, several
States remained reluctant to do so, especially in relation to adult males and
incarcerated minors. The United Nations, through its Global Framework for United
Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq Third Country National Returnees,
continued to support requesting Member States in developing appropriate responses
to address the precarious situation in camps and detention facilities and repatriate
their nationals.
42. Technological innovations offer significant promise for countering terrorism, as
demonstrated by the digitalization of evidence management implemented by the
United Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed
by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant (UNITAD). Conversely, the use of
information and communications technologies, including the Internet and social
media, as well as new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, remained a
pressing challenge. At the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes,
participants discussed the threat posed by terrorist use of the Internet and social
media, new payment technologies and fundraising methods and unmanned aerial
systems. The unanimous adoption of the Delhi Declaration on countering the use of
new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, the outcome of the special
meeting, was a symbol of the shared determination of Security Co uncil members to
tackle these challenges.
43. Moreover, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, acting on
behalf of the Counter-Terrorism Committee, continued to carry out assessment visits,
including in Iraq, Malaysia, Nigeria and Uzbekistan, to support Member States in
implementing relevant Security Council resolutions.

B.

Suspected Da’esh members and their family members in
conflict zones

1.

Current situation
44. The potential for long-term security and human rights repercussions will
continue to increase as long as the situation for foreign terrorist fighters and their
accompanying family members persists. Grave abuses continued in areas where
Da’esh and its affiliates operated, primarily against women and children, in areas
where Da’esh and its affiliates operated, and children continued to suffer from the
impact of landmines, improvised explosive devices and explosive remnants of war, in
both conflict zones and post-conflict settings such as in Iraq. Similarly, women and
children continued to bear the consequences of the atrocities committed by Da’esh,
including abduction and sexual violence.
45. The number of Da’esh fighters and their family members in camps and detention
facilities in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic remained largely the same.
Children continued to have limited access to basic humanitarian and essential
services, such as nutrition, shelter, education and medical care, while their
fundamental rights and freedoms, including the rights to education and a fair trial, as
well as freedom from arbitrary detention, continued to be breached. The security
situation in camps in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic remained volatile,
with increasing levels of violence, including against humanitarian workers, and
instances of targeted assassination, kidnapping and other human rights abuses. The

23-00963

9/17

S/2023/76

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) raised
concerns over the sharp rise in violence in the Hawl camp, including the reported
killing of 42 people, some of whom were children, since the start of 2022. 5
2.

Repatriation efforts
46. Although progress continued to be made, in particular by Iraq of Iraqi nationals,
Member States remained hesitant to address the repatriation of adult men and
incarcerated male minors from the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic,
underscoring persistent challenges relating to, inter alia, developing comprehensive
and tailored screening processes and risk assessments and satisfying evidentiary and
jurisdictional requirements. A few States cited the prospect of short prison terms for
individuals accused of terrorist offences, stemming from domestic sentencing
practices, as an additional consideration against the repatriation of such persons.
47. Following the joint scoping exercise conducted under the Global Framework for
United Nations Support on Syrian Arab Republic and Iraq Third Country National
Returnees, which is co-chaired by the Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United
Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the Government of Iraq launched a coordination
mechanism to facilitate collaboration between the Government of Iraq and United
Nations entities on the repatriation of Iraqi nationals from the north -east of the Syrian
Arab Republic. To facilitate efforts in the repatriation, rehabilitation, reintegration
and, when appropriate, prosecution of returning Maldivian nationals, a joint scoping
exercise was conducted to identify the needs of returnees, communities of return and
the Government of Maldives, as well as how the United Nations might be able to
support them.
48. The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) supported the Government
of Trinidad and Tobago in setting up and running sustainable centres to receive
women and children believed to be associated with foreign terrorist fighters following
their return from camps in the north-east of the Syrian Arab Republic. In partnership
with local authorities, UNICEF supported the repatriation and reintegration of two
children allegedly associated with the Allied Democratic Forces, from the Democratic
Republic of the Congo to their families in Uganda, in cluding through the provision
of basic needs and mental health care.

3.

Prosecution and investigation
49. Supporting prosecution and investigation remained central to United Nations
efforts to address the crimes committed by Da’esh. In preparation for the repatriation
of third-country nationals from Iraq and the Syrian Arab Republic, UNITAD
continued to support domestic efforts to hold Da’esh accountable by collecting,
preserving and storing evidence in Iraq of acts that might amount to war crimes,
crimes against humanity and genocide committed by Da’esh in Iraq regarding terrorist
crimes that Iraqi nationals might have committed. The volume of evidence being
collected by UNITAD surged owing to increased field deployments and the
implementation of key field-based, evidence-centric activities such as the digitization
and archiving of Da’esh evidence and mass grave excavations.
50. The United Nations system continued to play an important role in working with
partners to address war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide crimes
committed by Da’esh and its affiliates. UNITAD continued to support the joint
investigation team created by the national prosecution authorities of Sweden and
France in investigating atrocity crimes committed agai nst the Yazidis, including by

__________________
5

10/17

See www.ohchr.org/en/press-releases/2022/11/syria-un-human-rights-chief-condemns-brutalkilling-two-girls-alarmed-sharp.
23-00963

S/2023/76

identifying perpetrators, corroborating battlefield evidence and expanding
information on foreign terrorist fighters and the atrocity crimes for which they could
be held accountable. UNITAD also conducted interviews with key w itnesses within
and outside Iraq. In Nigeria, the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
(UNODC), the United Nations Team of Experts on the Rule of Law and Sexual
Violence in Conflict and a partner civil society organization strengthened the capacity
of Nigerian prosecutors to investigate and prosecute war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed by terrorist groups. UNODC also supported the Joint
Investigation Centre in Nigeria and the Nigeria Police Force in strengthening
investigation capacities, including by providing training activities and equipment for
forensic analysis.
51. In support of the Regional Stabilization, Recovery and Resilience Strategy for
Areas Affected by Boko Haram in the Lake Chad Basin Region, UNODC, the
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and the Office of CounterTerrorism continued to support Cameroon, Chad, the Niger and Nigeria in
strengthening cross-border cooperation and developing comprehensive and tailored
approaches to screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegration. In November,
following two workshops organized by the Executive Directorate, the Office of
Counter-Terrorism and UNODC, the Government of Chad adopted a national action
plan on the screening, prosecution, rehabilitation and reintegra tion of individuals
associated with Boko Haram.
52. To ensure adherence to applicable international human rights obligations in the
context of investigating and prosecuting Da’esh crimes, the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq (UNAMI) and OHCHR worked with the Iraqi judiciary
to finalize a set of guidelines on fair trial standards for distribution to all courts.
OHCHR continued to support the Government in implementing the Law on Support
for Female Yazidi Survivors by advocating funding, liaising between relevant
institutions and raising awareness of the application system among survivors.
4.

Rehabilitation and reintegration
53. The United Nations continued to support Member States in providing
comprehensive and tailored rehabilitation and reintegration programmes that were
gender-sensitive, age-appropriate and in compliance with international human rights
law. The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
contributed to efforts to prevent the radicalization of adul t detainees by developing a
road map for preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism and radicalization
and by holding workshops on detecting signs of radicalization. By strengthening
prison security mechanisms and improving the capacity of prison officials, UNODC
continued to support Member States in addressing the threats posed by high -risk
prisoners, including violent extremists and returning foreign terrorist fighters in the
national prison systems of Iraq, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Nigeria, Tajik istan, Tunisia
and Uganda. The Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee
Executive Directorate and UNODC enhanced the capacity of parole and probation
officers and other relevant stakeholders to support former violent extremist prisoners
in Indonesia.
54. The reintegration funds managed by the International Organization for
Migration covered procedural costs for issuing birth certificates, access to health and
education, school supplies, livelihood assistance and counselling to facilitate the
rehabilitation and reintegration of 228 returning foreign terrorist fighters and their
family members in Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, North Macedonia and Kosovo. 6

__________________
6

23-00963

References to Kosovo shall be understood to be in the context of Security Council resolution
1244 (1999).
11/17

S/2023/76

In addition to individual support, the International Organization for Migration
designed and implemented 13 initiatives to strengthen social cohesion in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, North Macedonia and Kosovo, including support for local youth
centres, schools and non-governmental organizations in providing essential social
services.
55. In Mozambique, UNICEF contributed to community-based reintegration efforts
by providing family tracing support to children who had been displaced by the conflict
with Ahl al-Sunna wal-Jama‘a, reuniting 468 children with their families during the
reporting period. It also provided humanitarian assistance to displaced populations,
including family tracing and reunification, mental health and psychosocial support,
access to health and nutrition, civil documentation and activities specific to the
empowerment of girls and boys. UNODC contributed to improving the detention
conditions in Mozambique of children and young people formerly associated with
Da’esh and to strengthening the capacity of professionals working to rehabilitate and
reintegrate them.

C.

International and regional cooperation
56. United Nations entities continued to promote the benefits of international and
regional cooperation on counter-terrorism. In October, the Government of Tajikistan
and the Office of Counter-Terrorism organized a high-level conference on
international and regional border security and management cooperation to counter
terrorism and prevent the movement of terrorists. Held in Dushanbe, the conference
was attended by more than 700 participants, who addressed practical chall enges and
capacity gaps to enhance border security.
57. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia organized a series of national workshops for
Member States in Central Asia to strengthen the capacity of their relevant law
enforcement and security organs and mitigate potential risks of incursion by violent
extremist and terrorist groups in regions bordering Afghanistan. With the Naif Arab
University for Security Studies, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate organized a high-level seminar for government officials from the Middle
East to discuss trends and propose recommendations to address challenges related to
the nexus between organized crime, terrorism and its financing.
58. The United Nations and the African Union organized two meetings of a joint
technical working group on preventing violent extremism conducive to terrorism and
countering terrorism to strengthen coherence, coordination and cooperation, inform
joint analysis and develop recommendations to address the threat of terrorism in
Africa. The Office of Counter-Terrorism and the Office of the Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General for the Great Lakes Region co-organized a meeting on the threat
of terrorism in the region in order to develop a joint understanding for better-informed
programme delivery.

D.

Supporting the victims of Da’esh
59. Victims and survivors of terrorism, including sexual and gender-based violence
perpetrated by Da’esh and other terrorist groups, continued to face a general lack of
support at the national level. In September, the international community reaffirmed
its commitment to the rights of victims of terrorism at the first United Nations Global
Congress of Victims of Terrorism, organized by the Office of Counter-Terrorism.
Attended by over 400 participants, including 113 victims of terrorism and
representatives of victims’ associations, the Congress featured a call to action by 10

12/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

victims of terrorism. The Office of Counter-Terrorism also organized a high-level
online event on 21 August to observe the International Day of Remembrance and
Tribute to the Victims of Terrorism.
60. UNAMI and OHCHR continued to support the Government of Iraq in
preventing and responding to conflict-related sexual violence, using a victim-centred
approach. In October and November, UNAMI and OHCHR, along with four civil
society organizations, held a workshop for a group of Yazidi women survivors to
develop a long-term road map to address their needs and rights.

E.

Border management and law enforcement
61. The United Nations system continued to bolster Member States’ border
management capacities. The United Nations Countering Terrorist Travel Programme, 7
led by the Office of Counter-Terrorism, currently supports 60 beneficiary Member
States in developing or enhancing their capability to collect, analyse and use
passenger data to identify and counter the movement of foreign terrorist fighters and
others who pose a terrorist threat, in line with Security Council resolutions,
international standards and good practices, and human rights. The Programme
delivered capacity-building training to Botswana, Moldova, Mongolia, Namibia, the
Philippines and Togo, strengthening foundational awareness and underst anding of
countering terrorist travel using advance passenger information and passenger name
record data. With the support of the Programme, Azerbaijan, Botswana and Norway
established effective passenger information units, which have operational capabilit y
to collect, analyse and use passenger data to identify terrorist threats. The Office of
Counter-Terrorism, in cooperation with the Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the United Nations Regional Centre for
Preventive Diplomacy for Central Asia, held a regional training course on advance
passenger information and passenger name record data to assist members of the
Shanghai Cooperation Organization and Turkmenistan in detecting and interdicting
foreign terrorist fighters and other serious criminals.
62. Efforts to protect critical infrastructure and vulnerable targets from terrorist
attacks continued to be prioritized within the United Nations system. Within the
Working Group on Emerging Threats and Critical Infrastructure Protection of the
United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, the Office of
Counter-Terrorism, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate and
other partners revised the Compendium of Good Practices on the Protection of
Critical Infrastructure Against Terrorist Attacks, of 2018, and delivered technical
assistance to Indonesia, Tajikistan, Togo and Tunisia. The Executive Directorate, the
International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and the Office of Counter Terrorism, in close partnership with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, held a workshop for experts to strengthen capacities and facilitate the
exchange of good practices among States in Central Asia on protecting vulnerable
targets from physical attacks and cyberattacks. In October and November, the Office
of Counter-Terrorism, the Executive Directorate, the Department of Peace Operations,
INTERPOL and the African Centre for Studies and Research on Terrorism delivered
a series of training sessions to Botswana, the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Ghana, Mozambique, Togo and Uganda to strengthen their national-level inter-agency
coordination mechanisms to better understand the terrorist threats that they face.

__________________
7

23-00963

Partners include the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, the International Civil
Aviation Organization, the International Organization for Migration, the United Nations Office
on Drugs and Crime, the Office of Information and Communications Technology and the
International Criminal Police Organization.
13/17

S/2023/76

63. Preventing the illicit flow of weapons to Da’esh, its affiliates and other terrorist
groups remained key to the work of the United Nations. The Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate led capacity consultations on behalf of the
Committee in Turkmenistan to strengthen the Government’s ability to address the
terrorism-arms-crime nexus under the Office of Counter-Terrorism’s programme to
prevent the illicit trafficking and supply of small arms and light weapons to terrorists.
Similar capacity consultations were held with the G overnments of Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan.

F.

Countering the financing of terrorism
64. United Nations entities continued to support efforts to mitigate Da’esh’s ability
to generate resources for terrorism purposes. By applying digital technology,
UNITAD expanded the evidence base against financial networks believed to have
supported Da’esh. UNODC supported efforts to counter the use of virtual assets for
terrorist financing purposes. During training in Indonesia and Mauritius, UNODC
contributed to establishing an informal platform for practitioners to exchange
information on risks and best practices.
65. In September, the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate held a
virtual launch of a Trends Alert report 8 to increase awareness of actual and potential
uses of revenue generated from the exploitation, trade and trafficking of natur al
resources for the purposes of terrorism financing. Also in September, the Executive
Directorate, in close cooperation with the United Nations Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and the Permanent Mission of Italy to the United
Nations, organized an online round-table discussion to identify challenges related to
the traffic and illicit trade of cultural property for terrorist purposes, including the use
of emerging technologies and social media platforms for such activities and to
generate proceeds from other related activities. In November, United Nations entities,
including the Office of Counter-Terrorism, the Executive Directorate and UNODC,
contributed to the third ministerial conference on counter-terrorism financing, on the
theme “No money for terror”, at which ministers analysed the evolving global
terrorist threat and recent terrorism financing trends.

G.

Impacts of information and communications technology and new
technologies on counter-terrorism
66. ICTs such as the Internet and social media, new payment technologies and
fundraising methods, and unmanned aerial systems, including drones, were the focus
of six online technical sessions led by the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive
Directorate in September and October. The sessions served to inform the special
meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on countering the use of new and
emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, hosted by the Government of India on
28 and 29 October. At the special meeting, the Delhi Declaration 9 on countering the
use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes was adopted unanimously
by the Counter-Terrorism Committee to enhance the Security Council’s approach to
addressing this threat in a comprehensive and holistic manner. The Declaration also
reflected the Committee’s intention to develop a set of non-binding guiding principles

__________________

Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate Trends Alert, “Concerns over the use of
proceeds from the exploitation, trade and trafficking of natural resources for the purposes of
terrorism financing”, June 2022.
9
See www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/news/delhi-declaration-countering-use-new-and-emergingtechnologies-terrorist-purposes-now-available.
8

14/17

23-00963

S/2023/76

to further assist Member States in implementing relevant Council resolutions on
countering the use of new and emerging technologies for terrori st purposes and
reaffirmed the importance of public-private partnerships, human rights and civil
society engagement. In December, the Council adopted a presidential statement
(S/PRST/2022/7) in which it welcomed the adoption of the Declaration.
67. The Office of Counter-Terrorism raised awareness of the need to prevent the
potential misuse of the metaverse by terrorists and organized an event in November
to address the risk of exploitation as well as the potential use of the metaverse as a
tool for practitioners working to counter terrorism and prevent and counter violent
extremism conducive to terrorism. The United Nations Interregional Crime and
Justice Research Institute launched a project, with the supp ort of the European
Commission, to develop a practical toolkit for responsible artificial intelligence
innovation in law enforcement.
68. In a recent report, 10 the Office of Counter-Terrorism examined the intersection
between online gaming and violent extremism conducive to terrorism and analysed
the potential use of gaming spaces for terrorist purposes and, conversely, for
preventing and countering violent extremism. While the Office established no causal
link between gaming and violent extremism in the report, it found that terrorists
exploited the cultural relevance and reach of gaming for recruitment and propaganda
purposes, in both open and closed networks.

H.

Countering terrorist narratives and engaging with communities to
prevent and counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism
69. The United Nations continued to engage with relevant entities to promote a
whole-of-society approach to counter-terrorism and efforts to prevent and counter
violent extremism conducive to terrorism. The report of the Counter-Terrorism
Committee Executive Directorate on discussions with civil society organizations in
south-east Europe offered reflections and recommendations on the involvement of
civil society in developing and implementing national counter-terrorism strategies in
the subregion. 11 UNDP continued to facilitate participatory and safe online
community engagement activities to prevent violent extremism conducive to
terrorism, including by offering masterclasses to strengthen the capacity of more than
50 staff from five geographical regions around the world. On the basis of knowledge,
tools and best practices from the masterclasses, UNDP developed a resource hub for
online community engagement activities.
70. UNESCO-led technical and vocational education and training programmes in
Mosul, Iraq, contributed to countering the divisive and violent narratives of Da’esh
and its affiliates by reinforcing the historically strong pluralism that characterizes the
city. The programmes provided skills to 1,315 people, strengthening their resilience
to unemployment and a sense of community. Furthermore, the reconstruction and
rehabilitation of historic houses in Mosul created more than 5,000 local jobs.
UNESCO made considerable progress in rehabilitating monuments and hi storic
houses destroyed by Da’esh in Mosul. It was also safeguarding and restoring
manuscripts saved from destruction by Da’esh and completed the stabilization of the
historic Aghwat mosque. In addition, a community information centre was opened in
the old city of Mosul to enable multicultural dialogue and exchange.

__________________

Office of Counter-Terrorism, “Examining the intersection between gaming and violent
extremism”, October 2022.
11
Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate, “Civil society perspectives: engagement in
countering terrorism and violent extremism in south-east Europe”, December 2022.
10

23-00963

15/17

S/2023/76

71. In Iraq, UNDP finalized research on how to better account for gender in efforts
to prevent violent extremism conducive to terrorism and to facilitate reintegration,
contributing to the strengthened participation of women in these areas. The CounterTerrorism Committee Executive Directorate continued to highlight the importance of
incorporating a focus on masculinities into counter-terrorism analysis and policies as
an essential element of gender mainstreaming. The Executive Directorate, in
partnership with the International Peace Institute, the Permanent Mission of Mexico
to the United Nations and the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute,
co-organized a forum to discuss the policy implications of applying a masculinities
lens to preventing and countering terrorism, following the publication of a related
policy report by the Executive Directorate and the International Peace Institute. 12
72. In December, the Office of Counter-Terrorism delivered a capacity-building
workshop for over 60 participants from the Government of Uzbekistan and Uzbek
civil society organizations on communication strategies to facilitate the peaceful
reintegration of returning foreign terrorist fighters and their family members.

IV. Observations
73. Despite leadership losses and successful efforts to curb its finances, Da’esh and
its affiliates continued to represent a serious threat to international peace and security.
The group increasingly used new technologies, including unmanned aerial systems
and cryptocurrencies, as well as ICTs, including the Internet and social media
platforms, to further its goals. The United Nations increased its efforts in response to
these trends and was actively exploring ways to leverage digital technologies,
grounded in human rights and the rule of law, to enhance counter-terrorism measures.
I welcome the special meeting of the Counter-Terrorism Committee on countering the
use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, as well as the Delhi
Declaration that was consequently adopted.
74. In armed conflict settings, Da’esh continued to leverage local dynamics and
exacerbate existing grievances and intercommunal tensions. Moreover, continued
rivalry with other non-State armed groups, including Al-Qaida and its regional
affiliates in Africa, the Middle East and Afghanistan, underscored the need to
understand the threat posed by Da’esh within the local context. It also demonstrated
that terrorism remained a strategic security risk, as emphasized in my report entitled
“Our Common Agenda”, and required multilateral cooperation as part of the New
Agenda for Peace. Decades of counter-terrorism have shown that security responses
alone are not sufficient. They must be accompanied by efforts that prevent new
recruits from joining the ranks of Da’esh and other terrorist groups. I call on all actors
to reconsider prevention needs and make serious investments in efforts to prevent and
counter violent extremism conducive to terrorism.
75. As the group’s reach beyond conflict zones persists, continued international
coordination on countering Da’esh remains essential, in particular in the Syrian Arab
Republic. Escalating armed confrontations in the vicinity of camps, pri sons and other
facilities that hold individuals with suspected links to Da’esh and other terrorist
groups may have negative ramifications on regional and global security, providing
opportunities for Da’esh to continue to plan prison breaks or otherwise ena ble
suspected terrorists to remain at large. I reiterate my call for Member States with
nationals in such facilities to consider the medium-term and long-term implications
of the situation and to significantly step up their efforts to facilitate the safe, voluntary

__________________
12

16/17

See www.un.org/securitycouncil/ctc/content/masculinities-and-violent-extremism.
23-00963

S/2023/76

and dignified repatriation of all those individuals, in line with applicable international
law and the best interests of the child.
76. In the mid-to-long-term, the threat posed by Da’esh is compounded by foreign
terrorist fighters relocating to new areas, who could take on roles as Da’esh recruiters
or leverage their battlefield experience to plan and carry out more lethal attacks. This
may also have implications for responses to prevent terrorist attacks by lone actors
with affiliation to or in the name of Da’esh, underscoring the need for international
cooperation and the exchange of good practices. Member States have the primary
responsibility to implement the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy
and meet their international counter-terrorism obligations. I look forward to the eighth
review of the Strategy and encourage Member States to keep striving for unity and
consensus, which remains fundamental to multilateral responses to terrorism. The
United Nations will continue to work with Member States, international and regional
organizations, civil society and other partners, including through the United Nations
Global Counter-Terrorism Coordination Compact, to support the balanced
implementation of the Strategy and responses that are gender-sensitive and firmly
anchored in the rule of law and human rights.

23-00963

17/17
