S/2015/655

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
21 August 2015
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan
(covering the period from 14 April to 19 August 2015)

I. Introduction
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 2223
(2015), by which the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) until 30 November 2015 and requested that I report on
the implementation of the Mission’s mandate by no later than 17 August 2015. This
report provides an update to my previous report ( S/2015/296) dated 29 April 2015,
and covers developments from 14 April to 12 August 2015.

II. Political developments
South Sudan peace process
2.
Following the suspension on 6 March of the peace talks led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD, the IGAD leaders and
partners proposed the reinvigoration of the peace process through the IGAD-plus
formula. IGAD-plus entails the expansion of the mediation team to incorporate key
regional and international stakeholders to collectively exert the necessary pressure
on the South Sudanese parties and offer incentives so that an inclusive and
comprehensive peace agreement can finally be reached. It is composed of the IGAD
member States (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan and Uganda), the
African Union High-level Ad hoc Committee for South Sudan (Algeria, Chad,
Nigeria, Rwanda and South Africa), the Troika States (Norway, the United Kingdom
and the United States), China, the European Union, the United Nations and the
IGAD Partners Forum.
3.
At the same time, and despite the suspension of the talks on 6 March, the
parties reiterated their support for the peace process. From 19 to 23 April, the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition held a leadership
conference in Upper Nile State to discuss the status of the peace process and the
IGAD-plus mechanism. In the outcome document, SPLM/A in Opposition expressed
its support for IGAD-plus and called for its involvement in the negotiations to
ensure a sustainable peace process. On 30 April, the Minister for Foreign Affairs
and International Cooperation of South Sudan, Barnaba Marial Benjamin, also
stated that the Government welcomed the participation of the Troika, the African
15-13816 (E)

240815

*1513816*

S/2015/655

Union, the United Nations and other members of the international community in the
peace process.
4.
Meanwhile, other regional initiatives aimed at narrowing the differences
between the South Sudanese leaders continued in parallel to the IGAD peace
process. Under the framework of the Agreement on the Reunification of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement (Arusha Agreement), the co -guarantors, namely the
Tanzanian and South African ruling parties, Chama Cha Mapinduzi (CCM) and the
African National Congress (ANC), facilitated a dialogue between the three SPLM
factions (the Government, SPLM/A in Opposition and the former detainees) to
address leadership and political issues in the party.
5.
On 29 May, the President of Kenya, who is also the rapporteur in the IGAD mediated peace process, hosted a meeting in Nairobi attended by the former
detainees, the ruling parties of South Africa and the United Republic of Tanzania
and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Ethiopia and Kenya, which resulted in the
announcement that the Arusha and IGAD processes had come together and that the
former detainees were ready to return to Juba to reconcile the wa rring parties. On
1 June, five former detainees, escorted by the Deputy President of South Africa and
ANC, the Secretary-General of CCM and the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of
Ethiopia and Kenya, arrived in Juba on a four-day visit and held discussions with
Salva Kiir Mayardit, President of South Sudan, and senior SPLM officials on the
steps required for the implementation of the Arusha Agreement, and the
complementarity of the Arusha and IGAD processes.
6.
Concurrently, on 2 June, the Chairperson of the African Union Commission
appointed former President Alpha Oumar Konaré of Mali as the African Union High
Representative for South Sudan. Mr. Konaré has subsequently engaged in shuttle
diplomacy with President Kiir and former Vice-President Riek Machar and with
neighbouring countries, in particular Sudan and Uganda, to facilitate a coordinated
resolution to the conflict.
7.
During the reporting period, the IGAD special envoys also engaged in
consultations with the Government, SPLM/A in Opposition and the for mer detainees
to narrow the main areas of contention and propose a compromise. Following the
consultations, on 10 June, the IGAD special envoys presented to the South Sudanese
parties a summary of the proposed peace agreement.
8.
The Government objected to the provisions of the summary related to
executive power-sharing and transitional security arrangements. Similarly, SPLM/A
in Opposition renewed its demands for compensation and reparations, federalism
and proportionate power-sharing in all 10 states of South Sudan, and emphasized in
a letter to the Secretary-General, dated 11 June, that an imposed solution would not
end the conflict.
9.
As discussions continued to stall, on 13 June, in the margins of the African
Union summit in South Africa, the Peace and Security Council of the African Union
issued a communiqué in which it called upon the South Sudanese parties, in
particular the former detainees, to foster dialogue and understanding among the
SPLM leaders in the search for peace in South Sudan.
10. In an important development in the intra-SPLM dialogue, the leader of the
former detainees, Pagan Amum, returned to Juba on 22 June. The following day, the
National Liberation Council of SPLM revoked the decision concerning the dismissal

2/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

of SPLM party cadres from their positions within the party and restored Pagan
Amum to his former position as Secretary-General of SPLM. The other senior
SPLM leaders who had been dismissed from the party, including Riek Machar, were
also reinstated in their positions.
11. On 27 June, President Kiir and Riek Machar held a consultative meeting in
Nairobi under the auspices of President Kenyatta of Kenya to review elements of
the proposed peace agreement. The two principals continued to express considerable
differences on the outstanding substantive issues of federalism; power-sharing ratios
at national and state levels; transitional security arrangements; governance reforms;
and compensation and reparation for victims of atrocities. As agreed at the meeting,
they subsequently submitted to President Kenyatta their positions on the contentious
issues for further negotiations under an IGAD -plus-led mediation.
12. Following a four-month hiatus in the IGAD-led peace process, the IGAD-plus
special envoys held a meeting from 21 to 23 July in Addis Ababa to review the
“compromise agreement on the resolution of the conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan” proposed by IGAD. The draft agreement includes, inter alia, provisions on
the framework of a transitional government of national unity; permanent ceasefire
and transitional security arrangements; humanitarian assistance and reconstruction;
resource, economic and financial management; transitional justice, accountability,
reconciliation and healing; the permanent constitution; and the joint mon itoring and
evaluation committee. The Secretariat provided technical experts to support my
Special Envoy for Sudan and South Sudan, Haile Menkerios, in the IGAD -plus
discussions on the transitional security arrangements, justice and accountability and
humanitarian aspects of the draft peace agreement.
13. On 24 July, the IGAD special envoys handed over the proposed compromise
agreement to the South Sudanese parties in preparation for the resumption of the
IGAD negotiations on 6 August in Addis Ababa.
14. On 6 August, the Government, SPLM/A in Opposition and the former
detainees resumed negotiations on the compromise peace agreement in Addis
Ababa. The main areas of disagreement between the parties pertained to three key
issues, namely: (a) the power-sharing arrangements between the President and the
First Vice-President; (b) the distribution of positions in the State governments of
Jonglei, Unity and Upper Nile States; (c) security arrangements, in particular the
process for the integration of the opposition forces into SPLA and the question of
the demilitarization of Juba. SPLM/A in Opposition requested that the fourth issue
of federalism also be addressed.
15. On 10 August, the Prime Minister of Ethiopia, the President of Kenya and the
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Sudan met at the invitation of Yoweri Kaguta
Museveni, President of Uganda, in Entebbe to discuss the peace process, and agreed
to collaboratively assist the parties in reaching a peace agreement. The leaders also
agreed to jointly meet with the two principals, President Kiir and Riek Machar, in
Addis Ababa on 15 August, with a view to resolving the outstanding issues before
the IGAD-Plus summit, scheduled for 17 August. On 16 August, after having earlier
announced that he would not attend the summit, President Kiir arrived in Addis
Ababa.
16. On 17 August, following lengthy consultations between the parties and the
leaders of Ethiopia, Kenya, the Sudan and Uganda, SPLM/A in Opposition and the

15-13816

3/18

S/2015/655

former detainees signed the compromise peace agreement. The Government decided
to only initial the agreement, expressing reservations about some of its provisions,
and requested an additional 15-day period for further consultations with its
constituencies. The Prime Minister of Ethiopia stated that the Gov ernment and
SPLM/A in Opposition had also agreed to respect a ceasefire and allow full
humanitarian access during the 15-day period granted for the consultations. The
members of the African Union High-level Ad hoc Committee decided to sign the
agreement. The other members of IGAD-Plus, including the Troika, the European
Union and the United Nations, also signed the agreement as witnesses on 18 August,
while China had signed the previous day.
Other political developments
17. On 12 May, the National Legislative Assembly passed the 2015
Non-Governmental Organizations Bill, which establishes a regulatory framework
for the operations of national and international non -governmental organizations. The
President returned the bill for parliamentary scrutiny, follo wing concerns raised by
civil society and members of the diplomatic community over the regulatory
provisions of the bill.
18. On 8 July, President Kiir addressed the National Legislature to inaugurate the
extension of the tenure of the Presidency, the National Legislature and the State
Legislative Assemblies from 9 July 2015 to 9 July 2018, and the Constitutional
Review Commission from 31 December 2014 to 31 December 2017, in accordance
with the Constitutional Amendment Bill adopted on 24 March 2015.
19. With regard to accountability for the serious human rights violations
committed during the conflict, on 24 July, the Peace and Security Council of the
African Union, at the ministerial level, issued a communiqué on the report of the
African Union Commission of Inquiry and the separate opinion submitted by a
member of the Commission. The communiqué calls for the Peace and Security
Council to establish an ad hoc subcommittee composed of Algeria, Chad, Ethiopia,
Nigeria, South Africa, Uganda and the United Repub lic of to consider the report and
the separate opinion and provide its recommendations on the way forward by the
third week of August for consideration at the meeting of the Peace and Security
Council at the level of Heads of State and Government, to be he ld at the end of
August.

III. Security situation
20. The conflict continued between the Sudan People’s Liberation Army (SPLA)
and SPLM/A in Opposition and the allied Shilluk militias under the command of
Major General Johnson Olonyi, with an intensification of the fighting in the Greater
Upper Nile region. Furthermore, rifts within each side became apparent at a press
conference held in Nairobi on 1 July, where the Shilluk militia commanded by
Major General Johnson Olonyi declared that it had merged with SPLM/A in
Opposition. On 21 July, Riek Machar relieved two senior military commanders,
Major General Peter Gatdet Yaka and Major General Gathoath Gatkuoth Oathnyang,
of their respective positions as the SPLM/A in Opposition Deputy Chief of General
Staff for Operations and Deputy Chief of General Staff for Logi stics as part of an
“administrative reshuffle”. On the same day, in separate orders, Riek Machar

4/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

appointed Johnson Olonyi as the Commander of Special Division 1 and Major
General James Koang Chuol Ranley as the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations.
The Government focused on retaining control of strategic towns. There has been an
escalation in hostilities in the southern part of Unity State, with SPLA and its allied
militias conducting major offensives, primarily against SPLM/A in Opposition
forces, with severe consequences for the civilian population. The Bahr el -Ghazal
region and Western Equatoria State have witnessed a further deterioration in the
security situation, with low-intensity fighting between armed groups.
21. In Upper Nile State, Malakal was the epicentre of the fighting between SPLA
and SPLM/A in Opposition with its allied Shilluk militias. Between 21 April and
6 July, control of the town changed hands on five occasions. Both sides remained in
close proximity to each other along the banks of the Nile River, with numerous
skirmishes in Melut, Upper Nile State, and in the vicinity of Malakal airport. On
19 May, during a clash between SPLA and Opposition forces in Melut, the UNMISS
base came under fire, resulting in the killing of nine and injury of 11 internally
displaced persons.
22. The military offensive by SPLA and allied militias into Opposition -held areas
of Guit, Koch, Leer, Mayendit, Rubkona and Panyjar counties, which started in late
May, led to a further deterioration in the security and humanitarian situation in
Unity State. This involved attacks mainly against civilians, as Opposition fighters
had already withdrawn into the bushes and swamps, with widespread reports of
cattle raiding, pillaging, the destruction of population centres and documented
incidents of grave human rights violations. It also sparked violent tensions between
the main communities of Dinka, Nuer and Shilluk internally displaced persons in
the UNMISS protection of civilians sites, particularly in Bentiu and Malakal.
23. In Jonglei State, there were reports in mid -May of sporadic clashes between
SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition forces in Pajut, Duk County. By the end of June,
SPLA claimed to have assumed control of Pajut, while the Opposition forces
remained in the vicinity, with periodic exchanges of shelling between the two sides.
On 13 June, an attack by unidentified armed youths on a warehouse in Pochalla
resulted in the death of two national humanitarian workers and one national police
officer.
24. Western Bahr el-Ghazal State witnessed an upsurge in violence on 31 May,
when an unknown armed group reportedly attacked Bazia Payam in Wau County.
On 4 June, further clashes occurred in an area west of Bazia. On 7 July, SPLM/A in
Opposition forces under General Dau Aturjong attacked Aroyo, Aweil Centre
County in Northern Bahr El-Ghazal State, reportedly resulting in the deaths of two
police officers. On 9 July, Opposition forces launched another advance into Chel kou
Payam in Aweil West County.
25. Intercommunal tensions in the Equatoria region, and Lakes and Warrap States
continued to be exacerbated by competition over grazing land for cattle and access
to water. Violence between pastoralists and the local population was on an upward
trend in the three Equatoria States, following non-compliance with the presidential
decree ordering cattle keepers to return to their places of origin in Lakes and Jonglei
States. On 22 May, there were widespread clashes between the local population and
pastoralists in Mundri West County, Western Equatoria State, resulting in
60 fatalities. On 8 June, pastoralists, who were reportedly supported by SPLA
elements from the same ethnicity, engaged in sporadic shootings, killing eight

15-13816

5/18

S/2015/655

civilians in Maridi County, Western Equatoria State. As a result of t he violence, at
least 75,000 civilians are estimated to have been displaced in the State.
26. In Lakes State, intercommunal violence continued over access to pasture and
water for cattle, compounded by the cycles of revenge killings between the Dinka
Agar subclans. The clashes, which occurred in mid-May, have resulted in over
80 deaths and 40 injuries. From May to July, in Jonglei State, despite significant
efforts by the Greater Pibor Administrative Area officials to curb the conflict within
its borders and with its neighbours, violence and tensions continued between
different Murle age groups within the Area. On 12 July, fighting between the
Nyakurmong and Lango groups in Pibor resulted in three people being wounded.

IV. Humanitarian situation
27. As at 31 July, over 1.6 million people were displaced inside South Sudan, and
more than 620,000 were refugees in neighbouring countries. Active hostilities and
insecurity continued to disrupt the humanitarian response and restrict road, river and
air access. On occasions, this forced humanitarian organizations to reduce their staff
levels or pause programmes in and around the conflict -affected areas, in particular
in southern Unity State and parts of Upper Nile State. Humanitarian deliveries were
also constrained by road and river checkpoints and demands for illegal taxation or
extortion. Humanitarian facilities have been attacked and looted, and personnel
subjected to assaults, threats, harassments, detention, abduction and killings, with at
least 29 fatalities among aid workers since 15 December 2013.
28. Despite the increasingly challenging operating environment, humanitarian
agencies scaled up the delivery of aid to remote areas. Since the beginning of 2015,
humanitarian partners have provided food assistance to more than 2 million people,
water sanitation and hygiene services to 1.6 million, health care to 1.1 million,
protection services to one million, and education services to 235,000 children and
adolescents.
29. The nutrition situation remains above the emergency threshold, with
approximately 80 per cent of the counties in Unity, Upper Nile, Jonglei, Northern
Bahr el-Ghazal and Warrap States classified at critical nutritional levels. Some
250,000 children are at risk from rapidly worsening nutrition, wi th one in three
children suffering acute malnutrition. According to the Integrated Food Security
Phase Classification report endorsed by the Government and released in May, in a
country of some 11.6 million people, 7.9 million are expected to face food
insecurity, including 3.3 million people in “stressed” food insecurity. Over
4.6 million people are already facing “crisis” and “emergency” levels of food
insecurity. The humanitarian situation in Unity State is particularly alarming, as the
insecurity prevents access to communities and monitoring the risk of famine among
the displaced population.
30. On 23 June, the Government officially declared a cholera outbreak in Juba
County. As at31 July, a total of 1,429 cholera cases, including 42 deaths, were
reported in Juba and Bor counties in Central Equatoria and Jonglei States,
respectively, with a case fatality rate of 2.94 per cent. Health partners conducted a
series of oral cholera vaccination campaigns targeting UNMISS protection of
civilians sites in Bentiu and Juba to prevent cholera and to complement other
measures to improve hygiene and community awareness.

6/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

31. The leading causes of illness among internally displaced people were acute
respiratory tract infections, followed by malaria, acute watery diarrho ea, acute
bloody diarrhoea and suspected measles. Viral leishmaniasis (or kala -azar)
continues to be a concern. From January through July, a total of 2,308 cases and
72 deaths (with a case fatality rate of 3.1 per cent) were reported from 15 treatment
centres. Partners continue to support enhanced surveillance, case management and
interventions to prevent transmission.
32. The escalation of fighting in the Greater Upper Nile region has resulted in the
damage and destruction of large numbers of schools, lea ving an increasing number
of children without access to education. The national Back -to-Learning Initiative,
conducted from February to June, aimed to support communities in returning their
children to schools and other temporary learning spaces and keepin g them there.
The initiative targeted out-of-school children and adolescents, including the children
associated with the South Sudan Democratic Movement/South Sudan Defence Army
(SSDM/SSDA)-Cobra faction, as part of their reintegration into communities.
Overall, more than 215,978 children and adolescents (of whom 42 per cent are girls)
have been provided with access to learning opportunities.
33. The humanitarian community revised the Humanitarian Response Plan for
2015 in June, taking into account the deepening vulnerabilities and new
humanitarian requirements, especially in urban areas, where humanitarian agencies
have not commenced operations. The revised plan requires US$ 1.63 billion to assist
4.6 million people with life-saving aid in 2015. On 16 June, over $275 million was
pledged at a high-level event in Geneva organized by the European Union and the
Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. As at 31 July, the plan was
funded in the amount of $687 million, leaving a funding gap of nearly $1 billion for
2015.

V. Implementation of the Mission’s reprioritized
mandated tasks
A.

Protection of civilians
34. UNMISS continued to pursue a three-tiered approach to ensure that civilians
are protected from the threat of physical violence, with specific protection for
women and children, and to deter or respond to violence against civilians. The
Mission’s early warning mechanism assesses the evolving risks to the civilian
population, to enable it to act in a timely and proactive manner.
35. Under tier one, protection through dialogue and engagement, UNMISS
continued to work closely with United Nations country team partners and
non-governmental organizations to support the resolution of local conflicts. During
the period, UNMISS civil affairs teams held 503 meetings with local authorities,
community leaders, youth and women, including in Opposition -held territory, to
identify conflict threats and mitigation measures. UNMISS also organized
97 conflict management, mitigation and resolution events, including intercommunal
dialogue activities and workshops, assisting 4,332 cattle camp youth, community
leaders, women and internally displaced persons at UNMISS protection of civilians
sites and at other locations to develop conflict management skills and to resolve
intercommunal disputes. Likewise, in Lakes State, UNMISS focused on conflict
management workshops for cattle keepers in Rumbek Centre and Yirol Counties,

15-13816

7/18

S/2015/655

one of the hotspots for intercommunal violence. UNMISS continued to promote
conflict resolution in its protection of civilians sites through daily interaction with
community leadership, women, youth and other authorities.
36. Under tier two, provision of physical protection, as at 12 August, UNMISS
was providing protection to over 189,220 internally displaced persons at six
protection of civilians sites, including over 121,194 in Bentiu, 36,149 in Malakal
and 28,663 in Juba. The UNMISS protection of civilians site in Bentiu experienced
the largest increase of internally displaced persons during the period, numbering
some 50,000, while Malakal registered an additional 3,000 internally displaced
persons. Threats of violence are an important factor forcing populations to seek
refuge in the protection of civilians sites, while increasing food insecurity
exacerbates the situation. Approximately 40 per cent of the UNMISS force strength
is now dedicated to the protection of these sites.
37. The remainder of force personnel not tasked with administrative, force
protection, contingency or protection duties are focused on dynamic protection
efforts. UNMISS projected its presence by conducting 8,611 short -duration,
280 long-duration, 33 dynamic air and 630 integrated patrols. In particular,
UNMISS is scaling up its protection efforts in Unity State by establishing a security
presence in previously inaccessible locations. This will include the establishment of
temporary operating bases in order to provide a sense of security to the local
populace, while also facilitating conditions for the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. From 23 to 28 May, in coordination with the United Nations Mine
Action Service (UNMAS), UNMISS undertook “Operation Unity,” the first road
patrols into the southern counties of Unity State since December 2013.
38. Disturbances in many UNMISS protection of civilians sites, ethnic tensions,
youth and gang mobilization, violence, incursions by armed elements and threats
against humanitarian and UNMISS personnel (28 UNMISS police have sustained
injuries in the protection of civilians sites in Juba, Malakal, Bentiu and Bor)
continued to pose considerable challenges. From 8 to 10 May, clashes occurred
between the Bul Nuer and Adok clans from the Nuer community in the protection
sites in Juba, which resulted in the death of one internally displaced person and
injuries to at least 73 others. The UNMISS protection site in Malakal has
experienced several incidents of fighting between inte rnally displaced persons from
the Shilluk, Nuer and Dinka communities (with some Darfuri citizens having been
attacked and their shops looted). Incidents of internally displaced persons being
caught in the crossfire and directly targeted by armed elements, in contravention of
international humanitarian law, have also been a source of concern.
39. UNMISS continued to administer four holding facilities to detain internally
displaced persons who threaten the safety and security of the protection of civilians
sites in Bentiu, Bor, Juba and Malakal. As at 31 July, 25 suspects (24 men and one
woman) were being held at these facilities, including seven in Juba, nine in Bentiu,
five in Malakal and four in Bor. This is a significant reduction compared to the
63 offenders detained in April, as UNMISS revised the procedures for the review of
cases of internally displaced persons being held in holding facilities, including
through reintegration into the community. UNMISS has also been in discussions
with the Government regarding the handover of suspects.
40. UNMAS conducted surveys and explosive ordnances disposal in Melut in
Upper Nile State and in Jonglei State. On 3 June, following the fighting between

8/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition in Melut, UNMAS deployed a team to c lear
two unexploded mortars in the UNMISS base. UNMAS provided mine risk
awareness training in the UNMISS protection of civilians sites in Malakal and
Bentiu, in Upper Nile and Unity States, respectively. Overall, during the period
from 14 April to 31 July, UNMAS released around 6.5 million square metres of land
(equivalent to 898 football fields); destroyed 621 landmines, 3,307 explosive
remnants of war and 6,635 items of small arms ammunition; and provided risk
education to 169,207 civilians (including 55,237 boys and 46,357 girls).
41. Under tier three, in support of the confidence and trust -building policing
strategy of the South Sudan National Police Service, UNMISS initiated an
integrated sensitization programme for 104 national police personnel, whic h
addressed the issues of community policing, building trust and confidence, human
rights, child protection, sexual and gender-based violence and respect for diversity.
42. In June, with UNMISS support, the Central Equatoria State Ministry for
Gender and Social Development opened South Sudan’s first safe house for survivors
of sexual and gender-based violence in Juba, where they will receive counselling
and psychosocial support. UNMISS continued to engage in advocacy using Security
Council resolution 1325 (2000) as a tool for training women on prevention,
participation and protection.
43. Following the issuance of “temporary stay” permits by the Government for
foreign nationals residing at one of the UNMISS protection of civilians sites in
Juba, UNHCR has supported several foreign national representatives in visiting
Makpandu Refugee Camp in Yambio, Western Equatoria State, ahead of a planned
relocation of the 578 foreign nationals remaining in the Juba site.

B.

Human rights monitoring and reporting
44. UNMISS continued to investigate reports of violations of international human
rights and humanitarian law, as well as human rights abuses. During the reporting
period, UNMISS interviewed over 200 displaced civilians, allegedly victims of and
witnesses to human rights violations perpetrated mostly by SPLA forces with the
support of armed militias or armed youth within the context of surge operations in
Unity State commenced in April. Following initial interviews, UNMISS released a
press statement on 11 May, indicating concerns over continuing and consistent
reports of the burning of towns and villages, killings, the abduction of males as
young as 10 years old, the rape and abduction of girls and women and the burning
of people alive in their homes.
45. On 29 June, UNMISS released a flash human rights report, which documented
the human rights violations perpetrated as fighting escalated in the Greater Upper
Nile region in April and May. The occurrence of sexual violence, including rape,
gang rape and abductions, has significantly increased during the recent upsurge in
fighting. At least 172 women and girls were reportedly abducted and 79 subjected to
sexual violence, including gang rape, with several subsequently being shot dead or
burnt alive in their tukuls in Unity State. Additionally, dozens of children were
reportedly killed, raped and abducted during April and May. At least 93 women,
mainly Shilluk, were reportedly abducted by SPLA soldiers in Upper Nile State.
There have been several reports of sexual violence and extortion against women and
girls at military checkpoints as they were leaving the UNMISS protection of

15-13816

9/18

S/2015/655

civilians sites for livelihood activities, such as gathering food and firewood. Women
have also been subjected to sexual exploitation, including inside the protection of
civilians sites, reportedly by male internally displaced persons.
46. These attacks resulted in the forced displacement of thousands of civilians,
many of whom have been deterred from seeking refuge in the UNMISS protection
of civilians site in Bentiu, Unity State, owing in part to the existing SPLA defence
cordon around Bentiu and Rubkona and SPLA checkpoints in the vicinity of the site.
Another surge in fighting in mid-June led to human rights violations similar to those
documented after the beginning of the offensive.
47. UNMISS continued to follow up on cases of alleged human rights violations,
including inside the UNMISS protection of civilians site in Malakal, Upper Nile
State. Intercommunal violence at the site increased when Malakal came under the
control of Major General Olonyi’s Shilluk forces, with UNMISS receiving
allegations of abductions and extrajudicial killings of Dinka men outside the
protection of civilians site. When the Government regained control of Malakal,
several members of the Shilluk community were targeted. UNMISS continues to
investigate cases of alleged killings and abductions. Overall, UNMISS has obtained
credible reports of the abduction of at least 50 civilians near the protection of
civilians site in Malakal, mostly by SPLA elements.
48. Owing to the upsurge in violence in Unity and Upper Nile States, a total of
279 incidents affecting 5,995 children were reported. These included 60 verified
incidents of killing (affecting 97 boys, 54 girls and 32 c hildren of unknown sex) and
an additional 27 unverified incidents (affecting 43 boys, 33 girls and 25 children of
unknown sex); 34 verified incidents of recruitment and use of children (affecting
289 boys and 3 girls), with 9 additional unverified incident s (affecting 418 boys);
13 verified attacks on or military use of schools and 2 additional unverified cases;
6 verified attacks on and military use of hospitals, with 5 additional unverified
cases; 33 verified incidents of rape (affecting 4 boys and 92 girls), with an
additional 7 unverified incidents (affecting 84 girls); 23 verified incidents of
abduction (affecting 23 boys, 53 girls and 2 children of unknown sex), with nine
unverified incidents (affecting 73 boys, 11 girls and 102 children of unknown s ex);
and 19 incidents of denial of humanitarian access, with an additional 4 unverified
cases.
49. To date, the SSDM/SSDA-Cobra faction troops in the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area released a total of 1,755 (including 5 girls) of an estimated
3,000 children. The children were screened, registered, released and reintegrated
within the context of a joint programme by the National Disarmament,
Demobilization and Reintegration Commission, UNMISS, UNICEF and partners. To
date 6,199 children and adolescents have access to learning in the five targeted sites
in Pibor. Advocacy efforts for the release of the remaining children continue.
50. A joint school assessment project by the United Nations and SPLA conducted
in April identified 45 schools under the military use by both parties to the conflict.
SPLA and allied forces have vacated 26 schools in Central Equatoria, Eastern
Equatoria, Jonglei, Lakes and Upper Nile States. Owing to the insecurity and
fighting, the Mission has not been able to access or verify schools being held by
SPLA in Opposition. With 11 additional incidents of military use of schools having
been documented since the outbreak of the conflict, a total of 30 schools are
presently under military use. In addition, nine schools were reportedly attac ked

10/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

during the military offensive in Unity State in May and are currently not being used,
while one additional school was temporarily used for military purposes in Western
Equatoria State.
51. In a positive development, on 30 April, South Sudan acceded to the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women and
its Optional Protocol, the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment and its Optional Protocol and the Convention
on the Rights of the Child.
52. In terms of accountability, SPLA reported, in its initial report on the revised
action plan and recommitment agreement for ending grave violations against
children, dated 4 May, that two SPLA soldiers were detained and charged for
sexually abusing two girls, aged 9 and 13, in Basilia in Western Bahr el -Ghazal
State.
53. Continuous challenges to the administration of justice in accordance with
international human rights standards persist given the collapse of justice institutions
in the context of the current crisis.. Prolonged and arbitrary detentions were
observed throughout the country, attributable to several causes, including the
ongoing conflict, lack of infrastructure and case backlogs. In the Greater Pibor
Administrative Area, in the absence of a statutory judge, 15 of those detained at the
prison on serious charges had not been brought to court. In Lakes State,
two members of the legislative assembly have remained in detention for months
awaiting trial.
54. In Central Equatoria State, the refusal by the Juba Main Prison to admit new
detainees owing to the absence of space, and a reported decision by the court not to
receive new cases owing to backlogs, contributed to prolonged detention and
overcrowding at police detention facilities. UNMISS also noted an increase in the
number of women held in various detention cells in South Sudan, totalling 31 in
June 2015.
55. While UNMISS received fewer reports of harassment and intimidation of
journalists by security personnel, there were at least two cases of harassment
directly related to reporting on fighting in Unity and Upper Nile States. Meanwhile,
the chair of the Association for Media Development in South Sudan, who is also the
editor-in-chief of the Juba Monitor, relayed procedural concerns about the
appointment of members of media regulatory bodies, determined by presidential
decree and announced on 13 May.

C.

Creating the conditions for delivery of humanitarian assistance
56. The delivery of humanitarian assistance is faced with unpredictable
challenges, particularly in the greater Upper Nile region, stemming from the risk of
becoming caught in crossfire, difficulties in obtaining flight and river safety
assurances and restricted movement due to the rains. UNMISS continued to work
with humanitarian partners to assess operational logistics and implement
contingency plans. Mission engineers conducted maintenance operations of road
networks, which, coupled with enhanced inter-agency information-sharing on road
conditions, has improved the mobility of humanitarian and UNMISS convoys. A

15-13816

11/18

S/2015/655

total of 7,482 force protection tasks were undertaken to protect road convoys,
barges and humanitarian activities during the reporting period.
57. UNMAS continued to play a key role in creating conditions for the delivery of
humanitarian assistance through surveys, route assessments and mine clearance of
250 km of roads in Jonglei, Unity and Western Bahr el-Ghazal States.
58. UNMISS continued to support the International Organization for Migration in
constructing extensions of the protection of civilians sites in Bentiu and Malakal,
through the provision of materials, fuel and transportation of cargo when feasible.
UNMISS also provided humanitarian partners with physical protection, office space,
warehousing and accommodation in its premises in Bentiu in Unity State, Bor in
Jonglei State and Malakal in Upper Nile State.

D.

Supporting the implementation of the cessation of
hostilities agreement
59. In addition to logistics and life support provided under bilateral arrangements,
UNMISS continued to assist the IGAD Monitoring and Verification Mechanism
through the IGAD Joint Technical Committee in Juba. This included the provision
of force protection and logistics and administrative support services
(accommodation, transport, water, food, fuel, electrical power and medical cover) to
the IGAD Monitoring and Verification Teams co-located at UNMISS bases.
60. From their deployment in March 2014 through 31 July 2015, the IGAD
Monitoring and Verification Teams investigated a total of 46 incidents, which
amounted to violations of the Agreement on Cessation of Hostilities of 23 January
2014. Of these, 19 violations were attributed to Government forces, 23 to SPLM/A
in Opposition and 4 to both parties. IGAD teams car ried out several investigations
in most counties of Unity State, as well as in Malakal and Melut, Upper Nile State.
All these resulted in violations being issued against the two parties.

VI. Mission staffing and status of deployment of surge capacity
61. As at 31 July, the actual strength of the UNMISS civilian personnel stood at
2,335, including 765 international staff members, 1,173 national staff members and
397 United Nations volunteers. The civilian staffing review was completed in 2014
and there have been no further adjustments. As at 31 July, the UNMISS police
strength stood at 1,033 of the authorized 1,323 officers, including 500 individual
police officers, 53 corrections officers and 480 personnel in formed police units.
The induction of the formed police unit from Nepal was completed on 9 May. The
Mission expects to reach its full capacity of formed police unit personnel in August
with the arrival of the remaining two units from Ghana and Rwanda, which has been
delayed owing to issues connected with the arrival of contingent-owned equipment
and clearances from the Government of South Sudan.
62. As at 31 July, the UNMISS troop strength stood at 11,546 military personnel.
Of the 5,500 surge troops, 4,713 have been deployed. The deployment of the F orce
Marine Unit from Bangladesh and the Aviation (Medium Utility Helicopter) Unit
from Sri Lanka was completed on 11 May and 22 June, respectively. The
deployment of the remaining 400 troops from Ghana and 280 troops from Kenya

12/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

has been postponed owing to challenges with contingent-owned equipment
deployment. The Ghanaian Battalion’s equipment is ready for deployment, but has
been delayed owing to the poor road conditions to Bentiu and clearances pending
from the Government of South Sudan. The deployment timelines for the remaining
troops from Kenya will be determined by the readiness of contingent -owned
equipment and timelines for obtaining the necessary clearances from the
Government of South Sudan. The deployment of five tactical helicopters from
Ethiopia and Rwanda was cancelled following the written objection of the
Government of South Sudan. Ongoing delays in the deployment of contingent owned equipment across the Mission continue to hamper operations for the units
already in the mission area.
63. UNMISS continued to raise awareness of its personnel and the local
population, particularly those seeking protection in UNMISS protection of civilians
sites, of the United Nations zero-tolerance policy on sexual exploitation and abuse.
Additionally, UNMISS is in the process of implementing initiatives in connection
with my report on special measures for protection from sexual exploitation and
abuse (A/69/779).

VII. Violations of the status-of-forces agreement, international
humanitarian law and security of United Nations staff
64. During the reporting period, UNMISS recorded a total of 102 violations of the
status-of-forces agreement. Of these, 59 were restrictions on UNMISS movement,
affecting land, air and river operations. Other violations included threats to
UNMISS personnel and premises, including protection of civilians sites, attacks
on UNMISS barges, assault and harassment of UNMISS personnel, illegal entry into
UNMISS premises, unwarranted arrest and detention, interference with
the UNMISS protection of civilians mandate, search and confiscation of UNMISS
property, impoundment of UNMISS vehicles and demand for payment of taxes. It is
of concern that 92 of the reported violations were perpetrated by go vernment
security forces, including SPLA, the national police and the national security
service.
65. In three incidents, on 29 April, 7 May and 27 July, SPLA soldiers fired shots
into the air in close proximity to the UNMISS base and protection of civilian s site in
Bentiu, Unity State, resulting in the injury of five persons seeking protection there.
On 5 July, two SPLA soldiers reportedly entered the same site in Bentiu, shooting
and killing one person. On 15 May, an UNMISS military officer was wounded by a
stray bullet fired by a SPLA soldier in Rumbek in Lakes State, while engaged in
celebratory firing. On 19 May, during heavy fighting between SPLA and SPLM/A in
Opposition in Upper Nile State, approximately 20 artillery shells and stray bullets
landed inside the UNMISS protection of civilians site in Melut, killing nine
internally displaced persons and injuring 11 others. On 28 May, as a result of some
SPLA soldiers carrying out intermittent small arms firing in close proximity to the
UNMISS base in Malakal, three internally displaced persons and one UNMISS
military personnel sustained gunshot wounds from stray bullets. On 27 June, SPLA
soldiers fired some 15 to 20 rounds at an UNMISS barge approximately
21 kilometres north of Bor town. On 9 July, SPLA attacked an UNMISS barge
convoy with rocket-propelled grenades and heavy machine guns south of Malakal,

15-13816

13/18

S/2015/655

rendering the engine and communication equipment of the barge temporarily
inoperable.
66. SPLM/A in Opposition was responsible for nine security incidents during the
reporting period, including restrictions on UNMISS land, river and air movement,
attacks on an UNMISS protection of civilians site and threats to UNMISS personnel
and premises. On 1 July, SPLM/A in Opposition and General Olonyi’s Shilluk
militia opened fire on internally displaced persons at the UNMISS protection of
civilians site in Malakal. One civilian was killed and another eight were injured.
67. As a direct effect of the deteriorating security situation due to armed conflict
in Upper Nile State, the United Nations approved the temporary relocation of
personnel on 22 May from Melut in Upper Nile State to Juba, Central Equatoria
State. On 3 July, the United Nations evacuated staff from Malakal in Upper Nile to
Juba, some of whom have since returned to Malakal. Most of the threats and
associated risk against United Nations personnel and assets, however, emanate from
the protection of civilians sites. Regular perimeter breaches, including the
smuggling of weapons into the sites and violence among internally displaced
persons, constitute a direct threat for United Nations personnel and assets within
these sites. Most of the sites, owing to their size and large number of inhabitants and
limited mission resources, cannot effectively be policed. In the protection of
civilians sites in Juba, internally displaced persons have entered United Nations
premises where staff work and reside on several occasions.
68. As at 5 August, three UNMISS national staff members arrested in August and
October 2014 remained under detention at the National Security Service
headquarters in Juba. During the Mission’s most recent visit to check on their
welfare, the staff members stated that no further investigations had been conducted
since April and no charges had been filed against the personnel.
69. UNMISS has continued to engage with, and notify the host Government on a
regular basis of these violations and their negative effects on UNMISS, its
operations and the safety of its personnel and premises. A monthly matrix of
incidents is also shared with the Government. However, to date, UNMISS has only
been informed of action taken with regard to the 27 June shooting incident targeting
an UNMISS barge, including the arrest of the commander of the SPLA Riverine
Detachment. The Mission is yet to be informed of the outcome of investigations into
the other incidents outlined above.

VIII. Financial aspects
70. The General Assembly, by its resolution 69/260 B of 25 June 2015, appropriated
the amount of $1,139,520,000 for the period from 1 July 2015 to 30 June 2016. As at
4 August 2015, unpaid assessed contributions to the UNMISS Special Account
amounted to $676.1 million. Total outstanding assessed contributions for all
peacekeeping operations at the same date amounted to $4,802.4 million. As at
4 August 2015, reimbursement to contributing Governments for troop and formed
police costs and contingent-owned equipment costs had been made for the period to
28 February 2015 and 31 December 2014, respectively, in accordance with the
quarterly payment schedule.

14/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

IX. Observations and recommendations
71. The security and humanitarian situation in South Sudan remains of grave
concern, particularly the unprecedented levels of violence inflicted on the
population. The conflict has resulted in the internal displacement of over 2 million
people, forced 201,911 internally displaced persons to seek protection in UNMISS
bases as at 19 August, and caused a severe humanitarian crisis, with 40 per cent of
the population facing crisis and emergency levels of food insecurity. I am deeply
concerned by the steep increase in the number of civilians seeking refuge in the
protection of civilians sites, escaping from the ongoing violence and a catastrophic
humanitarian situation.
72. Beginning in late April, the country witnessed a surge in large-scale fighting
between SPLA and SPLM/A in Opposition and allied militia forces over control of
key areas in Upper Nile State, including Malakal and Melut, as well as the oilfields
in Paloich in Upper Nile State and in southern Unity State. I strongly condemn this
escalation of violence, which violates the cessation of hostilities agreement signed
by the warring parties on 23 January 2014, and the killing of hundreds of innocent
civilians.
73. The clear preference by South Sudanese leaders to pursue a military option
instead of an inclusive political settlement has resulted in profound suffering for
millions. The increase in violence has once again demonstrated the absence of a
genuine commitment by the parties to end the current conflict. I have repeatedly
called upon President Salva Kiir Mayardit and former Vice -President Riek Machar
to display statesmanship and make the compromises necessary for an inclusive and
comprehensive peace agreement. The leaders bear the primary responsibility for the
violence and for the serious human rights violations and abuses committed in this
senseless, ruinous war. The horrific fact that women and children are being
deliberately targeted, with countless incidents of sexual violence, inc luding gang
rapes, abductions, killings, arson and displacement, is totally unacceptable. It must
stop now.
74. The culture of impunity in South Sudan must end, and the perpetrators of war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide must be held to accoun t. Justice and
accountability are a requirement for any peace agreement to be sustainable and to
break the cycle of violence. In this regard, I again urge the African Union to release
the findings of the report of the African Union Commission of Inquiry an d to
support the establishment of criminal accountability mechanisms, including the
option of a hybrid court.
75. I am particularly disturbed by the continued access challenges faced by
humanitarian and peacekeeping personnel, as well as the insecurity and violence,
including physical assault, harassment, threats, arrest, detention and abductions, that
they face while carrying out their duties. In this respect, I am deeply concerned
about the Government actions targeting United Nations officials. On 1 June, I issued
a statement condemning the Government’s decision of 29 May to declare my
Deputy Special Representative, Toby Lanzer, persona non grata, and called upon the
Government to immediately reverse its decision. The Government’s refusal to
reconsider the expulsion of Mr. Lanzer is yet another indication of its disregard for
the suffering of its people and contempt for those who work to bring them essential
humanitarian services.

15-13816

15/18

S/2015/655

76. I call upon the Government to adhere to its obligations under the status -offorces agreement and on the parties to the conflict to ensure unfettered freedom of
movement and humanitarian access for UNMISS and humanitarian workers. I also
urge both parties, in particular the Government, which has the primary
responsibility to protect civilians, to establish a secure environment for civilians and
create the conditions necessary for the voluntary return of internally displaced
persons. I also appeal to the Security Council to call upon the Government and the
opposition to abide by the status-of-forces agreement in granting unrestricted access
to the United Nations and humanitarian partners.
77. UNMISS continues to make every effort to implement its protection of
civilians mandate under Security Council resolution 2223 (2015) and exte nd its
reach beyond UNMISS bases to provide protection to the hundreds of thousands of
vulnerable civilians throughout South Sudan. In this regard, I renew earlier calls for
troop-contributing countries to expeditiously deploy the remaining surge
capabilities and military equipment, which are critical to enable UNMISS to
effectively deliver on its mandate. UNMISS continued to experience delays in
obtaining necessary clearances from the Government of South Sudan for troop
deployments and internal relocations, as well as for the deployment of contingentowned equipment, affecting the efforts to deploy all mandated surge troops. I regret
that the Government rejected the much-needed deployment of tactical helicopters. I
urge the Government of South Sudan to extend its full cooperation to the
deployment of the remaining troops and assets, which will help the Mission to
provide wider and more effective protection to civilians under threat of violence.
78. I welcome the signing by Riek Machar and the former detainee s of the IGAD
compromise peace agreement. I have taken note that President Kiir initialled it with
some reservations. I strongly hope that he will sign the agreement by the end of
15-day deadline set by IGAD.
79. I am disappointed that the Heads of State and Government summit did not
culminate in the signing of the agreement by all the parties. However, I am
encouraged by the regional and international consensus in support of the agreement,
which the United Nations also signed as a witness.
80. Time is of the essence. The situation on the ground is highly charged and
unpredictable. Every day that passes without an agreement prolongs the suffering of
the South Sudanese people and increases the risk of a large -scale resumption of the
fighting. It is critical that South Sudan’s regional and international partners act
collectively to ensure that the parties who have signed remain committed to the
agreement and that the Government comes on board by 1 September. The
consequences of failing to reach a negotiated settlement would be catastrophic for
South Sudan and the region as a whole.
81. The United Nations stands ready to work with the parties, IGAD, the African
Union and other international partners to finalize the agreement and move swiftly
towards its implementation. It is my intention to convene a high-level summit on the
situation in South Sudan on the margins of the General Assembly this September, to
collectively support the peace process and speak with one voice.

16/18

15-13816

S/2015/655

82. Finally, I wish to express my sincere appreciation for the tireless courage of
UNMISS personnel, who, under the able leadership of my Special Representative,
Ellen Margrethe Løj, continue to work to protect tens of thousands of civilians
under threat of physical violence and to stabilize the sec urity situation. In particular,
I thank the troop- and police-contributing countries that have provided much-needed
uniformed personnel and assets to the Mission. I also commend the personnel of the
United Nations country team and non-governmental organization partners for their
assiduous efforts to provide much-needed humanitarian assistance to the population,
often in perilous circumstances.

15-13816

17/18

S/2015/655

18/18

15-13816
