United Nations

Security Council

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)
Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9090th meeting

Tuesday, 12 July 2022, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Costa Filho. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Brazil)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mr. Wan Feng
Ms. Fériaud
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Mr. Iddrisu
Mr. Bhalla
Ms. Hill
Ms. Mbabu
Mr. Cisneros Chávez
Ms. Erno
Ms. Agaronova
Mr. Al-Ali
Ms. Sims
Ms. Badawy

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
The key role of strategic communications for efficient peacekeeping
Letter dated 5 July 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Brazil to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/539)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-42257 (E)
*2242257*

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting resumed at 3.10 p.m.
The President: I wish to remind all speakers to limit
their statements to no more than three minutes in order
to enable the Council to carry out its work expeditiously.
I now give the floor to the representative
of Lithuania.
Mr. Paulauskas (Lithuania): Let me express
our gratitude to the Brazilian presidency and to His
Excellency Mr. Carlos Alberto Franco França, Brazil’s
Minister for External Relations, for convening a
Security Council debate for the first time on such an
important subject. I would also like to thank SecretaryGeneral António Guterres, Lieutenant General Affonso
Da Costa, Force Commander of the United Nations
Organization Stabilization Mission in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, and Ms. Jenna Russo, Director
of Research of the International Peace Institute, for
their insightful remarks.
Today, as instability and conflicts increasingly
challenge international security, the United Nations
and the Security Council must step up their efforts to
deal with new challenges and unconventional threats,
and organizing this debate is a commendable example
of the Council’s dedication to doing just that. The
manipulation of information, including misinformation
and disinformation, has long been part of the toolkit used
by non-democratic States in times of conflict. As the
Secretary-General rightly noted, today disinformation,
misinformation and hate speech are increasingly being
used as weapons of war. We are all witnesses today of
how Russia is weaponizing disinformation to justify its
unprovoked, full-scale and illegal invasion of Ukraine.
As a troop-contributing country, with 45 Lithuanian
peacekeepers currently serving in the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA), Lithuania is extremely
concerned about the degrading effects of information
manipulation and the threats posed by disinformation
and misinformation in the context of peacekeeping
operations. They could have long-term negative effects,
including eroding communities’ perceptions of the
credibility of peacekeeping and the legitimacy of the
United Nations presence.
Over the past few years, there has been a significant
increase in disinformation campaigns against the
United Nations and United Nations peacekeeping
operations. As many speakers have noted, that trend
2/10

12/07/2022

is particularly worrisome in Mali, the Central African
Republic and the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
where various actors are increasingly using social
media and other platforms to deliberately spread
disinformation and incite hatred and violence. Just last
week, members of the Security Council condemned
yet another deadly attack on MINUSMA in Mali (see
S/PV.9086). It is crucial to ensure that such attacks are
swiftly investigated and their perpetrators brought to
justice, including those who might have incited such
attacks by spreading anti-United Nations narratives. A
reported increase in disinformation activities in Mali,
including concerted efforts to deflect attention from
atrocities reportedly committed by the Kremlin-linked
Wagner Group, is not only sowing discord, confusion
and seeding divisions in the increasingly volatile
region, it has a direct impact on the safety and security
of peacekeepers and undermines the implementation of
MINUSMA’s mandate.
We see strategic communications as one of the
key tools at the disposal of the United Nations to
address this ever-growing challenge. In that regard,
we welcomed the 2021 Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping, as
well as the Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, with
strategic communications as one of its priorities. We are
committed to supporting the strategic communications
of the United Nations in peacekeeping, including
alongside the six concrete actions cited by the SecretaryGeneral this morning, and especially through training
and capacity-building on responding to misinformation
and disinformation and on strategic communications in
a digital environment. This is a multifaceted challenge
that requires a multidimensional response, and
Lithuania stands ready to contribute to our common
interest in making United Nations peacekeeping more
efficient and capable of addressing the needs of the
twenty-first century.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Ecuador.
Mr. Espinosa Cañizares (Ecuador) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, I would like to thank this
morning’s briefers. I also want to congratulate the
Brazilian presidency on its conduct of the work of
the Security Council so far this month, as well as its
particular contribution to peace and security efforts,
which is also reflected in Brazil’s leadership in
promoting strategic communications in peacekeeping
missions. We had the opportunity to reflect on this topic
22-42257

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on 25 May, during the meeting sponsored by Brazil,
Ghana, India and Ecuador in the context of Protection
of Civilians Week (see S/PV.9042).
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered by the representative of Indonesia on behalf
of the Group of Friends on the Safety and Security of
United Nations Peacekeepers.
In my national capacity, I commend the adoption
this morning of presidential statement S/PRST/2022/5.
We look forward to the Secretary-General’s review of
strategic communications, including an assessment of
existing capabilities. The value that Ecuador places
on the role of system-wide communications has also
been reflected in our presidency of the United Nations
Information Committee over the past two years, where
we have witnessed the role that communications plays
in facilitating most of the efforts undertaken by the
United Nations and its members.
Rapid technological development and the digital
revolution have increased the number of tools
available while also adding to the complexity of
persistent challenges. That is why we must also delve
comprehensively into discussions on the topic. Strategic
communications encourage the strengthening of trust
between the peacekeeping missions and the places
where they work, while consultations with civil society
at the local and national levels can help to effectively
integrate strategic communications into the planning
and implementation of efforts to protect civilians.
As one of the priorities of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative, strategic communications
are linked to the women and peace and security agenda
and to peacekeeping based on data and technology,
thereby adding to the tools available for preventing
and deterring sexual violence in armed conflicts.
Beyond that, it is important to ensure that strategic
communications cannot and do not reinforce gender
stereotypes. Ecuador will work to ensure that the
critical importance of strategic communications is
also highlighted in the next session of the Special
Committee on Peacekeeping Operations, considering
that such communications help to manage expectations
among local communities and counter disinformation
and misinformation.
Finally, strategic coordination must be part of the
comprehensive planning and early coordination that
precede any transition process with host countries and
the various relevant actors, in order to ensure smooth

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

transitions that foster lasting peace, which is the central
pledge of the United Nations.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Australia.
Mr. Pendlebury (Australia): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening this important debate,
and I thank the Secretary-General for his remarks and
continued efforts to improve mandate implementation
and preserve the safety and security of peacekeepers.
Today’s peacekeeping missions face many
challenges,
including
ambiguous
information
landscapes. Ceding the information space to those who
work against the efforts of the international community
can undermine the effectiveness of peace operations and
damage the credibility of the United Nations. Strategic
communications bridge the information gap between
peacekeeping operations and local populations. They
enable the dissemination of facts, the correction of
disinformation and the building of credibility in our
work, and they can mobilize civil society — including,
importantly, local women leaders — to advocate on
behalf of vulnerable populations.
Australia supports the use of strategic
communications to spread awareness of a mission’s
mandate and counter misinformation, disinformation
and hate speech in peacekeeping environments. We
also see them as integral to effectively delivering on
mandate elements that support key pillars of the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, particularly women
and peace and security and the protection of civilians.
We join with all stakeholders in peace processes to
better understand how false narratives are used to
inflame conflict. We strongly urge action to help
peacekeeping missions better identify and counter these
tools of conflict, thereby reducing the risk of violence
to peacekeepers and civilians. Australia currently
supports the integration and implementation of strong
strategic communications in two key areas.
First, since we view peacekeeper preparation
as central to building awareness of the importance
of strategic communication among our deployed
personnel, we have partnered with our regional family
to deliver effective, contemporary predeployment
training. The recent opening of Fiji’s Blackrock Camp
is a strong example of such cooperation, and Australia
looks forward to supporting that facility as a regional
centre of excellence in peacekeeper training.

22-422573/10

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/07/2022

Secondly, through our pledge to fund the
establishment of an innovation hub in the Department
of Peace Operations, we have taken practical steps
to help fully implement the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping. I am
pleased to announce that Australia has released the
first tranche of funding for that exciting and important
project. Effective strategic communication must harness
all available mediums, many of which are delivered and
accessed digitally. The innovation hub will assist the
United Nations, in partnership with a broad group of
stakeholders, to identify and address complex issues
through cost-effective, innovative solutions tailored to
the needs of peacekeeping missions.

of the women and peace and security agenda,
and partnerships.

Australia thanks Brazil for convening today’s open
debate and highlighting the importance of strategic
communications in peacekeeping operations. As a key
priority of the Action for Peacekeeping Plus (A4P+)
initiative, they represent a pillar of our collective efforts
to achieve the Action for Peacekeeping vision. Australia
renews its commitment to the A4P+initiative and looks
forward to ensuring that peacekeeping operations are
effective, efficient and supported by clear and accurate
strategic communications.

Of paramount importance is the ability of the entire
United Nations to communicate in unison to all relevant
stakeholders in order to control the narrative about the
roles and mandates of peacekeeping missions. Clear
communication must be directed to host countries
and local communities. Such an approach would assist
in countering the misperceptions, misinformation,
disinformation and fake news that negatively impact the
integrity of peacekeeping missions and consequently
endanger the safety and security of peacekeepers.

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.

Secondly, approximately 4,200 peacekeepers
have lost their lives since the establishment of the
first United Nations peacekeeping mission, in 1948.
The recent spike in attacks against peacekeepers
illustrates that their safety and security remains a
major concern. Innovative ways must be explored to
eliminate those fatalities, including by intensifying
intelligence collection and early-warning capacities,
as well as urging the sharing of information among
military, police and civilian components. It is key to
develop the ability to use strategic communications as
a means to enhance the analysis of the complex conflict
environment and mitigate unwarranted threats.

Ms. Tshabalala (South Africa): My delegation
would like to express its appreciation to Brazil for
convening today’s open debate on the key role of
strategic communications for efficient peacekeeping.
We would also like to thank all the briefers for their
insightful interventions.
Strategic communications in United Nations
peacekeeping operations remain imperative for the
effective implementation of the mandates of each
United Nations mission and managing expectations
about their activities. It goes without saying that each
peacekeeping operation has a particular mandate
based on the prevailing situation in the host country.
In that context, strategic communications represent an
important explanatory tool for the work of the United
Nations, as well as one of the priorities of the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
South Africa would therefore like to highlight four
issues that are germane to strategic communications:
the use of digital technologies in peacekeeping, the
safety and security of peacekeepers, the advancement
4/10

First, effective strategic communications are
inextricably linked to United Nations efforts aimed at
inclusive digital transformation. The continued reform
of peacekeeping operations should take into account
evolving digital technologies and their potential use
for advancing United Nations peacekeeping mandates.
Suitable technologies, complemented by capable
personnel, should form an integral part of all phases
of peacekeeping missions, including during transitions.
Continuous training should be provided to all troop- and
police-contributing countries in order to ensure access
to digital technologies and the acquisition of skills.

Thirdly, we are heartened by the developments
aimed at advancing the women and peace and security
agenda in United Nations peacekeeping operations. The
role of women peacekeepers, particularly in promoting
women’s rights and protection in conflict situations, is
well documented in peacekeeping missions with female
representation. Evidence suggests that the involvement
of women peacekeepers has enhanced outreach and
engagement in local populations, resulting in trustbuilding between the missions and the host populations.
More efforts must be geared towards enhancing strategic
22-42257

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

communications to amplify women’s work and voices
and increasing the deployment of women peacekeepers.
Fourthly, as we commemorated this year’s
International Day of United Nations Peacekeepers
with the theme “People, peace and progress: the
power of partnerships”, we were reminded of the
cardinal role of partnerships in the effectiveness
of strategic communications, including in training
and the dissemination, gathering and sharing of
information, with the support of host Governments,
local communities, civil society, non-governmental
organizations, academia, regional and subregional
organizations, United Nations agencies and other
key partners, especially in the information and
communications industry. We look forward to the
completion of the new communications strategy for
peacekeeping operations.
In conclusion, we pay tribute to the men and women
who have served in United Nations peacekeeping
operations. Their commitment and dedication have
saved scores of lives and continue to do so during these
most unprecedented times. We owe them a great deal of
gratitude for their efforts.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Hossain (Bangladesh): I congratulate Brazil
for assuming the presidency of the Security Council
this month and for organizing today’s important open
debate. I would also like to thank the Secretary-General
and the other briefers for their comprehensive briefings
this morning.
As the leading troop- and police-contributing
country, Bangladesh has invested its own resources to
strengthen the capacity of peacekeeping missions in
order to ensure the safety and security of peacekeepers.
We have taken initiatives to deploy armoured personnel
carriers in conflict-prone areas. We have also provided
mine-resistant ambush-protected vehicles to guard
against improvised explosive device attacks.
My delegation aligns itself with the statement
delivered earlier today by the representative of
Indonesia on behalf of the Group of Friends on the
Safety and Security of United Nations peacekeepers.
Allow me to highlight a few additional points in my
national capacity.
First, while we highlight the responsibilities
of senior leadership in peacekeeping missions, we

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

also need to focus on the importance of adopting
a whole-of-mission approach to ensuring effective
strategic communications. In that regard, both the
predeployment and in-mission training of all mission
personnel, as well as their capacity-building, should
be prioritized. Bangladesh has incorporated strategic
communications and community engagement in the
predeployment training of its peacekeepers.
Secondly, collaboration with the national and local
authorities and communities is critically important
for ensuring successful mandate implementation.
Strengthening communications and dialogue among
all stakeholders is important for that collaboration. We
can also share experience in enhancing community
engagement by organizing different unarmed
protection activities, such as sports and sociocultural
events. Such activities will facilitate engagement and
build relations of mutual trust between peacekeepers
and their host communities.
Thirdly, due to the increased use of social media
and smartphones, misinformation and disinformation to
the detriment of peacekeeping operations has become a
serious concern for some missions. Peacekeepers need
to build the capacity to monitor, detect, analyse and
respond to such misinformation and disinformation.
In that regard, we emphasize the need for the full and
effective implementation of the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping.
Finally, we commend the role of the Department
of Global Communications in highlighting the
contributions of troop- and police-contributing
countries. We also welcome the initiative of the
Department of Peace Operations to develop its own
communications strategy. Member States have a shared
responsibility in that regard.
In conclusion, I reiterate Bangladesh’s commitment
to supporting strategic communications in the
peacekeeping operations of the United Nations as part
of our efforts to achieve the priorities of the Action for
Peace Plus initiative.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malta.
Mrs. Frazier (Malta): I would like to thank Brazil
for organizing today’s high-level open debate on this
important topic. I also thank the Secretary-General,
Lieutenant General Affonso da Costa and Ms. Russo

22-422575/10

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/07/2022

for enriching our discussion with their insightful and
compelling briefings.

preventing sexual violence and building confidence
among local communities.

Peacekeeping operations are at the heart
of the Council’s work, and the role of strategic
communications is more fundamental than ever to
ensuring that peacekeeping mandates are fulfilled and
that these missions receive the support they need from
all relevant stakeholders. The importance of ensuring a
safe and secure environment for peacekeepers demands
a strong communications strategy that reaches out
to local Governments and stakeholders, creating the
necessary political and public support for missions’
fulfilment of their mandates. That is even more
important in transition settings, where only an effective
communications strategy can create an environment
conducive to missions’ eventual withdrawal. As
underlined in the Secretary-General’s Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative, strategic communications
are needed to promote success, manage expectations
and foster support for peacekeeping.

Malta believes that we should always strive to
find better ways to reach out to our audience. The
implementation of peacekeeping mandates and the
safety and security of peacekeepers can only be
secured if effective strategic communications are
internalized both in day-to-day planning and the
wider mission mandates. That also demands adequate
training for civilian and uniformed personnel. In that
regard, I commend the efforts of the Department of
Peace Operations in developing a new communications
strategy, which should involve many of the elements we
have discussed here today.

Based on that initiative and today’s discussion, it is
clear that we are facing great challenges when it comes
to the spread of disinformation and misinformation.
The use of technology and social media has increased
the reach of several forms of disinformation, which
sometimes also includes terrorist elements. Such
activities have the potential to destabilize peacekeeping
missions and entire countries, undermining the
trust between United Nations missions and the local
population. Peacekeeping missions cannot fulfil their
mandates and plan for transitions if trust between them
and stakeholders is eroded or weakened. Strong and
effective communications strategies have the potential
to serve as an enabler and improve every facet of a
mission’s operation.
It is also important to make use of the Strategy
for the Digital Transformation of United Nations
Peacekeeping, which acknowledges that digital
technologies have taken a more prominent role in the
conflict arena and outlines how we can harness digital
technology to better deliver on mission mandates. The
implementation of more complex mandates, which
include such important elements as the protection of
civilians and the women and peace and security agenda,
necessitates increased situational awareness and clear
messaging. Dialogue and increased engagement are
fundamental to reaching those goals. Furthermore,
clear and effective communications are vital tools in
6/10

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Philippines.
Mr. Peñaranda (Philippines): I congratulate Brazil
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for this month. Today’s high-level open
debate is timely and meaningful, as we all recognize
the importance of strategic communications as both a
doctrinal and operational concept.
The changes in the evolving global landscape,
marked by crises ranging from climate change and the
coronavirus disease pandemic to regional conflicts
and food insecurity, pose risks to United Nations
peacekeeping operations. This meeting underscores
the urgency of advancing the implementation of United
Nations reforms to strengthen the Organization’s
peacekeeping operations as tools for global peace and
security. With a proud peacekeeping tradition of almost
60 years, in 27 United Nations missions and with more
than 11,000 Filipino peacekeepers, the Philippines
is more committed than ever to implementing the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping and
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiatives, and would
like to make the following points.
First, we support the view that strategic
communications in peacekeeping operations are
essential to implementing mission mandates and
managing the expectations of various stakeholders,
such as host States, local communities and other peace
constituencies, including women and young people.
Secondly, the Philippines recommends that the
Department of Peace Operations and the Department
of Global Communications consider conducting
a joint policy review of United Nations strategic
22-42257

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

communications to provide guidance for United
Nations peacekeeping operations. That would further
build confidence in United Nations peace processes and
promote better understanding of the missions’ raison
d’être. A multi-year joint policy review and planning
of strategic communications should be conducted on a
regular basis, using a whole-of-Government approach.
Thirdly, we believe that for strategic communications
to be effective and have an impact on the ground, the key
messages and the messaging must be tailored to both
the internal and external publics of missions. Contextspecific communications campaigns that are focused on
the relevant audiences would address misinformation
and disinformation efforts aimed against a mission’s
leadership and would also help to ensure the safety and
security of peacekeeping personnel. The Philippines
therefore echoes a key proposal from Member States
submitted early this year during the negotiations of
the Special Committee on Peacekeeping Operations,
asking the Secretary-General to establish a framework
for strategic communications in peacekeeping in order
to combat anti-United Nations propaganda.
There can be no doubt that strategic communications
should not be an afterthought but a core mission
capacity and element. We need a more broad-based,
comprehensive and adequately resourced strategic
communications framework in peacekeeping that is fit
for twenty-first-century international diplomacy.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Slovakia.
Mr. Mlynár (Slovakia): Let me thank you,
Mr. President, for convening a discussion on this
subject. I would also like to thank the briefers for their
insightful remarks.
United Nations peacekeeping operations are a
crucial factor in upholding a level of peace and stability
in some of the world’s most difficult violent conflicts,
often deployed in unwelcoming environments and
tasked with a complex set of responsibilities. I would
like to use this opportunity to pay tribute to every
man and woman for their sacrifice in the service of
peace. In difficult circumstances, the United Nations
peacekeeping operations have a special role to play in
support of local communities. Slovakia is supportive of
the robust and comprehensive approach of the United
Nations in ensuring that complicated political processes
are continued, stability is maintained and civilians
are protected.

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

In the past two decades the scope and intensity
of conflicts have changed dramatically, peacekeeping
operations have faced increasing challenges, and
traditional and non-traditional security factors have
posed serious threats to the safety and security of
peacekeepers. One of the factors in this rapidly
changing landscape is strategic communications, which
are critical to securing the political and public support
that United Nations peacekeeping missions need to
effectively implement their mandates and create a safe
operating environment for peacekeepers. Strategic
communications help manage the expectations of
relevant stakeholders, particularly local communities
and host Governments, and address misinformation
that undermines the credibility of such missions.
Close coordination among local and international
partners and enhanced strategic communications
vis-à-vis the local population and international media
are particularly essential to exposing and denouncing
infringements of international norms by other
actors. Strategic communications are also crucial to
maintaining situational awareness, which requires an
ability to feel the pulse of local communities and can
have a significant impact on the whole peacekeeping
process. We highly commend the Secretary-General’s
leadership in this area, including the Action for
Peacekeeping Plus initiative, which has provided a road
map for our collective efforts. We welcome the increased
engagement of the Department of Peace Operations in
countering disinformation, along with the commitment
of the Secretary-General and the Department of Global
Communications to countering factors that pose
various especially worrisome challenges, such as the
intentional targeting through information manipulation
by malign actors.
We also recognize the essential role that strategic
communications play in promoting the protection of
civilians and the advancement of the women and peace
and security agenda. Slovakia strongly supports the
equal and full participation of women in all efforts to
create and maintain international peace and security
and calls for the full implementation of all the relevant
Security Council resolutions addressing this issue.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Belgium.
Mr. Lagatie (Belgium): I would like to thank
you, Mr. President, for organizing this open debate
on strategic communications and their importance for

22-422577/10

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations

12/07/2022

peacekeeping operations. I would also like to thank all
those who spoke before me for their interesting remarks.

work carried out by local radio stations in the countries
hosting peacekeeping operations.

I will focus my intervention on misinformation
and disinformation — challenges that are both old and
new. They are new in the sense that the digital age and
social media have brought myths and disinformation to
new highs, and old in that the truth has always been the
first casualty of war. In that regard, we are particularly
concerned about Russia’s narrative on its war in
Ukraine. Belgium would like to take this opportunity to
once again condemn all violence against peacekeeping
missions and to honour the sacrifices of their women
and men.

I would like to conclude by making a point on
humanitarian actors. Given that today’s open debate
has largely focused on the security of peacekeeping
missions, we need to be aware that disinformation is
increasingly putting humanitarian personnel at risk.
Some parties to conflicts indeed politicize humanitarian
action, and false rumours are often spread about
humanitarian aid workers. Belgium calls on all parties
to conflict to maintain discipline in the dissemination
of information. We recall that humanitarian actors
operate under the principle of neutrality — and they
must be protected.

My first point is related to the power of ensuring the
trust and confidence of the public. Misinformation can
sometimes erode the confidence of local populations
and peacekeeping operations and incite anti-mission
sentiments. The past few years have shown enough that
fake news rules easily. It is therefore crucial that we,
the United Nations, constantly seek to communicate
better and more convincingly. In that regard, we must
avoid complacency and address the criticism regarding
the disconnect between our peacekeeping missions and
the local realities.
But fighting misinformation is only one part of our
efforts; we also have to focus on one of the best ways to
avoid it — clear, engaging and proactive communication
about our actions, objectives, achievements, values
and successes. We also need to listen better and try
to address the concerns of communities. That is why
such proactive communication has to be realistic
and accessible to all populations. That is the price of
restoring their trust. The belief that the United Nations
and its operations are acting in their interests will be
the best bulwark against disinformation.
(spoke in French)
My second point concerns strategic communications
in United Nations missions. Missions must inform the
public in their host countries about their mandate,
priorities, actions and outcomes. As I mentioned, that
helps to build trust with local communities. However,
we need to be careful about which languages we use
to make that information accessible. We need to
communicate with the public in their native languages,
which are often not official languages of the United
Nations. We cannot lose sight of the fact that traditional
media is the main information source for some
communities. In that regard, we want to commend the
8/10

The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Israel.
Mr. Erdan (Israel): I would like to thank you,
Mr. President, for organizing today’s important and
timely debate and to congratulate you on your presidency.
Sixteen years ago today, Iran’s terror proxy,
Hizbullah, launched an attack on an Israeli border
patrol, murdering five soldiers, kidnapping two and
wounding three others. That heinous act of terror
ignited the Second Lebanon War, a war in which
Hezbollah targeted Israel’s civilian population, raining
thousands of rockets down on Israeli towns and cities.
The war concluded with the adoption of resolution
1701 (2006), which strengthened the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and enhanced its
mandate. Nevertheless, here we are, 16 years later, and
Hizbullah’s death grip on southern Lebanon has not
decreased. It has increased exponentially, while barring
UNIFIL from fulfilling its mandate.
As we know, strategic communications are one
of the most critical aspects of peacekeeping missions
in the implementation of their mandates, especially
during times of crisis. Strategic communications
are important for the protection of civilians, the
de-escalation of conflict and the safety and security
of the peacekeepers themselves. They enhance trust
among the peacekeeping force, the relevant States and
the local community.
However, in order for communications to be
truly effective, they must address misinformation and
disinformation and publicly point out the root causes
of the issues that disrupt missions’ mandates. When it
comes to UNIFIL, one such root cause is Hizbullah’s
22-42257

12/07/2022

United Nations peacekeeping operations

continued presence and malign activity in that
peacekeeping Force’s very area of operations.
The current reality on the ground, which is well
documented in multiple United Nations reports,
reflects a dire situation in which UNIFIL’s freedom
of movement is excessively restricted. Its mandate
is not being fully implemented, and the safety and
security of its peacekeepers are threatened daily. But
Hizbullah’s actions against UNIFIL go far beyond the
restriction of movement and blatant attacks. Hizbullah
has undermined UNIFIL’s ability to utilize strategic
communications by launching a war of disinformation
against the Force’s objectives and mandate. By
propagating false accusations and questioning
UNIFIL’s impartiality, Hizbullah tarnishes the Force’s
reputation and turns the local population against the
very body that has been mandated to keep it safe. When
that weapon of lies is implemented, it is no wonder that
UNIFIL is subject to increased attacks and is unable to
effectively fulfil its mandate.
In fact, over the past 16 years following the adoption
of resolution 1701 (2006), UNIFIL has been unable to
prevent a significant expansion of Hizbullah’s presence,
or the 10-fold — I repeat, 10-fold — multiplication of its
rocket arsenal, from 10,000 to 150,000 — that is more
than 10-fold, in fact. Because of Hizbullah, UNIFIL’s
hands are tied behind its back. Following the explosion
in the port of Beirut, and despite its own role in that
atrocity, Hizbullah baselessly blamed UNIFIL’s naval
forces for the destruction, in an attempt to damage the
Force’s reputation.
Furthermore, blatantly diverging from the UNIFIL
mandate, Hizbullah promotes the false narrative that
UNIFIL patrols must always be accompanied by the
Lebanese Armed Forces — all in order to distort and
obstruct the Force’s mandate. Hizbullah’s actions
constitute blatant violations of resolutions 1701 (2006)
and 1559 (2004). It is no secret that Hizbullah is the
cause of Lebanon’s political, economic and security
crisis. The least that can be done is to give UNIFIL the
backing it needs to fulfil its mandate, and to demand
accountability from Lebanon as well. Israel calls on
the international community and the Security Council
to strongly and unequivocally condemn Hizbullah’s
unjustified and illegal actions in Lebanon.
Israel supports the crucial role of peacekeeping
and maintains close cooperation with its relevant
peacekeeping missions. Strategic communications

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

contribute to that close cooperation by increasing
transparency and de-escalating tensions; they cannot
merely remain a catchphrase. They require a proactive
approach. Spreading accurate information must go hand
in hand with countering disinformation. And when it
comes to UNIFIL, the only obstacle to achieving strong
strategic communications is Hizbullah’s continued
presence and activity.
Israel calls on the Council and the international
community to redouble their efforts in combating the
terror threat from Hizbullah and other terrorist groups
that undermine international peace and security. In that
regard, we highlight the importance of today’s open
debate and the special role of strategic communications
in achieving that objective.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Algeria.
Mr. Larbaoui (Algeria) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Sir, on your
assumption of the presidency of the Council, and
to wish you every success in your lofty tasks. We
greatly appreciate today’s open debate, considering
the importance of its topic and the pivotal role of
strategic communications in enabling United Nations
peacekeeping missions to carry out their duties in
full. Since this meeting is dedicated to peacekeeping
operations, I would like to mention that my country,
Algeria, has changed its position regarding its
contribution to achieving peace and stability worldwide,
based on amendments made to our Constitution
in November 2020, whereby we decided that our
contribution would be directed under the auspices of
the United Nations and in line with the purposes and
principles of the Organization.
Peacekeeping operations in various areas of tension
and conflict are an essential part of the responsibility of
the United Nations for maintaining international peace
and security. The growing and escalating conflicts
and disputes we are seeing demand that we protect
civilians, especially vulnerable people such as women,
children and the elderly. Although the mandates of
peacekeeping operations differ depending on the nature
of each crisis, there are essential common factors
that should be established in order to ensure that all
missions can fulfil their mandates, and one of the most
important is strategic communications, the subject of
our discussion today.

22-422579/10

S/PV.9090 (Resumption 1)

United Nations peacekeeping operations

It will be important to ensure that the work of
strategic communications in peacekeeping operations
is continually updated to keep pace with developments
on the ground and confront the ever-evolving and
multidimensional
challenges,
thereby
enabling
peacekeeping operations to meet their vital goals.
In that regard, my country’s delegation supports the
Secretary-General’s initiative calling for a renewed
approach to strategic communications in the context
of peacekeeping operations as well as the Action
for Peacekeeping and Action for Peacekeeping Plus
initiatives. In that context, and by way of adding to the
discussion on the development of a new approach to
strategic communications, I would like to focus on the
following points, in line with the issues raised in the
concept note (S/2022/539, annex).
First, strategic communications continue to be
a pivotal tool and an integral part of special political
missions as well as peacekeeping operations. If we
are to guarantee their effectiveness and credibility, we
must uphold certain criteria, particularly inclusivity,
effectiveness and transparency. We should also include
all stakeholders, especially women, in creating and
implementing strategic communications.
Second, it is important to ensure that strategic
communications constitute an essential platform that
allows for the expression of the demands, aspirations
and expectations of civilians, as well as responses to
their aspirations through a comprehensive, inclusive
and direct approach, keeping peacekeeping operations
aware of the reality on the ground, gathering their
initial information from direct sources and permitting
them a realistic and comprehensive understanding
of the situation so that they can carry out their tasks
effectively. In that regard, we consider language an
important factor in building confidence, ensuring direct
communication with the local residents and obtaining
accurate information.
Third, and in parallel with this, we need to
enhance mutual trust and coordination between
peacekeeping operations and host Governments, which
should facilitate missions’ efforts, especially in their
interactions with the local communities and the various
essential stakeholders, and enable them to do their work
effectively, particularly where gathering information
on human rights issues and violations that should not
be ignored is concerned.

10/10

12/07/2022

Fourth, misleading and disinformation campaigns
against peacekeeping operations have negative
consequences not only for efforts to make progress
on political and security tracks but for the protection
of peacekeepers themselves. It is therefore extremely
important to use strategic communications to correct
any misinformation about the work of peacekeeping
missions and clarify any ambiguity regarding their
work on the ground in order to avoid misunderstandings
and misconceptions.
Fifth, strategic communications should facilitate
the work of peacekeeping missions by contributing
to the fulfilment of their mandates according to their
established time frames and objectives. Efforts should
focus on facilitating political tracks and solutions
agreed to among the stakeholders concerned, increasing
those operations’ effectiveness and credibility and the
people’s trust in the value they bring.
Sixth, it is important to use training to build and
support peacekeepers’ capacities in order to enhance
communication and mutual understanding with major
stakeholders, control lines of communication and use
modern equipment and communications technologies,
important tools that enable peacekeepers to better
understand their operating environment.
Seventh, we should strengthen and enhance strategic
communications in the framework of partnerships
between the United Nations and regional and subregional
organizations. Strategic communications plans should
also be developed by all units and missions to ensure
that work on the ground is carried out effectively and
the desired goals are achieved expeditiously.
In conclusion, my delegation stresses the
importance
of
strategic
communications
for
peacekeeping operations’ effective interaction with
local communities, parties to conflicts, regional and
international stakeholders and their various partners
on the ground. Priority should be given to adopting
strategic communications that give specific support to
implementing peacekeeping operations’ mandates and
that enhance the use of tools, including social media,
to ensure that the right information is delivered at the
right time.
The meeting rose at 3.55 p.m.

22-42257
