TWENTY-FOURTH

YEAR

th
MEETING: 18 DECEMBER 1969
NEW

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l 524) . , . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

Adoptionof

. . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . e. . . a. . . . . .

1

Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Chargb d’affaires ad interim of Guinea
addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/9528) . . . . . . . . . . . .

1

theagenda

S/PV. 1524

NOTE
*Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council. The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

FIFTEEN HUNDRED AND TWENTY-FOURTH

MEETING

Held in, New York on Thursday, 18 December 1969, at 3 p.m.
President: Mr. V. J. MWAANGA (Zambia).
Present: The representatives of the folIowing States:
Algeria, China, Colombia, Finland, France, Hungary, Nepal,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Senegal, Spain, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, United States of America and Zambia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l524)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. Complaint by Guinea:
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the ChargB
d’affaires ad interim of Guinea addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/9528).
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Complaint by Guinea
Letter dated 4 December 1969 from the Charge d’affaires
ad interim of Guinea addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/9528)
I. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with previous decisions, I propose now, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the representatives of Guinea and Portugal to take
places at the Council table, and the representatives of Mali,
Syria, Congo (Brazzaville), Liberia, Madagascar, Sierra
Leone, Tunisia, Lesotho and Saudi Arabia to take the
places reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber,
in order to participate in the discussion without the right to
vote, on the usual understanding that those with places at
the side of the chamber will be invited to take a seat at ‘the
Council table when it is their turn to address the Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. A. TourB (Guinea)
and Mr. F. B. de Miranda (Portugal) took places at the
Council table, and Mr. S. Traore (Mali), Mr. G. J. Tomeh
(Syria), Mr. J. Mombouli (Congo (Brazzaville)), Mr. L. H.
Diggs (Liberia), Mr. B. Rabetafika (Madagascar), Mr. F. B.
Savage (Sierra Leone J, Mr. A. M’Sadek (Tunisia),Mr, M. T.
Mashologu(Lesotho) andMr. J. M. Baroady (SaudiArabia)
took the placesreservedfor them.

the Council, and if I hear no objection, I shall invite the
representativesof Libya and Yemen to take the places
reserved for them at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understandingthat they will be invited to take a
seat at the Council table whenit is their turn to addressthe
Council.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. W. El Bouri
(Libya) and Mr. M. S. Aluttar (Yemen) took the places
reservedfor them.
3. The PRESIDENT: The Security Council will now
continue its considerationof the complaint submitted to it
by Guinea on 4 December1969, contained in document
S/9528.
4. The first speakeron my list is the representativeof

Syria. I invite him to take a place at the Council table and
to make his statement.
5. Mr. TOMEH (Syria): For the secondtime this month
the Security Council hasbeen seizedof another complaint
by a sister African State resulting from acts of aggression
committed against the sovereignty of that State, The
complaint which our sisterRepublic of Guinea has placed
before the Councif is basedon a true and immediatewrong
done to it, its territory and its citizens, The dozens of
burned housesin Dana and Doubadou, the ravagescaused
by the shells falling on Satiguiya, both from fighter
bombers and from mprtar guns, the savageattack on a
Gujnean boat, killing one of its passengers,
and wounding
three, and the abduction of the remaining 21 passengers,
are all flagrant Encroachmentson the integrity, sovereignty
and security of our sister Republic of Guinea and its
citizens.
6. And who is the aggressor?Again and again, it is the
units of the colonial army which the regimeof Lisbon sends
to Africa in order to subject to its ruthless rule vast
portions of that continent, to deprive its people of the right
to self-determination, to harassindependent African countries, to intimidate them, in the falsehope that their voices
in support of their suffering brotherswould be silenced.

7. With the presenceof a colonial army for the purposeof
perpetuating colonialism,which has been declared by the
United Nations to be a crime againsthumanity, the rdgime
of Lisbon cannot logically invoke the right of self-defence.
2. The PRESIDENT: I shouldlike to inform membersof
the Council that since our last meetingletters have been That right accruesrather to its victims, thosewho are under
received from the representativesof Libya and Yemen illegitimate occupation and those who are attacked by
requesting to be invited to participate in the discussion aggressivemilitary units, Let the occupation cease,let the
process of self-determination take its course, let the
[s/9566, S/9567], In accordancewith the usualpracticeof

and material assistance
the appropriate pressuresso as to
dissuadethem from continuing their colonial adventures,
whichnot only put the peaceof Africa andthe peaceof the
world in danger,but threatento corrupt the whole spirit of
the United Nations.

colonial army and administration withdraw to their country
of origin, and security will indeed prevail.
8. The African countries have neither the wish nor the
interest nor the intention to antagonize Portugal as such.
Their manifestos have made that quite clear. But when the
Portuguese regime embarks on a colonial war to consolidate
its conquest of African Territories, it is the duty of the
African masses and independent African countries to fight.
The liquidation of the remnants of colonialism is a basic
premise of the very existence of the United Nations. The
spirit of the United Nations cannot survive if colonialism
doesnot completely disappearin all its forms. Indeed, the
resolutions of the IJnited Nations enjoin all countries to
support the struggle of the subjectedmassesto attain
selfdetermination.
9. What the regime of Lisbon accusesothers of doing,
what in the distorted thinking of the Lisbon regime is
interference, is, in the view of the UnitedNations, a sacred
duty to support the liberation movementsfor the sakeof
justice and for the sakeof equality amongnations.

13. Nor shouldthe Security Council be impressedby the
pretext expounded by the Portugueserepresentativewhen
he said: “Until a few momentsago, we did not even know
exactly what this debate was about” [1522nd meeting,
pum.43/, and that there had not been any indication of
the questionto be debated.The Portugueserepresentative
and the Portugueseauthorities should have had some
premonition. Nine years ago, the General Assembly
adoptedresolution1.514(XV) on the granting of independenceto colonial countriesandpeoplesand,in the interim,
Portugal has been the recipient of many United Nations
“recommendations”. The Portuguese representative declared: “for aught all our statementscould contribute to
equitablesolutions,they have not beentaken into account”
[ibid., para.491.
14. His grievanceis partially justified. Wepassover much
of the detail to get to the essence
of the issue,which is the
continuedcolonial presenceof Porhlgal in Africa. That by
itself negatesbasically any such statement about not
knowing what the complaint was about. If Portuguese
interestsin Africa have suffered violence, we recall that
they are colonial interests. The complaintsfrom independent African countriesare complaintsof encroachmentby
the army of a colonial Power with no longer any valid
reasonfor its presencein Africa. And it is the duty of the
Security Council to seeto it that this abnormal state of
affairsceases
forthwith.

10. Guinea (Bissau),MozambiqueandAngola have no less
right to be sovereignand independentthan Portugal itself.
When Portugal deniesthis right and annexesthose Territories by sheerforce, it is the whole community of nations
that must meet the challenge.Hencewe are all concerned
about what happensat the criminalhandsof the colonial
forces againstthe United Republicof Tanzania,againstthe
Democratic Republicof the Congo,againstCongo(Brazzaville), againstthe Republicof Zambia,againstSenegal,and
againstour sisterRepublicof Guinea,whosecomplaint it is
the Council’sduty to hear andto redress,
11, What justifications are the spokesmenof the Lisbon
regimegiving for their constant encroachmentsagainstthe
Republic of Guinea? The pretext that this or that incident
dates back a few months, and that the accusation is
invalidated, is indeed a most extraordinary pretext. If the
Republic of Guineahasacted with self-restraintin the face
of one incident after another,in the hopethat the aggressor
will refrain from its criminalcourse,canthat be considered
acceptanceor acquiescence?Should not the Republic of
Guinea be accorded appreciation for the resl-raintit has
imposed upon itself, as well as for its recourse to the
Security Council when the territorial encroachmentsand
murder of Guinean citizens started to escalate?Should it
be, in the opinion of the PortugueseGovernment, compIetely silent and let peaceand security deteriorate to a
point of no return? Should not the Republic of Guinea,
fully and nobly engagedin the arduousprocessof development, for the s&e of assuringan equitable standard of
living for its toiling masses,
be accordedthe solidarity of all
States against an insatiableoppressor,not content with
subjecting to illegitimate rule an adjacent portion of
African territory, but using it as a base against the
independenceand sovereigntyof the Republic of Guinea?
12. It is now the Security Councilwhich is called upon to
put an end to the tragediesthat colonialismcreates,to the
threat to international peaceand security that occupation
of territory by force inevitably poses,and to apply against
the Lisbon r@gimcand those who supportit with military

15. The PRESIDENT: I now call on the representativeof
Liberia to take a placeat the Council table and to address
the Council.
16. Mr. DIGGS (Liberia): Mr.President, my delegation
wouldlike on this occasionto pay specialtribute to you for
your understandingand patienceand for the statesmanlike
qualities which have helped you to sustainthe strenuous
routine to which you have beensubjectedduring your term
asPresidentof this Council.My delegationand Govermnent
would alsolike to expressits appreciationto you and to the
membersof the Council for allowing usto take part in this
debateon the aggression
of Portugalagainstthe Republic of
Guinea.
17. A few weeks ago the Liberian delegation came
before the Council to support the complaint by the
Republicof Senegalabout certain premeditatedattacks by
Portugueseforcesagainstthat country. Now with an almost
studied cynicism the Lisbon Governmenthas forced us to
comebefore you onceagainto requestthat action be taken
now againstthe Government of Portugal for a violation of
the territory of another African State, the Republic of
Guinea.
18. In a calculated and brutal manner, units of the
Portuguesearmy have shelled Guinean villages causing
destructionof property whosevalueis immeasurable
in the
lives of the victims when all is taken into account. In other

2

I

instances peaceful villagers have been subjected to one of
the most terrifying experiences to which they may be
subjected in this day and age of modern and sophisticated
weaponry. I refer to the mortar shellings followed by
strafing of villages by fighter bombers. These incidents of
terror are too numerous to itemize; but the letter of 12
December 1969 [S/9.5%‘/
from the representative of
Guinea, Mr.‘El Hadj Abdoulaye TourB, gives a full account
of those incidents.

pat on the back. My delegation would like to state that the
lJnited Nations, as we conceive of it, is an instrument of
peace and is capable of ensuring and preserving world peace
and order, if those in whose hands the maintenance of
international peace and secul-ity lie would undertake to
stand up to their responsibilities and see to it that peace
through justice is implicitly established.
25. I conclude with the hope that the Council will now
take the necessary action under the Charter of the United
Nations to redress the wrongs inflicted on the sister
Republic of Guinea by Portugal.

19. The particular complaint which we are called upon to
consider at this time concerns attacks on the Republic of
Guinea, a country having very close relations and a
common border with our own. This raises the matter before
us to a position where my delegation would like to state
that we in Africa cannot be expected to be idle witnesses to
this spectacle of Portugal’s violation of the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of African States, because of
Portugal’s determination to hold back the clock of history
by pursuing the otherwise condemned colonial policy in its
worst and most backward aspects.

26. The PRESIDENT:
1 thank the representative
Liberia for the kind words he has addressed to me.

of

27. Before I call on the next speaker, I should like to
inform the Council that I have just received a letter from
the Permanent Representative of India [S/9568/, asking to
be invited to participate in our discussion without the right
to vote. In accordance with the usual practice, with the
consent of the Council, I shall invite the representative of
India to take a place at the side of the Council chamber, on
the usual understanding that he will be called upon to take
a seat at the Council table when it is his turn to speak.

20. The Government of Liberia would like once more to
as:sure the Council of its complete adherence to the
principles and purposes of the Charter of the United
Nations and of the Organization of African Unity; it is in
this context that we should like to make the following
observation.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. S. Sen (India) took
the place reserved jar him.

21 , It is with a sense of genuine regret and disappointment
that my delegation is forced to state that every resolution
adopted in the Council has had no effect whatsoever in
stopping these attacks on independent African countries by
Portugal, a European colonial Power. The reasons may well
be quite obvious and not need to be enumerated in this
statement. Suffice it to say that these acts of terrorism and
thle destruction of lives and property on the African
continent by Portugal would net be possible were it not for
thle use of weapons in its possession which were given to it
for defence purposes of the North Atlantic Treaty Organiz&ion, but which are being converted by it for the
suppression of the aspirations of the African people to
freedom and independence in the Territories under its
domination.

28. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of Libya. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
29. Mr. EL BOURI (Libya) (translated from F’rench):
Mr. President, may I first of all express the satisfaction and
pride of my delegation at seeing one of the youngest and
most eminent representatives of new Africa presiding over
the debates of this Council. The ability, devotion and
objectivity that you have displayed during the Council’s
debates this month have borne out our conviction’that you
are a worthy representative of Africa.
30. We are very grateful to you, Mr. President, and to the
members of the Council for being allowed to speak at this
stage of the debate on the complaint made by Guinea
against Portugal.

212. The Organisation of African Unity has expressed itself
in no uncertain terms, stating that it intends to achieve the
lilberation of the African continent by peaceful means but
with the participation and good faith of all the parties
concerned, which include Portugal.

31. There are several reasons why Libya is taking part in
this debate. First of all, we wish to draw the Security
Council’s attention to the fact that the use of force has
become a rule of the Portuguese Government which in this
manner is attempting either to intimidate the States
adjacent to the African Territories it occupies or to prevent
the African populations of those Territories from fighting
for their inalienable rights or from fleeing its regime of
oppression and terror by seeking refuge in neighbouring
independent African States where already one half million
persons have found refuge.

23. The liberation of the African colonies by some of the
erstwhile colonial Powers has not degraded those countries.
Their economies did not suffer, Instead, they found a new
slrength and became, in the eyes of their former colonies,
friends and partners. Portugal should realize that the
A.frican people under its domination want to be free and
will be free. The lessons of history are too numerous for me
to recount here, but each time an oppressor has ceased his
oppression the oppressed peoples have become friends with
the oppressor who, in turn, found a new and better political
e.sistence without depending on the blood, sweat and tears
of the former colonized peoples.

32. Another reason lies in the brotherly ties that link my
country to Guinea in all fields and that lead us to common
action for co-operation and the promotion of a free and
prosperous Africa in which peace and harmony reign.

24. Each time a cry comes from Africa it is treated asjust
another outburst from a newborn child that deserves only a
3

33. In addition there are the principles of the United
Nations, to which we have all subscribed and which we
must respect and defend. The signatories to the San
Francisco Charter wished to erase from international
practice the arbitrary domination of one people, one race
or one State by another, no matter under what pretext, and
more particularly when such domination wasbasedonly on
an allegedsuperiority of race. They felt that the annexation
of one people by another should alsobe prohibited, and the
principle of self-determination was introduced into international law and becamethe corner-stone of our era.

40. However, Senegaland Guinea have been the only
victims of actions of banditry of this kind; about four
months ago, Zambia, too, was attacked by Portuguese
armies and the Security Council, in its resolution
268 (1969), strongly censuredthe Portugueseaction. The
United Republic of Tanzania,the Democratic Republicof
the Congoand Congo (Brazzaville) have already beenthe
victims of attacks and violations of their territories by
Portuguesecolonialist forces. But as this seriesof Portuguese aggressionsand violations grows, it is bound to
becomean increasinglygravethreat until it endangerspeace
in the African continent. For the Portuguesepresencein
Africa is itself, in this year of grace1969, a permanentact
of aggressionagainstAfrica which offends the universal
consciencethat hasrejectedcolonialism.

34. It is indeed painful to hear, in this harmony of
goodwill and mutual understanding,stubbornly discordant
voices SUCK as that of Portugal, which has for more than
400 years oppressedand exploited the peoplesof Angola,
Mozambique and Guinea (Bissau) and refusesto abide by
any of the decisionsof the United Nations that formally
proclaim the end of colonial enterprises.

41. Our Organization hasalready proclaimed the right to
freedom and independenceof African peopleswho arenow
under Portuguesedomination, Our organization hasalready
concededthat all the acts that the PortugueseGovernment
would like to have labelled acts of insubordination or
subversion are in fact acts of legitimate self-defenceby
thoseoppressedpeoples.

35, Portugal is not satisfied with violating decisionsof the
United Nations by its systematic refusal; now, by its typical
and repeated acts of aggression against a great many
peace-loving African States, it is trampling underfoot the
provisions of the Charter for the settlement of disputesthat
may arisebetween States.

42, It is indeed strangethat a smallcountry like Portugal
should so persist in its attempts to maintain theselarge
African populationsin a state of sterile dependenceon it,
when all the other colonialPowershavealready disposed
of
their colonial possessions
and haveestablishednew relations
with their former coloniesbasedon respect,mutual interest
and friendship.

3G. If the small and medium-sized States, encouragedby
the complacent attitude of our Organization, set out to
violate the Charter of the United Nations with impunity
and infringe the rules that the world community has laid
down for itself to safeguardpeaceand co-operation among
peoples,we are bound to ask ourselves,with someanxiety,
where we are going.

43. What can Portugal do when faced by the will of the
peoplesthat it oppressesand by their uncontainableneed
for freedom and independence?It will be futile for it to
try to vent its ill humour on the peaceful African States
adjoiningthe occupiedTerritories.

37. It is barely a week ago that the Council concluded its
debate on a complaint lodged by SenegalagainstPortugal
on violations of its territory by Portuguesetroops.

44. The representative of Portugal clearly told us the
following at the Council meeting of 15 December1969:
“But it should not be forgotten that resolutions of the
GeneralAssembly are only recommendationswhich Member States may accept or reject [1522nd meeting,
para. 511“.

38. The Council now has before it another complaint
presentedby the Government of Gukea. The representative
of Guinea informed the Council, at its 1522nd meeting on
1s December 1969, of a series of violations and provocations committed by Portugal againstthe territorial integrity
and the civilian population of Guinea over a period running
from April to November 1969. Portuguese armed forces
used artillery, aviation and patrol boats againstthe villages
and civilian populations, causing destruction of dozens of
housesand bringing death to innocent victims, including
women and children. The most seriousfact, one that can be
consideredonly as an act of piracy, pure and simple,is the
penetration of the territorial waters of Guinea by Portuguesemilitary patrol boats, which attacked a vesselcarrying
civilians and, after killing one of the passengersand
wounding three others, carried off the vesseltogether with
the 21 personswho were aboard.

45. The statementof the representativeof Portugalaffects
the responsibility of the Security Council. If the Council
intends to enforce respect for various resolutionsof the
GeneralAssembly,and in particular resoWon 1514 ((XV),
which is the corner-stone of all the great work of
decolonization carried out by the United Nations; if it
expectsto safeguardpeace,which is so seriouslythreatened
on the African continent by the continued acts of
aggressionby Portugal, and if it wishesto imposerespect
for its own decisionson recalcitrant members,it must,with
due regard to all its prerogatives,take up once and for ail
the question of the Portuguesepresencein Africa andthe
dangerscaused by that presence,Only energetic steps
dealing with the very substanceof problems of the
Portuguesecoloniesin Africa can lead to a relaxation of
tension and to a cessationof all the continuing seriesof
provocationsagainstAfrican States.

39. on the fallacious pretexts that Portugal had’ acted in
self.defence, that it had the right of pursuit, and that
resistancemovements were fighting against the Portuguese
presencein the Territory of Guinea (Bissau)from alleged
basesin the rear, Portugal has had recourse to the above
tactics, which are well-known and had already been usedby
other colonial r@imes, to make up for its inability to put
down the revolt of peoplesagainstits domination.

46. It is for the Security Council, the watchdog of the
United Nations, to put an end to these unjustified actsof
4

aggression by duly penalizing the trouble-makers and by
settling once and for all the fate of African populations
under Portuguese domination.

age,have succeededin installingthemselves
in variousparts
of their homeland.The useof pressreportsto accuseStates
of having their regulartroops participatingin a liberation
stmgglewagedonly by thoseconcernedis simply ridiculous.

47, The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of Libya
for 1~s over-generous compliments addressed to me,

54. And what is this legitimateself-defence
which consistsY
in firing only upon children, womenand old men? In the
nameof what morality are we to believethat the peaceful
citizens of Senegaland Guineahave taken up armsagainst
Portugal? What miraculousmeansdo thesepopulations
Possess
to enablethem to crossthe seasandto disturbthe
Iberianpeninsulaon the other sideof the world’?

48. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Mali. I now invite him to take a seat at the Council table
and to address the Council.
49. Mr. TRAORE (Mali) (translated from French); At the
1518th meeting of the Security Council on 8 December
1969, the representative of Mali had occasionto tell you
personally Mr. President, and the other membersof the
Council how much our Government appreciatedthe urgency with which the Council met, and alsohow concerned
it was at the wilful provocationsof PortugalagainstAfrican
States. At that same meeting, Mr. Boye of Senegaldescribed to the Council the incredible circumstancesin
which shells and bullets, regrettably placedat the disposal
of the Portuguese authorities, had killed innocent nationals
of his country. At the 1522nd meeting too, Mr, Tour& of
the Rlepublic of Guinea described to the Council the
circumstances in which peaceful citizens of his country had
likewise been killed by Portuguesemercenaries.

55. The representative of Portugal, in his statement
attempting to justify aggression
by his country a&nst the
Republic of Guinea,spoke of ensuringthe security of its
colonial populations.That samerepresentativetold usthat
firm instructions-and I would emphasizethat term-were
given to the occupation troops to respectthe territorial
integrity and sovereigntyof the Statesadjacentto Portuguesecolonies. But there hasbeenaggression,
which the
representativeof Portugal is trying to justify, Weare then
led to ask ourselves:On behalf of what Governmentis the
representativeof Portugalspeaking-theGovernmentwhich
gives ordersthat are not obeyed,or the Governmentthat
doesnot feel itself in any way boundby thoseorders?For
50. In eight months the Territory of the Republic of
our part, that matterslittle; it is Portugal’sbusiness.
What
Guinea has been seven times violated by the Portuguese doesmatter is that such a Governmentcannot ensurethe
security of anyone. And that is what is so serious.The
authorities, Guinea has the meansto put an early end to
populationsof Guinea(Bissau)are,in fact, living in a state
SUCKencroachments on its sovereignty and its integrity. It
has not done sobecause,like other African States,it knows of permanentinsecurity, and it is to put an end to that
what its commitments are when it adheresto international humiliating and dangerousstateof affairsthat the freedom
institutions and it does not wish to be reproachedwith
fightershavetaken up armsagainstPortugal.
failing to respect its commitments.
56. The representativeof Portugal,replying to the repre51. Elesides, the causebeing heard here is not a Guinean L sentative of Senegal,expressedsurprisethat the Govemcause, a Senegalesecause,or a Zambian cause.The fact is ment of Senegaldid not have recourseto the provisionsof
that there are millions of men still fettered by colonialism Article 33 of the United Nations Charter. But what he
forgot to tell us wasthat no soonerhad the Organizationof
and, with two or three exceptions, all the Governmentsin
African Unity beenestablishedthan it dispatchedMinisters
the wlorld, whether Membersof the United Nationsor not,
for Foreign Affairs to the Governmentof Portugalto seek
have proclaimed their determination to break thosefetters.
It is against this that Portugal invokes what it calls an honourable solution to the tragedy of Portuguese
colonialism.
legitimate self-defence and its allegedright to ensurethe
security of populations which, fortunately, have a quite
different notion of security and normal life from those 57. The representativeof Portugalis better placedthan I
to teII the Council-and I hope he will do so-what his
worked out in the out-dated poison laboratoriesof Portucountry’s attitude wasto this peacefulmoveby the African
gal.
States.In any event, at the time of the attackson Guinean
52. The Governmentsand peoplesfighting colonialismare, territory, did the Government of Portugal no longer
if we follow the logic of the representativeof Portugal, rememberthe provisionsof Article 33 of the Charter,or are
we to understandthat theseprovisionsarebindingonly on
accused of being anti-Portuguese.In that casewe are all
anti-Portuguese and we are happy to note that each African States?
succe’eding day addsmore anti-Portugueseto the already
58. The representativeof Portugalalsotried to catch the
impressive number of anti-Portuguese.
Council napping by resorting to a concealmentwhich,
of
53. In any event, if legitimate self-defencewere to be b unfortunately, continuesto frighten the representatives
some
States
Members
of
our
Organization.
In
speaking
of
accepted as justification for violence,it is the African States
which should invoke this right of legitimate self-defence the weaponsof the fighters, he attemptedto involve the
against Portugal. Guinea (Bissau) is in Guinea, and one responsibifityof countrieswhich he did not name,andit is
becausehe did not namethemthat hisinsinuations
become
woulid have to have a strange cast of mind to deny the
evidence. In reality, what Portugal is trying to camouflage, dangerous.The fighters obtain their weaponswhereandas
best they may. Logic would have it that all of us should
in firing on States adjacent to Guinea (Bissau),is that the
liberation movements, thanks to their revolutionary cour- arm the fighters sincethey are strugglingfor a causewhich

5

we have recognized as our own and, consequently, they are
also “our” fighters. I hope however that the representative
of Portugal will tell us which countries are arming its
mercenaries and by virtue of what provisions such execrable
use is being made of these weapons.

64. But that is not all. Only a few moments before my
delegation entered this Council chamber, we received s
cable giving information about an attack which took place
only yesterday. An armed band coming from Foula Mori in
the Republic of Guinea attacked the village of Cambaja and
left one dead and several wounded, some eight of them
seriously, among the local population. The enemy group
went back to the Republic of Guinea,

59. Portugal is once more in the dock. A representative
has intimated that this will again be the case in the days
ahead; and that is what is serious. Experience has proved
that the resolutions of the Security Council are not
sufficient, however strongly worded, to bring Portugal to a
normal understanding of relations between States and of
the inalienable right of peoples to self-determination.
The
Security Council is the guarantor of international peace and
security. The Security Council would not be true to itself if
it agreed to stand aloof from the fate of millions of men
enslaved by a system which is repugnant to human
conscience, For, that is in reality the true substance of the
debate, and the arguments advanced by the representative
of Portugal cannot conceal the fact. If it were otherwise,
the members of the Council, in the first instance, and all of
us thereafter would be uncommonly like those doctors in
Moliere’s comedies who are content to proffer fme phrases
while their patient is dying. In this case the patient is none
other than the colonized populations, none other than our
humanity, made up of justice and love.

65. Now it is for the Council to say who is defying it,
unless of course the Council should hold that attacks
against us are in order, and then we shall draw our own
conclusions. If we were to follow the example of the
delegation of the Republic of Guinea, we too could have
read out here the cables we have received from our
authorities, describing one by one all the attacks launched
against us from the Republic of Guinea. In fact I have the
cables with me right here. But we will leave that method to
the delegation of the Republic of Guinea.
66. We will not waste time and try to impress the Council
by repeating information which, whether directly stated or
quoted from cables, amounts after all to the same thing.
Repetition is not made better by the addition of a summary
table. These are attempts to impress the eye and the ear,
but they cannot impress the intelligence of anyone. For our
part, we wish to fmd out. But while the Republic of Guinea
has come to the Council with allegations of incidents said
to have taken place weeks and months ago, we have
brought to the notice of the Council facts which are taking
place currently, Perhaps even as we are sitting here now
Portuguese Guinea is being attacked from the Republic of
Guinea, for such attacks are constant.

60. The Government of Mali, for its part, is convinced that
the members of the Security Council have the means of
eradicating the evil before it assumes tragic proportions.
61, The PRESIDENT:
The next name on the list of
speakers is that of the representative of Portugal, on whom
I now call.

67, We have already pointed out that on the dates of the
alleged incidents or thereabouts, the Republic of Guinea
did not think of calling for a meeting of the Security
Council or even of bringing those matters to the attention
of the Council. It will have been noted that the Republic of
Guinea decided to come to the Council alleging destruction
of huts, but it did not do so in connexion with the deaths
and other casualties alleged to have occurred in April 1969.
It will likewise have been noted that although the latest
incident is alleged to have taken place on 13 November
1969, the Republic of Guinea complained to the Security
Council only on 2 December and called for a meeting of the
Council only on 4 December.

62. Mr, MIRANDA (Portugal): My delegation would like,
if it may, to add some remarks to the statement we made at
the outset of this debate on 15 December 1969 [1522nd
meeting]. Since our intervention at that time, we have
received further information about attacks launched from
the Republic of Guinea against Portuguese Guinea during
the current month. I shall mention first those that took
place on 12 December. There were three attacks in a single
day. The area of Gadamael in Portuguese Guinea was
shelled with heavy artillery installed in the Republic of
Guinea. That attack left two dead, both women, and three
injured, one of them a child of three years. Armed raiders
coming from the Republic of Guinea attacked Canquelifa.
The attack was repelled and the raiders were pursued up to
the frontier, They retreated in the direction of their base at
Missira Foulmansa in the Republic of Guinea.

68. The representative of the Republic of Guinea said at
the 1S22nd meeting that his Government had lost patience.
Apparently the Government of the Republic of Guinea
waited patiently for months, or at least for weeks, and
decided to lose patience only after a meeting of the
Security Council had been called on a complaint made
against Portugal by another country-obviously
in order to
avail itself of the atmosphere thus created.

63, A Portuguese patrol detected an armed band which had
infiltrated from the Republic of Guinea in the area of
Quiteje in Portuguese Guinea. On being pursued the raiders
fled back into the territory of the Republic of Guinea and
from there opened fire on the Portuguese patrol across the
frontier. All of those attacks took place on a single day, 12
December, the very day on which the representative of the
Republic of Guinea addressed his latest letter to the
Council detailing his complaints against us, ten days after
his original complaint and eight days after he asked for a
meeting of the Council.

69. But the complaint of the Republic of Guinea has other
curious aspects, In the letter addressed to the Council by
the Permanent Mission of the Republic of Guinea on
4 December (S/9.528], it was stated that “full information”
on the complaint would reach New York on 5 December.
Nevertheless, the letter giving this alleged “full information” was sent to the Council only on 12 December
6

[S/9554]. The Council will draw its own conclusions. We
have drawn OUTS,and our conclusion is that the allegation
of frontier incidents was no more than a pretext to bring
before the Council two old matters-the question of the
plane and that of the boat-in the hope of achieving,
through1 the Council, an objective which the Republic of
Guinea has long been seeking, namely, the restitution of the
nationals and the property of the Republic of Guinea
withou-t fulfilling its own obligation to release the Portuguese nationals illegally detained in that country.

quences,whatever they may be, arisingfrom its ownillegal
offensiveactions.It is the duty of the Republicof Guinea,
by all norms of international law and by the most
incontrovertible principles of the Charter, to stop the
violence that is organizedin its territory and launched
againstPortugueseGuineatherefrom.
75. Returning to the questionof the planeand the boat, I
must stress once again that the Portuguesenationals
detainedin the Republic of Guineawerekidnappedfrom
PortugueseGuinea. They have committedno crimein the
Republic of Guinea.Thereis no stateof war betweenthe
Republicof GuineaandPortugal,eventhoughthe Republic
of Guinea officially aids violence against Portuguese
Guinea.The Portuguesenationalsin questionare held in a
@ime of duress.The Government of the Republic of
Guineacannot avoid responsibilityfor their illegal detention. Either that Governmentexercises
sovereigntyoverthe
whole of its territory or it doesnot. If it does,thenit must
dischargeits responsibilitytowards the foreign nationals
illegally detainedin its territory. If it doesnot, it mustsay
SO,and then we shalldraw the logicalconclusions
and act
accordingly. The position of the Portuguese
Governmentis
clear: the return of the Portuguese
nationalsis a condition
sine qua non for the return of the nationalsand the
property of the Republicof Guinea,And hereI shouldlike
to givethe Councilthe namesof the Portuguese
nationalsin
question:

70. The Government of the Republic of Guinea has long
been working toward that end. It has approached friendly
Governments. The Secretary-General of the United Nations
has also used his good offices. As far as we are concerned
these contacts have not been terminated, which makes it all
the more surprising that the question of the plane and the
boat s.hould be passed on to the Security Council. In an
attempt to move the Fourth Committee to tears, the
representative of the Republic of Guinea, on 14 November
stated that the issue was about “a boat carrying students
returning from their vacation”.1 Members of the Council
can see for themselves, from the list submitted with the
letter lof 12 December [see S/9554, annex VII], how many
studen.ts,if any, were on the boat.
71. The Council witnessedon 15 Decemberthe highly
imaginative approach adopted by the delegationof the
Republic of Guinea. My delegationplacesin this context
the frontier incidents so belatedly allegedby the Republic
of Guinea. The information we have received regarding
those alleged incidents points in that direction. Those
alleged incidents are old and it has been difficult to have
them investigated. Neverthelesswe have tried to find out
what, if anything, was behind the Guineanallegations.We
began, naturally, with the dates of the latest alleged
incidents. As a result of the investigationwe havebeenable
to conduct since 15 December,we reject the allegationsof
the shellingincidents supposedto have taken place on 13
November and 10 Septemberin the regionsmentionedin
the Guineancomplaint.

Kidnappedon 12 January1968:PrivateAntbnio Castro
Aguiar;
Kidnapped on 3 February 1968: LieutenantAntbnio
Jfilio Rosa,CorporalGeraldinoMarquesContino,Private
Victor ManueldeJesusCapitulo;
Kidnappedon 1 April 1968: LanceCorporalJoaoNeto
Vaz, CorporalJosCda SilvaMorais,CorporalJoseManuel
Moreira Duarte, Private DomingosNoversaDa Costa,
Private David N6bregaGouveiaPedras,Private Luis dos
SantosMarques,Private JosedosSantosTeixeira,Private
Ant6nio Angelo Duarte, Private Luis SalvadorAntunes
Da A. Vieira;

72. .As for the allegations concerning air raids, we also
reject, them, for the records of our military aviation do not
show any planeshaving flown on the datesindicatedin the
complaint over the areasallegedto have beenbombarded.

Kidnappedon 29 April 1968: PrivateManuelMarques
de Oliveira;
Kidnapped on 20 May 1968: Corporal Rui Rafael
Correia, Private Manuel August0 Leite da Silva, Private
Agostino da Silva Duarte, Private Manuel JoseMachado
da Sfiva, Private JoseMaria Magalhaes
Medeiros,Private
JerQimo Manuelde Sousa;

73. Finally, we have no evidence of shellingincidents
alleged to have taken place over six months ago. But in
connlexion with those and all other allegedincidents, mY
deleg,ationwishesto emphasizethat whatever action we
take, it is alwaystaken in our own territory andit is always
exclusively defensiveaction. Wehave no desireor intention
to violate the territory of the Republic of Guineaor of any
one else. But we also emphasizeour right of self-defence
against attacks launched on PortugueseGuinea; sincethe
attacks come from the Republic of Guinea, we hold the
Republic of Guinea wholly responsiblefor the consequences.

Kidnappedon 1 June 1968: Private JoseManuelAlves
Vieira;
Kidnappedon 11 July 1968:Private FranciscoManuel
Monteiro;
&happed on 23 October 1968: Private Jacinto MadeiraBarradas;

The Republic of Guinea, which aids and encourages
violence against US, has no right to complain of conse74.

of the General Assembly, Twenty-fourth
Sessibn,
Fourth Committee, 1847thmeeting,para.28.

l(lfficial~ecor&

Kidnapped on 22 May 1963: Air Force Sergeant
Antonio Lourenpode SousaLobato.
The total numberof kidnappedpersons
istwenty-four.

7

I

conciliation, on the harmonious bringing together of parties
in dispute, whatever the issue in question. It is to that end
that the entire machinery of the Untied Nations is geared
and directed by the Charter; not towards the sowingif the
seeds of violence and strife, not towards the creation of
conditions that must inevitably lead to that “scourge of
war” from which the founders of this Organization expressly set out to save the succeeding generations of
mankind. The only exception to that over-all prohibiton of
the use of force is to be found in Article 51, which is
intended to cover cases of self-defence without any
distinction.

76. Many a fallacy has been invoked in this debate, as in
the previous debate, to justify attacks launched against
Portuguese Guinea and to deny Portugal the right of
self-defence. It has been said, for instance, that Portugal is
not in Africa, We reply serenely that Portugal-that is, the
Portuguese State-is in Africa and has been there for nearly
500 years, which is a long period even in the perspective of
history. Throughout that period Portugal’s sovereignty in
Africa has been internationally recognized. It was on that
basis that Portugal was admitted to the United Nations. It is
beyond the competence of the United Nations to question
the territorial composition of the Portuguese State or its
sovereignty in any part of its territory. Whatever may be
said here or elsewhere in the United Nations, we have no
doubt whatsoever as to the legitimacy of our sovereignty in
Portuguese Guinea, as in other parts of our territory, and
we mean to exercise the rights which our sovereignty
confers on us in accordance with the time-honoured
principles of international law.

82. If *any of the Member States then present to sign the
Charter did so with mental reservations as to the full intent
and purpose of that basic ideal of the Organization, that
fact cannot invalidate the conclusion that violence and war
in any of their manifestations have been entirely excluded
from international relations since the Second World War
and the adoption of the Charter.

77. We do not interfere in the internal affairs of any other
State. We respect the sovereignty and the territorial
integrity of all other States. And we demand that all other
States respect our sovereignty and territorial integrity and
avoid interfering in our internal affairs.

83. Nevertheless and despite that, the Republic of Guinea
and its friends, obsessed by a false philosophy which, in the
last analysis, boils down to a philosopliy of expansion, have
taken the path of cold-blooded and persistent hostility
towards Portugal’s national territory, in the course of which
acts of bad-neighbourly relations and threats have been
transformed progressively into open violence which cannot
be condoned under any norms of international conduct
based on the rule of law. And since it appears that that is
being done in pursuance of a certain well-known ideology
through methods that have been rejected as unacceptable in
other parts of the world, it would be well to stress that
their repetition in the present instance under cover of
disputed resolutions of the General Assembly will not
render valid and acceptable what was wrong and abominable from the very outset.

78. The Republic of Guinea, however, has not been
respecting these norms of international good conduct in
regard to us. For many years now the Republic of Guinea
has been one of the major promoters of violence against US.
It has been aiding and encouraging violence not only
directly but also through third parties entirely alien to
Africa and well known for their ideological cult of violence,
which they try to sow throughout the world.
79. My delegation wishes to inform the Couqcil that,
according to reports received by our military intelligence
services, the most modem type of war mat&M Is being
received in the Republic of Guinea for use against Portuguese Guinea; foreign military experts are also arriving there
in increasing numbers for the same purpose, The countries
supplying the military experts and the war rruztdriel are well
known to the whole world, since they themselves make no
secret of their active participation in the violence of which
Portuguese Guinea is the victim. And the objective of those
countries is also well known: it is to establish a people’s
republic in West Africa.

84. Mr. President, since I have the floor, allow me to make
an important declaration. You have announced that the
Indian representative has asked to be allowed to participate
in this debate. The Indian Union, as is well known,
committed premeditated aggression against another overseas province of Portugal, my own homeland, Goa, exactly
eight years ago today. For that aggression, which perhaps
the Indian representative wishes to commemorate by
coming to the Council, the only explanation given in this
Council by the representative of that country was that the
aggression would go on “Charter or no Charter, Council or
no Council”. That aggression was condemned by the
majority in the Council,

80. We cannot abdicate or in any manner compromise our
lawful and sovereign right to defend ourselves against all
violence from outside our frontiers, whatever its form and
whatever the motives that may be set forth in order to
justify it. No doctrinal considerations can alter this position
and make us falter in our resolve to stand for our
convictions, for we believe that violence has no legitimate
place in international relations.

85. My delegation, therefore, does not recognize the
slightest moral standing of a representative of an aggressor
asking to participate in this debate, and my delegation will
withdraw
from the Council chamber while that representative takes the floor.

81. Nowhere in the Charter do we find consecrated either
directly or by implication the principle that it is permissible
to impose through the use of armed force and by aggressive
action the solution of any question, whether it be for the
satisfaction of any political ambitions or in the interests of
any ideological expansionism. Rather, from the first page to
the last, it must be underlined, the emphasis is on

86. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker on my list is the
representative of India. I invite him to take a place at the
Council table and to make his statement.
87, Mr, SEN (India): I think this is the best day of our
life. If by my presence here we could drive out the
8

f

Portuguese delegation from this Council or from any other
COUnCil
of the United Nations, I think we should all be the
happier. India committed “aggression”, according to the
POI-hgUeSe
definition of that word, but India has exercised
a moral right, and I hope the day will come when all the
Africans will dS0 exercise a similar moral right. And if it
lies in the power of India to assist in the slightest in helping
the African countries to do so, we shall do so again.

Saudi Arabia pointed out yesterday, no government can
afford to discourage.
95. In fact, we believe that if the United Nations cannot
take suitable action to further one of the basic principles of
the Charter, countries and peoples are under a moral and
Political obligation to take whatever steps they consider
appropriate to put an end to the colonial tyranny of the
Portuguese. That tyranny cannot be judged in terms of
material benefits or lack of them, but has to be related to
more fundamental values of human dignity and pride of
patriotism.

88. 1 shall now tum to the subject before us. My written
text was prepared before the Portuguese delegation with.
drew, and I was so filled with enthusiasm and admiration
for what we have achieved that I made those preliminary
rema.rks.

96. In that context, any notion that these tragic events,
which the Government of Guinea has brought to the
COunCil’s notice, should be investigated becomes meaning
less. Similar complaints have been received from a great
number of African countries which border the Portuguese
possessions in Africa, showing a consistent pattern of the
attitude of the Lisbon Government. Briefly, its policy
seems to be that it must continue to maintain its colonial
possessions and the suppression of the local peoples by
force. The authorities of Lisbon demonstrate a high degree
of callousness if, in the process, African lives are lost,
property damaged and destroyed, and villages and fields
burned and bombed. It is extraordinary that the representative of Portugal should complain-without
details, of
course-that
African countries and communities, committed to seek the freedom of all Africa, are receiving aid
from countries outside Africa.

89. I should like to thank you, Mr. President, and the
members of the Council for permitting me to participate in
this debate on an important subject which concerns not
only the African States but all of us who have the best
interests of the United Nations at heart, and also those of
us who care and dare to do their utmost to uphold the
purposes and principles of the Charter.
90. Before I proceeh further, Mr, President, I should like
to offer you the congratulations of my delegation on your
Presidency of the Council for this month. We hope that
under your guidance the Council will discharge its responsibilities as effectively and wisely as it has often done under
the distinguished leadership of your predecessors.
91, Normally, the nature of complaints brought before the
Council by the representative of Guinea could have been
settled by bilateral negotiations between two sovereign
States with common frontiers. Unfortunately, that procedure is not applicable in the present circumstances. On
the one hand, the United Nations is committed to the
elimination of colonial r&imes-I know that the Portuguese
delegation is still listening somewhere-and,
on the other
hand, Portugal staunchly refuses to abide by that principle
or to carry out any of the resolutions adopted by the
Council or by the other organs of the United Nations. That
mulish and, I was almost going to say, quixotic refusal by
Portugal to fulfil its obligations, is, of course, accompanied
by much sanctimony and a feeling of being misunderstood.

97. The fact is that Portugal is outside Africa and every
inch of territory it holds is being held not only illegally but
as the result of aggression. So as an outside Power, it is
Portugal, and Portugal alone-Portugal is not an African
country, I repeat-which
is responsible for suppressing
Africans in Africa in a variety of ways.
98. The Security Council has considered similar complaints in the past and, rightly, Portugal has been condemned. But, in our opinion, that is not enough. We should
not only condemn Portugal but make it quite impossible
for it to continue to maintain its aggression in Africa. Ifit
will not listen to reason or pay any respect to the principles
of the Charter, it must be isolated more than ever before. 1
add this again because it has given me a great deal of
satisfaction to see the Portuguese delegation withdraw.

92. The difficulty is that we understand Portugal only too
well. Here again, if I might revert to the Indian experience,
we tried our utmost for more than ten years to come to a
negotiated settlement with the Portuguese. Nothing hap
pemed. Now Portugal talks about some fantastic theory
which denies the Africans any right to claim sovereignty
over their own territories. Surely, Portugal’s continuing
agigression has been recognized by the international community .

99. As to that quotation of Mr. Miranda’s which he brings
out from time to time-and even those who were in the
General Assembly will recall that in a right of reply at
7 o’clock one evening, when no Indian representative was
present, he brought it up again-we are not ashamed to
declare that if colonies cannot be liberated bY the peaceful
efforts of sovereign States, including my own, then there is
no alternative but to drive them out by force. 1 repeat: we
have no hesitation at all. And if for more than ten Years we
have tried and failed to convince the Portuguese, then 1
should Eke to ask the members of the Council what
alternative they would put forth or suggest.

93. Now I leave it to the Council to judge who has been
more fantastic, The representative of Portugal on many
occasions has stated that his delegation would draw its own
conclusions. We in the United Nations too can draw ours.
94. The problem is further complicated bY the United
Nations failure to give effect to its resolutions, as a result of
which the Aftican States are understandably frustrated and
are obliged to take action which, as the representative of

100. Those who help and support Portugal have particular
responsib~&
in ensuring that such help and suPPort is
totally withdrawn.

9

101. The present complaints of Guinea can, of course, be
disposed of in the same manner as the Council disposed of
the complaints of Senegal a few days ago, But the main
purpose of my intervention
is to indicate that these
piecemeal solutions, if indeed they can be called solutions,
will lead us nowhere. We have to consider Portuguese
intransigence in respect of its colonial possessions in a much
wider context. I suggest this not for effect, not even for the
record, but out of an earnest wish to see some suitable
action taken. We may not remove all the wrongs the
Africans have suffered at the hands of the Portuguese
colonialists over the centuries, but we can begin to make a
beginning.

of Guinea (B&au), through the African Independence
Party of Guinea and the Cape Verde Islands, won sizeable
victories in its liberation struggle. It liberated a considerable
portion of Guinea (Bissau) and that is what the representative of Portugal doesnot want to admit to here. But in
their hatred of and fury againstthe peaceful population,
the soldiersof the Portuguesecolonial army indiscriminately bomb the villages and countryside of those territories which have already been liberated and of neighbouring countriesaswell.
109. The representativeof Portugal allegesthat the Territory of the Republicof Guinea and that of Senegalareused
as basesfor those he calls “rebels” and that those rebels
receiveassistance
from certain Powers;which he still refuses
to name.

102. The PRESIDENT: I thank the representative of India
for his kind and generous words addressed to me.
103. The next speaker on my list is the representative of
Guinea, who has asked to be allowed to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.

110. I shouldlike to refer the Council to an article which
appeared in the French newspaper,Le Monde, which
reportsthe statementsof an eminentAfrican Headof State,
PresidentLBopoldSedarSenghor, of Senegal,whosecountry has been and still is the victim of Portugueseacts of
aggression.We know that the sister Republic of Senegal,
like the Republic of Guinea, has been the object of
constant attacks. The representativeof Portugal saysthat
those attacks are justified becausethose two States offer
asylumto or serveasbasesfor those“rebels”, andhe claims
that that is an infringement of Portuguesesovereignty.But
this argumenthasbeenraised alsoagainstthe Republic of
Zambia, againstthe Democratic Republic of the Congo,
againstCongo(Brazzaville), againstthe United Republicof
Tanzaniaand againstall African countries.

104. Mr. TOURE (Guinea) (translated from Fwzch): I
should like to say first of all, for the benefit of the Security
Council, that the representative
of Portugal has just
eloquently demonstrated both the attitude of his Government and what it thinks about the problems of interest to
the international community.
105. The representative of Portugal, in the fallacious
justification that he attempted to give of the facts, forgot
that what is happening here in the Security Council is a fact
of history and that, in the struggle of all peoples for their
liberation, nothing-not even all the forces, guns or armadas
that Portugal owns, directly or indirectly-can
put an end
to the resistance of the African peoples.

111. From the very outset we havedrawn attention to the
fact that, whether we look at a geographical map or
consider the facts as they are, Portugal has no common
frontier with any African State, But the occupation of
Africa by Portugal and its stubborn adherenceto the belief
that these African territories are extensionsof the metropolitan country constitute an act of permanent aggression.

106. In his statement a few minutes ago, the representative of Portugal attempted to obscure the issue, to
camouflage the facts, For the information of the Council,
may I review the acts that the Portuguese Government,
using its colonial army, has been guilty of committing
against the Republic of Guinea. I would refer to our letter
dated 12 December 1969 [S/9.554/ and to my own
statement at the 1522nd meeting of the Council.

112. Here we may say that the various armiesof national
liberation have won considerablevictories and that the part
of Guinea (Bissau)which has now been liberated by the
national liberation army is beingorganizedadministratively
and in such fields as public health and education. Films
have been shot by film techniciansfrom WesternEurope,
Italians in particular. There is no longer any doubt in the
mind of anyone, except perhapsof the representativeof
Portugal who is sitting here in New York far from the
realities of the situation, that the Territory of Guinea
(Bissau)is beingliberated and that, were it not for the aid
that Portugal continues to receive from its allies, the
liberation of that Territory would have been finally
completed. That is a fact, and that is what the Portuguese
representativedoesnot wish to admit here, in all humility,
before the Security Council.

107. The representative of Portugal implicitly recognizes
the acts that 1~s army was guilty of, namely-I repeat-the
seven acts of aggression committed over a period of eight
months against the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
my country, by the kidnapping of persons, by the seizing of
a vessel, by the taking of persons into custody and by the
kilIing of others. Those seven acts have been borne out by
documents. In accordance with the custom of the representative of Portugal already known to the Council, he has
denied those acts. That is his only argument; he just denies
the facts.
108. As we have said, the representative of Portugal
implicitly recognizes that on the dates of the Portuguese
acts of aggression against Guinean national territory, acts
did indeed take place which he describes as “reprisals” for
alleged attacks from the Republic of Guinea. But there we
have a fact which I think deserves the attention of the
Council: it is the fact that the national army of liberation

113. However, we would say againthat in their fury and
hatred the soldiersof the Portuguesecolonial army are
bombing indiscriminately both the liberated part of the
Territory and the neighbouring territories. The representative of Portugal allegesthat there are prisonersbeing
held in Guinea,whom he lists; but, without giving thought
10

to the matter, he lists Portuguese soldiers, and then hastens
to add that the Republic of Guinea is not at war with
Portugal. Indeed, we affirm that the Republic of Guinea is
not at war with Portugal. How then can the Republic of
Guinea be holding Portuguese military prisoners on its
territory?
114. What the representative of Portugal does not wish to
re cognize , and this is a point we would stress, are the
victories won by the freedom fighters. An African weekly,
which I have here, in relating more eloquent facts that
occurred elsewhere with the FRELIMO (Frente de
Libcrtagao de Mozambique) fighters in Mozambique, describes a ceremony on the occasion of the release of eight
Portuguese soldiers who had been taken prisoner in the
field by the national liberation army. The same occurred in
the case of the fighters of the PAIGC (Partido Afiicano da
hdeperlderzcia da Guine’ e Cabo Verde). who as a humanitarian gesture, released soldiers taken prisoner in the field
of operations. What the representative of Portugal does not
wish to admit is his refusal to enter into a dialogue, and
when he does ask for that dialogue, WCrefer him to his own
words and say that if there is a refusal to hold a dialogue it
is Portugal itself that refuses.
115. The Organization of African Unity, in the Lusaka
Manifesto,2 has insisted on a dialogue. The representative
of the Indian Republic a few minutes ago recalled the
patience displayed by that great country for ten years in
asking for a dialogue with Portugal. Portugal speaks of
violence, when referring to the actions of patriots. Portugal
speaks of violence when liberation movements are in action.
1 know that the Security Council will not allow itself to be
swayed by the fallacious arguments presented to the
2 Ibid.,

Twenty-fourth

Session, Annexes,

agertda

Council, which rest on no foundation. If there are prisoners
held by the national liberation movements, all Portugal
need do is to enter into a dialogue with those liberation
movements and its prisoners. Knowing the humanitarian
spirit, the African spirit devoid of rancour, I shall say that
these innocent prisoners-who are all young Portuguese
forcibly recruited into the mercenary army-will be released
by the freedom fighters who have already released others
like them.
116. However, what we cannot accept from Portugal are
the typical overt and definite acts of aggression carried out
as reprisals for the assistance we are rendering to liberation
movements. If there is any State, any country that has
placed itself beyond the pale of the United Nations and of
the Charter, it is Portugal. That was demonstrated here a
little while ago by the representative of Portugal, who,
before the eyes of the Council, preferred to leave rather
than to hear the truth. It is that attitude of closed eyes and
deaf ears that Portugal maintains. I would ask the members
of the Security Council if they think that a dialogue is
possible when we are faced with such an attitude. We do
not think so.
117. The PRESIDENT: There are no further speakers on
my list for this afternoon’s meeting. If no representative
wishes to speak at this stage, I propose to adjourn the
meeting. On the basis of informal consultations that have
taken place I should like to announce that the next meeting
of the Security Council will be held tomorrow, 19
December 1969, at 3 p.m. It is the hope of the Presidentand 1 hope that the President is not hoping against
hope-that the Council will then conclude its deliberations
on the item before it.

item 106, docu-

The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

mcnt A/7154.

11

HOW

T O OBTAIN

United

UNITED

Notions
publications
world.
Consult
your

the

NATIONS
may
bookstore

PUBLICATIONS
be

obtained
or write

from bookstores
and dirtribulorr
to: United
Notions,
Sales
Section,

ihroughout
New York

or Geneva.

COMMENT

SE PROCURER

Ler
publications
der
dCpositoires
du monde
Nations
Unies,
Section

COMO
Lor

CONSEGUIR

publicaciones

LES PUBLICATIONS
Nations
Unier
sent
entier.
Informer-vour
des venter,
New York

PUBLICACIONES
de

las

Litho

in United

Nations,

New

York

Price:

DE LAS

Naciones

en todas
partes
del mundo.
Ventas,
Nueva
York o Ginebra.

Unidas

Consulte

$U.S.

DES NATIONS

0.50

UNIES

en vente
dons
les librairies
et les ogencer
auprbs
de votre librairie
au adressez-voug
6:
ou Gen&ve.

NACIONES

ertdn

en vento

a su librero

a dirljare

(or equivalent

UNIDAS
en

in other

librerlas

y casas

dirtribuidoras

Unidar,

Secci6n

a: Naciones

currencies)

de

82305-January

1973--2,050

4
