48

General Assembly ARTICLE

XXXIV

(Documentary euidencc)
Replace the present text by the following:
"l. Every participant and every beneficiary under these
regulations shall furnish such documentary evidence as may
be required under the administrative rules.
"2. If the Joint Staff Pension Board finds that any
material fact so required has been omitted or misrepresented,
the Board shall be cmpowcrc,l to take such omission or
misrepresentation into account in deciding 011 the individual's
entitlement to benefits or participation in the Pension Fund
or in modifying any such decision, provided that the
individual's entitlement to benefits and participation in the
Fund in such case shall be no less favourable than it would
have been had the material facts been disclosed or accurately
represented."

Ill
ADJUSTMENTS IN BENEFITS AFTER AWARD

Decides that:
1. The supplement of 5 per cent to pensions and
life annuities authorized, pending the outcome of the
comprehensive review, by paragraph 5 of General
Assembly resolution 1310 (XIII) shall cease to be paid
after 31 March 1961, provided that if in any case the
increases resulting from paragraph 2 below in the
benefits of a participant or his widow, taken together
with the benefits payable to his children, shall amount
to less than the amount of the 5 per cent supplement,
the differenctt shall continue to be paid;
2. With effect from 1 April 1961, all pensions and
life annuities in payment or payable under the provisions
of articles IV, V, VII, VIII and X.1 (d) of the
Regulations of the United Nations Joint Staff Pension
Fund as in force on 31 March 1961, shall, with the
exception stated in paragraph 3 below, be adjusted to
the amount which would have been payable had they
been awarded under the provisions of articles IV, V,
VII, VIII, and X.3 (a) or X.3 (b), as approved in
section II of the present resolution, and had their final
average remuneration been calculated on a base salary
at the mid-point between their actual net base salary and
the corresponding United Nations gross salary; in the
case of staff subject to the post adjustment system who
retired between 1 January 1959 and 31 March 1961,
the base pensionable remuneration shall be deemed to
have been further increased by 5 per cent with effect
from 1 January 1959;
3. No adjustment shall be made in the amount of
lump-sum payments paid or payable under the Regulations in force on 31 March 1961, nor shall the new
provisions of article IV .1 ( b) applied retroactively to
any retirement benefit of which the recipient commuted
a part to a lump sum ;
4. Where part of any retirement benefit has been
commuted to a lump sum, the amount of any remaining
part which is paid or payable as an annuity shall be
increased pro rata to the increase which would have
been granted under paragraph 2 above in the full retirement benefit, other than as a result of article IV .1 ( b),
had no part of it been commuted;
5 The present resolution shall create no entitlement
to a pension or annuity to which no entitlement existed
at the date a former participant left the service;
6. The United Natic,ns Joint Staff Pension Board
is reouested to studv, at its next session, methods by
which any foture adjmtmerits in benefits, after their

Fifteenth Session

award, might be made; pending the outcome of such
study, the Board is invited to establish, fron~ the e~cess
yield on its investments, a Reserve for Pension Ad Justments, and to credit annually to such Reserve a.n amount
sufficient to cover the actuarial value of an increase of
1 per cent in benefits and annuities in payment and in
deferred annuities payable under article X of the Regulations.
954th plenary mectinr,.
18 December l<JMJ.
1562 (XV). Amendments to the Pension Scheme
Regulations for members of the International Court of Justice
The General Assembly,
Having considered the reports of the SecrctaryGeneral30 and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,3 1
1. Adopts the text annexed to the present resolution
as revised Pension Scheme Regulations for members of
the Internatfonal Court of Justice;
2. Decides that the revised Regulations shall come
into force on 1 January 1961 and shall supersede the
Regulations contained in the annex to General Assembly
resolution 86 (I) of 11 December 1946, as amemkd by
resolution 1408 (XIV) of l Decemher 1959.
954th plenary me,'linq,
18 December 1Q60.
ANNEX

PE'.'JSION SCHEME REGULATIONS FOR MEMBERS
OF THE INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE
ARTICLE

I

Retirement pension

I. A member of the International Court of Justice who has
ceased to hold office and who has reached the age of sixtyfive shall be entitled during the remainder of his life, subject
to paragraph 4 below, to a retirement pension, payable monthly,
provided that he has :
(a) Completed at least five years of service ;
(b) Not been required to relinquish his appointment under
Article 18 of the Statute of the Court for reasons other than
the state of his health.
2. The amount of the retirement pension shall be determined
as follows:
(a) If the member has served a full term of nine years,
the amount of the pension shall be 10,000 dollars a year;
( b) If he has served for more than nine years, the amount
of the pension shall be increased by 33.33 dollars a. year for
each month of service in excess of nine years, provided that
the maximum retirement pension shall not exceed two-thirds
of his annual salary;
( c) If he has served for less than a full term of nine years,
the amount of the retirement pension shall be that proportion
of 10,000 dollars which the number of months of his actual
service bears to 108.
3. A member who ceases to hold office before the age of
sixty-five and who would be entitled to a retirement pension
when he reached that age may elect to receive a pension from
any date after the date on which he ceases to hold office.
Should he so elect, the amount of such pension shall be that
amount which has the same actuarial value as the retirement
pension which would have been paid to him at the age of sixtyfive.
30 Ibid., agenda item 54, document A/4424.
31 Ibid., documents A/4544 and A/4579.

19

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

4. No retirement pension shall be payable to a former member
who has been re-elected to office until he again ceases to hold
office. At that time, the amount of his pension shall be
calculated in accordance with paragraph 2 above on the basis
of his total period of service and shall be subject to a reduction
equal in actuarial value to the amount of any retirement pension
paid to him before he reached the age of sixty-five.
ARTICLE

II

Disability pension

1. A member found by the Court to be unable to perform
his duties because of permanent ill-health or disability shall
be entitled upon leaving office to a disability pension payable
monthly.
2. The amount of the disab11ity pension shall be determined
as in article I, paragraph 2, provided that it shall not be less
than 5,000 dollars a year.
ARTICLE

III

Widow's pension
1. Upon the death of a married member, his widow shall
be entitled to a widow's pension amounting to one-third of the
pension which he would have received had he become entitled
to a disability pension at the time of his death, provided that
the widow's pension shall not be less than one-sixth of the
annual salary.
2. Upon the death of a married former member who was
in receipt of a disability pension, his widow, provided she was
his wife at the date his service ended, shall be entitled to a
widow's pension amounting to one-third of the pension which
her husband was receiving, provided that the widow's pension
shall not be less than one-sixth of the annual salary.
3. Upon the death of a married former member who was
entitled to a retirement pension, his widow, provided she was
his wife at the date his service ended, shall be entitled to a
widow's pension calculated as follows:
(a) If the former member had not begun, at the date of
his death, to receive his retirement pension, the widow's pension
· shall amount to one~third of the pension which would have
been payable to him under article I. paragraph 3, had he
commenced to receive such pension on the date of his death,
provided that the widow's pension shall not be less than onetwelfth of the annual salary ;
(b) If the former member had begun to receive his retirement pension before he reached the age of sixty-five, under
article I, paragraph 3, the widow's pension shall amount to
one-third of the amount of such pension, but shall not be less
than one-twelfth of the annual salary ;
(c) If the former member had reached the age of sixty-five
when he began to receive his retirement pension, the widow's
pension shall amount to one-third of his retirement pension,
but shall not be less than one-sixth of the annual salary.
4. A widow's pension shall cease on her remarriage.
ARTICLE

IV

Child's benefit

1. Each child or legally adopted child of a member or
former. member who dies shall be entitled, while unmarried
and under the age of twenty-one, to a benefit calculated as

follows:
(a) Where there is a widow entitled to a pension under
article III, the annual amount of the child's benefit shall be:
(i) Ten per cent of the retirement pension which the former
member was receiving ; or
(ii) If the former member had not begun, at the date of
his death, to receive his retirement pension, 10 per cent
of the pension which would have been payable to him
under article I, paragraph 3, had he commenced to
receive such pension on the date of his death; or
(iii) In the case of the death of a member in office, 10 per
cent of the pension which he would have received had

he qualified for a disahility pension at the dat•: of his
death;
provided, in all cases, that the amount of the child's ben~fit
shall not exceed 60) dollars a year ;
( b) Where there is no widow entitled to a pension under
article lII, or where the widow dies, the total am()unt of the
children's benefits payable under sub-paragraph (a) above shall
be increased by the following amount :
( i) If there is only one eligible child, by one-half of the
amount of the pension which was being paid or would
have been paid to the widow ;
(ii) If there are two or more eligible childrrn, by the amount
of the pension which wa, being paid or would h,n·e been
paid to the widow ;
(c) The total children's benefits payable under sub-paragraph
( b) above shall be divided equally among all the eligible
children to determine the amount of any one child's benefit;
as and when a child ceases to be eligible, the total benefit
payable to the remainder shall be recalculated in accordance
with sub-paragraph ( b).
2. The total amount of children's benefit, when added to
the amount of any widow's benefit in payment, shall nut exceed
the pension which the former member or memhcr received or
woul<l have received.
ARTICLE

V

Special prm-isio11s
1. Notwithstanding the pro\·isions of article I, paragraph I
(a), a member elected to fill a casual vacancy who holds office
for the remainder of his predecessor's term, where such
remaining term is less than five but not less than three years,
shall on ~etirement, after completion of that term and provided
that he is not subsequently re-elected, be entitled during the
remainder of his life, and subject to article I, paragraph 4,
to a retirement pension, payable monthly, calculated 111
accordance with article I, paragraph 2 ( c).
2. Upon the death of a married former member who was
entitled to a retirement pension under paragraph I above, his
widow and children shall be entitled to the appropriate benefit
provided under article III, paragraph 3, and article IV, subject
to the conditions described therein but without the application
of the related minima provisions.
ARTICLE

VI

Definitions
I. "Member" means either the President, the Vice-President
or a member of the Court in office.
2. "Annual salary" means the annual salary, exclusive of anv
allowances, fixed by the General Assembly and received by tl;c
member at the time he ceased to hold office.
ARTICLE

VII

Misce/laneo1ts provisions

I. Pensions provided for by the present Regulations shall be
calculated in terms of the currency in which the salary of the
member concerned has been fixed by the General Assembly.
2. All pensions provided for by these Regulations shall he
regarded as expenses of the Court, within the meaning of
Artie-le 33 of the Statute of the Court.
3. The President of the Court and the Secretarv-General
shall establish a table of actuarial reduction factor:, on the
advice of a qualified actuary or actuaries.
ARTICLE

VIII

Application and effectiz•e dat,,
1. The present Regulations shall be applicable as from
January 1961 to all who are members on or after that date,
except that members elected at the fifteenth session of the
General Assembly or earlier may, within a period of three
months from the date of adoption of the present Regulations,
elect to have their entitlements determined in accordance with

General Assembly -

50

the Regulations in force immediately prior to the adoption of
the present Regulations.32
2. Fonner members who left office prior to 1 January 1961,
or their eligible beneficiaries who are in receipt of a benefit
on 1 January 1961, may elect within three months of the
adoption of the present Regulations to have their entitlements
governed by these Regulations ; any former member or beneficiary who does so elect shall have such benefit payments as
are due to him on or after 1 January 1961 calculated in
accordance with the present Regulations.

1575 (XV). Cost estimates for the maintenance
of the United Nations Emergency Force 33
The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 1089 (XI) of 21 December
1956, 1151 (XII) of 22 November 1957, 1337 (XIII)
of 13 December 1958 and 1441 (XIV) of 5 December
1959,
H <Wing considered the ob!.ervations made by Member
States on the financing of the United Nations Emergency
Force,
Having examined the budget estimates for the Force
submitted by the Secretary-General for the year 1961 34
and the observations and recommendations thereon of
the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, 35
Having noted with satisfaction that special financial
assistance has been pledged voluntarily towards the expenditures for the Force in 1961,
Considering that it is desirable to apply voluntary
contributions of special financial assistance in such a
manner as to reduce the financial burden on those Governments which have the least capacity to contribute
towards the expenditures for maintaining the Force,
32 Annex to General

Assembly resolution 86 (1) as amended

by resolution 1408 (XIV).
33 See "Allocation of agenda items", footnote 5.
34 Official Records of the General Assembly, Fifteenth

Ses-

sion, Annexes, agenda item 'Zl, document A/4396.
35 Ibid., document A/4409.

Fifteenth Session

1. Authorizes the Secretary-General to expend up
to a maximum of $19 million for the continuing operation of the United Nations Emergency Force during
1961;
2. Decides to assess the amount of $19 million against
all States Members of the United Nations on the basis
of the regular scale of assessments, subject to the provisions of paragraphs 3 and 4 below ;
3. Decides further that the voluntary contributions
pledged pr.ior ·to 31 December 1960, including those
already announced and referred to in the fourth preambular paragraph above, shall be applied, at the request of the Member State concerned made prior to
31 March 1961, to reduce by up to 50 per cent:
(a) The assessment that the Member States which
were admitted during the fifteenth session of the General
Assembly are required to pay for the financial year
1%1 in accordance with Assembly resolution 1552 (XV)
of 18 December 1960;
( b) The assessment of all other Member States receiving assistance during 1960 under the Expanded
Programme of Technical Assistance, commencing with
thos~ States assessed at the mm1mum of 0.04
per cent and then including, in order, tho.se States
assessed at the next highest percentages until the total
amount of the voluntary contributions has been fully
applied;
4. Decides that, if Member States do not avail themselves of credits provided for in paragraph 3 above, the
amounts involved shall be credited to section 9 of the
1961 budget
the Force;
5. Approves the recommendations set forth in paragraphs 67 to 70 of the Secretary-General's report on tne
United Nations Emergency Force36 concerning reimbursement of Governments in respect of supplies, material and equipment furnished to their contingents.
960th plenary meeting,
20 December 1960.

for

86 !bid., document A/4486.

1581 (XV). Supplementary estimates for the financial year 1960
The General Assembly
1. &solves that for the financial year 1960 the amount of $US63,149.700 appropriated by its resolution
1443 (XIV) of 5 December 1959 be increased by $2,585,200 as follows:
Amount
appropriated
by resolution
1443 (XIV)
Section

2.
3.

appropriation

Revised
amount of

appropriation

(US dollars)

A. UNITED NATIONS

1.

Supplementary

Part I. Sessions of the General Assembly, the councils,
commissions and committees; special meetings
and conferences
Travel of representatives, members of comhiissions and
committees
Special meetings and conferences .
Board of Auditors

832,600
62,300
53,000

89,300
559,000
5,000

921,900
621,300
58,000

TOTAL, PART I

947,900

653,300

l,(i()l,200

2,523,300

378,800

2,902,100

Pa,-t II. Special missions and related activities
4.

Special missions and related activities.
