S/2018/732

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
25 July 2018
Original: English

Letter dated 23 July 2018 from the Secretary-General addressed to
the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to transmit herewith (see annex) a communication dated 9 July
2018 from the Director General of the Organisation for the Prohib ition of Chemical
Weapons (OPCW). It transmits the report of the OPCW fact-finding mission in the
Syrian Arab Republic regarding incidents in Hamdaniyah on 30 October 2016 and in
Karm al-Tarrab on 13 November 2016, as well as the interim report of the miss ion
regarding the alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Duma on 7 April 2018.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

18-12289 (E)

260718

*1812289*

S/2018/732

Annex
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]
I have the honour to transmit to you two notes by the Technical Secretariat
entitled “Report of the OPCW fact-finding mission in Syria regarding the incidents
in Al-Hamadaniyah on 30 October 2016 and in Karm Al-Tarrab on 13 November
2016” (see enclosure I) and “Interim report of the OPCW fact-finding mission in Syria
regarding the incident of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma, Syrian
Arab Republic, on 7 April 2018” (see enclosure II).
(Signed) Ahmet Üzümcü

2/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Enclosure I
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]

NOTE BY THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT
REPORT OF THE OPCW FACT-FINDING MISSION IN SYRIA
REGARDING THE INCIDENTS IN AL-HAMADANIYAH ON 30 OCTOBER 2016
AND IN KARM AL-TARRAB ON 13 NOVEMBER 2016

18-12289

3/100

S/2018/732

7Contents
Page

1.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5

2.

FACT-FINDING MISSION BACKGROUND INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6

3.

FIRST DEPLOYMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

8

4.

SECOND DEPLOYMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

9

5.

THIRD DEPLOYMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10

6.

FOURTH DEPLOYMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

11

7.

FIFTH DEPLOYMENT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

8.

DATA ANALYSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

13

9.

CONCLUSIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

39

10.

SIGNATURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

41

ANNEXES (ENGLISH ONLY)
1.

FACT-FINDING MISSION MANDATED AIMS AND OPERATIONAL INSTRUCTIONS . .

42

2.

LIST OF CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE AUTHORITIES OF THE SYRIAN ARAB
REPUBLIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

44

LIST OF INFORMATION RECEIVED FROM OR HANDED OVER TO THE
AUTHORITIES OF THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC DURING DEPLOYMENTS . . . . . . .

45

LIST OF CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE AUTHORITIES OF THE RUSSIAN
FEDERATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

47

5.

LIST OF SAMPLES TRANSPORTED FOR OFF-SITE ANALYSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48

6.

SELECT SAMPLE PHOTOGRAPHS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

50

7.

REPORT ON THE ANALYSIS OF FACT-FINDING MISSION SAMPLES RELATED TO
THE ALEPPO INCIDENT, RETURNED BY TEAM BRAVO IN JANUARY 2017 . . . . . . . . .

52

REPORT ON THE ANALYSIS OF FACT-FINDING MISSION SAMPLES RELATED TO
THE ALEPPO INCIDENT (RETURNED BY TEAM BRAVO IN JANUARY 2017) . . . . . . . .

53

9.

TECHNICAL WEAPONS EXPLOITATION REPORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

55

10.

MAPPING OF INCIDENT LOCATION IN AL-HAMADANIYAH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

11.

MAPPING OF INCIDENT LOCATION IN KARM AL-TARRAB . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

67

12.

LIST OF EVIDENCE GATHERED DURING THE INTERVIEW PROCESS . . . . . . . . . . . . .

71

3.
4.

8.

4/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

1.

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.1

At its Forty-Eighth Meeting, the OPCW Executive Council (hereinafter “the Council”)
adopted a decision entitled “Reports of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria”
(EC-M-48/DEC.1, dated 4 February 2015) in which, inter alia, it requested the
Director-General to provide to the Council at its next regular session information on
the progress of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in Syria (FFM) and on specific plans,
schedules, and their implementation. In response to that request, the OPCW Technical
Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) submitted a Note to address the future
activities of the FFM (S/1255/2015*, dated 10 March 2015 and Add.1, dated 13 March
2015).

1.2

The Secretariat received from the Syrian Arab Republic note verbale No. 109 (dated
17 November 2016) containing correspondence No. 259 (dated 16 November 2016)
providing information regarding several incidents reported to have occurred in the
Aleppo residential neighbourhoods of “Al-Hamadaniyah” and “Dahiyat al-Assad” on
31 October 2016; in “Manian located to the west of the city of Aleppo” on 3 November
2016; and in Karm al-Tarrab, also referred to as “Al-Nayrab located to the west of the
city of Aleppo” on 13 November 2016. Note verbale No. 109 requested that the FFM
take action.

1.3

The Secretariat also received note verbale No. 113 (dated 29 November 2016)
containing correspondence No. 9551 (dated 29 November 2016) referring to incidents
in the “1070 Apartments Project in the Al-Hamadaniyah area in the south-west of
Aleppo City” on 31 October 2016; and in “Maarata near the village of Um-Housh in
the suburb of Aleppo” on 16 September 2016.

1.4

These notes verbales form the basis of the deployments of the FFM between December
2016 and April 2018 in regard to a number of incidents.

1.5

The Director-General subsequently dispatched the FFM to collect facts pertinent to the
reported incidents. The FFM team deployed on five occasions to gather facts and
retrieve samples in connection with the incidents. The team was composed of OPCW
inspectors and qualified interpreters. During these deployments, the FFM conducted
interviews, collected testimonies, and reviewed documents and other information
provided by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. Furthermore, the FFM visited
the Scientific Studies and Research Centre (SSRC) in Barzi to conduct a technical
exploitation of one item and to secure and recover samples for analysis at the OPCW
Laboratory.

1.6

This report details only the incidents in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah on
30 October 2016, which was reported to have occurred on 31 October 2016, and in the
area of Karm al-Tarrab, also referred to as Al-Nayrab, on 13 November 2016.

1.7

On the basis of the information received and analysed, the prevailing narrative of the
interviews, and the results of the laboratory analyses, the FFM cannot confidently
determine whether or not a specific chemical was used as a weapon in the incidents
that took place in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah on 30 October 2016 and in

18-12289

5/100

S/2018/732

the area of Karm al-Tarrab on 13 November 2016. The FFM is of the view that the
persons affected in the reported incidents may, in some instances, have been exposed
to some type of non-persistent, irritating substance.
2.

FACT-FINDING MISSION BACKGROUND INFORMATION

2.1

The Secretariat received from the Syrian Arab Republic note verbale No. 109 (dated
17 November 2016) containing correspondence No. 259 (dated 16 November 2016)
providing information regarding “three toxic gas attacks” which took place in the
Aleppo residential neighbourhoods of “Al-Hamadaniyah” and “Dahiyat al-Assad” on
31 October 2016; in “Manian located to the west of the city of Aleppo” on 3 November
2016; and in “Al-Nayrab located to the west of the city of Aleppo” on 13 November
2016. Note verbale No. 109 also requested that the FFM take action.

2.2

The Secretariat also received note verbale No. 113 (dated 29 November 2016)
containing correspondence No. 9551 (dated 29 November 2016), which referred to an
incident in the “1070 Apartments Project in the Al-Hamadaniyah area in the south-west
of Aleppo City” on 31 October 2016. Note verbale No. 113 also referred to the incident
in “Maarata near the village of Um-Housh in the suburb of Aleppo” on 16 September
2016.

2.3

Notes verbales 109 and 113 initiated the deployments carried out by the FFM between
December 2016 and April 2018. During these deployments, and throughout the
post-deployment activities, the team gathered, reviewed, and analysed all available
information related to the incidents reported by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic.

2.4

After reviewing the information gathered and provided by the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic following the first deployment, the FFM identified a number of issues
that were further clarified, as described below:

6/100

(a)

The reported incident in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah in the city of
Aleppo includes the two residential areas of Dahiyat al-Assad and the 3000
Apartments Project. The 1070 Apartments Project borders the 3000 Apartments
Project from the south. Throughout meetings and correspondence with the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, it was decided that, for reporting
purposes, the 1070 Apartments Project would be considered as part of the
neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah. Furthermore, although note verbale No. 109
refers to 31 October 2016 as the date of the reported incident, through a
combination of interviews with individuals connected to the incident, the analysis
of individual military police reports, as well as meetings with the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic, it was later concluded that this incident took place on
30 October 2016.

(b)

The location of the incident reported to have occurred on 13 November 2016 was
later identified by the team as Karm al-Tarrab, which is an area close to the
Al-Nayrab airport in the city of Aleppo.

18-12289

S/2018/732

2.5

Note verbale No. 109 (dated 17 November 2016) referred to an incident taking place
on 3 November 2016 in “Manian located to the west of the city of Aleppo”. During its
first deployment, the FFM did not receive any pertinent information from the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. Therefore, the team requested information
relevant to the incident, including documents, photos, videos, access to witnesses, and
environmental and biomedical samples. In response, the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic stated that they did not have any substantial information to support the
activities of the FFM and acknowledged that, in the absence of such information, the
team would be unable to report on this incident.

2.6

Note verbale No. 113 (dated 29 November 2016) referred to an incident taking place
on 16 September 2016 in “Maarata near the village of Um-Housh”. This report
excludes that incident, which was detailed in a previous report issued by the FFM
(S/1491/2017, dated 1 May 2017).

2.7

Accordingly, the present report covers the work of the FFM in relation to the incidents
reported in notes verbales No. 109 (dated 17 November 2016) and No. 113 (dated
29 November 2016) in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah on 30 October 2016 and
in the area of Karm al-Tarrab on 13 November 2016.

18-12289

7/100

S/2018/732

3.

FIRST DEPLOYMENT

3.1 The first deployment was comprised of the Mission Team Leader, seven inspectors, and
two qualified interpreters, who conducted activities from 11 to 19 December 2016.
The team composition is described in the table below.

No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

FFM team composition
11 to 19 December 2016
Function
Speciality
Mission Team Leader
Inspection Team Leader
Deputy Team Leader
Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
Confidentiality Officer
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Evidence Officer
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Logistics Officer
Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
Health & Safety Officer
Health & Safety Specialist Inspector
Non-Destructive Evaluation Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
(NDE) Specialist
NDE Specialist
Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
Interpreter
N/A
Interpreter
N/A

3.2

The team met with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to discuss the details of
the deployment, and to gather information associated with the incidents reported in
notes verbales No. 109 (dated 17 November 2016) and No. 113 (dated 29 November
2016). During its deployment, the FFM collected incident reports, medical records of
casualties, and names of individuals affected and treating hospital staff.

3.3

Additionally, the team was provided access to the SSRC in Barzi to inspect an
unexploded munition and seven environmental samples collected by the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic.

3.4

Furthermore, the FFM was able to conduct a technical exploitation of the unexploded
munition and to take and secure splits of environmental samples for further analysis by
the OPCW Laboratory. Given that the samples were collected by the authorities of the
Syrian Arab Republic, the team documented the handover process and ensured that the
samples were treated in line with the relevant standard operating procedures (SOPs),
including the provisions on chain of custody.

3.5

Over the course of the deployment, the team was able to conduct 13 interviews with
casualties and medical personnel connected to the reported incidents.

3.6

A list of documents, evidence, and samples collected, as well as the reports of the
technical exploitation in connection with the reported incidents, can be found in
Annexes 3, 5, 9 and 12.

8/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

4.

SECOND DEPLOYMENT

4.1

The FFM further deployed from 7 to 12 January 2017 to recover previously secured
samples. The team composition is described in the table below.

No.
1.
2.
3.

FFM team composition
7 to 12 January 2017
Function
Speciality
Mission Team Leader
Inspection Team Leader
Deputy Team Leader
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Interpreter
N/A

4.2

Upon arrival, the team met with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to discuss
the plan for movements to the SSRC in Barzi.

4.3

The FFM subsequently repacked and transported the previously secured samples to the
OPCW Laboratory.

4.4

A list of samples collected during the second deployment can be found in Annex 5.

4.5

Samples recovered during the second deployment were analysed by the OPCW
Laboratory. The report of the laboratory analysis can be found in Annex 7.

18-12289

9/100

S/2018/732

5.

THIRD DEPLOYMENT

5.1

The Secretariat exchanged correspondence with the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic to gather any additional information regarding note verbale No. 109 (dated
17 November 2016). This correspondence formed the basis of the FFM’s third
deployment from 6 to 17 December 2017. The team composition is described in the
table below.

No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Function
Mission Team Leader
Deputy Team Leader
Confidentiality Officer
Evidence Officer
Logistics Officer
Interpreter
Interpreter

FFM team composition
6 to 17 December 2017
Speciality
Inspection Team Leader
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
Health & Safety Specialist Inspector
Chemical Weapons Munitions Specialist
N/A
N/A

5.2

Upon arrival, the team met with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, who
informed the FFM of the presence of 46 biomedical samples in connection with the
reported incidents. The team was provided access to these samples at the SSRC in
Barzi. The FFM also collected technical reports and medical information during its
deployment.

5.3

While the FFM team was conducting its activities at the SSRC in Barzi, it was provided
with information about the presence of eight environmental samples in relation to the
reported incident in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah. The authorities of the
Syrian Arab Republic confirmed that its Technical Committee collected both
environmental and biomedical samples. The team was provided with access to
environmental samples.

5.4

The FFM was able to secure all the environmental and biomedical samples under
OPCW custody for further analysis by the OPCW Laboratory. Given that the samples
were collected by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, the team documented
the handover process and ensured that the samples were treated in line with the relevant
SOPs, including the provisions on chain of custody.

5.5

A list of documents and samples collected in connection with the reported incidents
can be found in Annexes 3 and 5.

10/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

6.

FOURTH DEPLOYMENT

6.1

The FFM further deployed from 7 to 11 January 2018, to recover samples previously
secured during its third deployment. The team composition is described in the table
below.

No.
1.
2.
4.
10.

FFM team composition
7 to 11 January 2018
Function
Speciality
Mission Team Leader
Inspection Team Leader
Deputy Team Leader
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Health & Safety Officer
Health & Safety Specialist Inspector
Interpreter
N/A

6.2

Upon arrival, the team met with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to discuss
the plan for movements to the SSRC in Barzi.

6.3

The FFM subsequently repacked and transported the previously secured samples to the
OPCW Laboratory.

6.4

A list of samples collected during the third deployment can be found in Annex 5.

6.5

Environmental samples recovered during the fourth deployment were analysed by the
OPCW Laboratory. The report of the laboratory analysis can be found in Annex 8.

18-12289

11/100

S/2018/732

7.

FIFTH DEPLOYMENT

7.1

The Secretariat exchanged correspondence with the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic, including NV/ODG/213949/18, to gather additional information regarding
note verbale No. 109 (dated 17 November 2016). This correspondence and note verbale
No. 21 (dated 7 March 2018) from the Syrian Arab Republic formed the basis of the
FFM’s fifth deployment from 29 March to 7 April 2018. The team composition is
described in the table below.

No.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

FFM team composition
29 March to 7 April 2018
Function
Speciality
Mission Team Leader
Inspection Team Leader
Deputy Team Leader
Analytical Chemist Inspector
Evidence Officer
Health & Safety Specialist
Interpreter
N/A
Interpreter
N/A

7.2

The team met with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to discuss the details of
the deployment, and to gather information associated with the reported incidents. The
additional information gathered during the team’s deployment included incident and
technical reports.

7.3

Over the course of the deployment, the team was able to conduct 13 interviews with
casualties and medical personnel connected to the reported incidents.

7.4

A list of documents and evidence gathered in connection with the reported incidents
can be found in Annexes 3 and 5.

12/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

8.

DATA ANALYSIS
Description of data

8.1

The data forming the basis for the present report of the FFM was collected during five
deployments and the interim periods between these deployments. The data was
provided by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and the Russian Federation,
and also includes data gathered or generated by the team. The types of data acquired
include the following:
(a)

(b)

Written documents
(i)

Medical information was provided by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic regarding individuals connected with the incident, including
casualties and treating physicians, as well as the facilities where the
casualties were treated. It also includes medical records depicting the
treatment of the casualties, X-rays, electrocardiograms (ECGs), blood
test results, discharge sheets, and shift logs for the pertinent medical
facilities and incident dates. When applicable, reports drafted by
forensic doctors were provided.

(ii)

Incident reports detailing the reported incidents were provided by the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. Some reports were generated
by the Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic, while others were drafted by the Syrian Arab Armed Forces.
They also include minutes and reports prepared by the police.

(iii)

Technical reports include laboratory reports, consisting of the results of
the laboratory analysis conducted by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic as well as the accompanying sample logbooks. When relevant,
they may also include the description of the laboratory equipment,
working instructions and standard operating procedures used during the
aforementioned laboratory analyses. When applicable, laboratory
quality assurance documents and calibration certificates are provided.
The Russian Federation provided a report with the results of the
laboratory analysis of samples reported to be connected with the
incident in Al-Hamadaniyah.

(i)

Inspector notes, meeting notes, and reports were generated by the team
during the deployments.

Electronic data
(ii)

18-12289

Pictures include photographs of locations, personnel, and objects
reported to be in connection with the reported incidents, and screenshots
of videos as well as computer software. This data was either provided
by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic or collected by the FFM
during interviews and the initial analyses process.

13/100

S/2018/732

(c)

(d)

(iii)

Videos include open source media and footage provided by the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.

(iv)

Maps of the reported incidents with the coordinates or the description
of the locations were either provided by the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic or collected by the FFM during interviews and the initial
analyses process.

Interviews
(v)

Testimonies gathered by the FFM team comprise audio and/or video
recordings, or were collected in the form of written statements with
individuals in relation to the reported incidents.

(vi)

Documents generated during the interviews include drawings made by
the interviewees and written notes of the FFM interview team.

Samples
(vii)

Environmental samples include those collected by the Technical
Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and made
available to the FFM.

(viii) Biomedical samples include those taken from individuals connected to
the reported incidents by the medical staff of the relevant medical
facilities. At a later stage, these samples were given to the Technical
Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and made
available to the FFM.
(e)

Technical exploitation
(ix)

14/100

A technical exploitation and assessment of an unexploded munition was
conducted by the FFM. A written report was produced by the FFM team
based on chemical detection, physical measurements, and nondestructive evaluation (NDE) techniques.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Data analysis methodology
8.2

The overarching purpose of the data analysis conducted by FFM inspectors was to
collate facts in relation to the reported incidents, with a focus on identifying aspects
related to the use of toxic chemicals as a weapon. Therefore, the FFM used, analysed,
and reviewed all types of data mentioned in the section above.

8.3

The analysis of the medical information provided to the FFM and of the testimonies
collected by the team was carried out by health and safety specialist inspectors within
the FFM. They assessed how consistent the symptoms, treatment, and medical
documentations were with potential exposure to a toxic chemical. Prior to being
assessed, this information was translated into English by qualified interpreters assisting
the FFM team.

8.4

The FFM analysed the incident and technical reports to establish a basic understanding
of the event, and to identify potential interviewees, locations, and samples of interest.
The information provided in these reports was translated and then compared to data
gathered during the deployments and throughout post-deployment activities.

8.5

Inspector notes, meeting notes, and reports were used to compare the data gathered
during the deployments and throughout post-deployment activities.

8.6

The FFM also analysed and used electronic data, including pictures, videos, and maps,
as a reference to identify the location of the reported incidents as well as the
whereabouts of the medical facilities that treated the casualties. This data was also used
to corroborate the sequence of events that occurred on the dates of the reported
incidents.

8.7

Testimonies, documents, and electronic data gathered by the FFM team during the
interview process were also used to establish a link between the witnesses and the
reported incidents.

8.8

The interview analysis methodology employed by the FFM allowed individual
accounts to be collated into a prevailing narrative, where factual content could be
extracted and reported according to the mandate.

8.9

First, the audio and video records of each interview conducted by the team were
translated and transcribed into English by the interpreters of the FFM team in order to
facilitate their thorough analysis. The interpreters were deployed with the team and
were present during every interview.

8.10

Next, the verbal content of each interview (the video, audio, and transcripts thereof)
was carefully and separately reviewed by at least two FFM inspectors. A
timeline-based analysis table was produced in order to organise the individual
responses. This allowed each respondent’s description of locations, sights, sounds,
smells, symptoms, and actions to be categorised according to relevant variables. During
the interview review process, FFM inspectors matched the interviewees’ responses
with their respective variables in the analysis table. The result for each interview was
a unique description of the evolving, sequential event, from the perspective of

18-12289

15/100

S/2018/732

interviewees. Once all the relevant narratives had been individually assembled, they
were compared against one another. The final stage of interview analysis involved
cross-checking all of the data to identify commonalities, gaps, and discrepancies.
8.11

Commonalities formed the basis for the prevailing narrative, and gaps were addressed
and discrepancies were analysed to determine their significance. During the first three
deployments and the subsequent initial analysis process, the FFM was able to identify
a number of gaps and sought to address them. Furthermore, the FFM anticipated
reasonable discrepancies in the events recalled from the interviewees, given that some
of them were themselves casualties, that significant time had lapsed between the
reported incidents, and that the interviews and combat operations in the areas of interest
were ongoing. In cases where discrepancies were minor or of little consequence to
establishing a prevailing narrative (i.e., the recollection of general timings and
distances), they were disregarded. If reconciliation with the prevailing narrative was
not possible, the discrepant narrative could be considered limited in value and therefore
difficult to objectively address the FFM’s mandated aims.

8.12

Environmental samples connected to the reported incidents were handed over to the
Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, which had been
dispatched to Aleppo. The samples were further transported to the SSRC in Barzi,
where the FFM team was allowed access to all of the samples over the course of several
deployments.

8.13

During the first and third deployments, the FFM was able to take and secure original
and splits from environmental samples provided by the Technical Committee of the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic connected to the reported incidents, for further
analysis by the OPCW. All samples were secured under OPCW seal, while waiting for
arrangements for transportation.

8.14

During the second and fourth deployments, splits and original samples were
transported back to the OPCW Laboratory. The process of segregating, packaging,
transporting and handing over the samples was done according to OPCW SOPs. The
procedure for the handover and takeover of samples between the FFM team and the
OPCW Laboratory was witnessed by the representative of the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic.

8.15

Environmental samples that were recovered during the second and fourth deployments
were analysed by the OPCW Laboratory. The results of the laboratory analysis were
used to confirm the absence or presence of scheduled chemicals in the samples. The
team subsequently compared other available data to establish a link between the
samples, the casualties, and the location of the reported incidents.

8.16

The remainder of the original environmental samples was left in the custody of the
SSRC in Barzi. At the time this report was drafted, the FFM was not aware of how the
military developments at the SSRC in Barzi on 14 April 2018 might have affected the
aforementioned samples.

16/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

8.17

Biomedical samples were taken by the medical staff, given to the Technical Committee
of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, and made available to the FFM. The
samples were further transported to the SSRC in Barzi where the FFM team was
allowed access to them.

8.18

During the third deployment, the FFM was able to take and secure original biomedical
samples provided by the Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic connected to the reported incidents, for further analysis by the OPCW. Owing
to the limited quantity of the biomedical samples, it was agreed with the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic that they would not be split and joint custody would not be
applicable. The process of segregating, packaging, transporting, and handing over the
samples was done according to OPCW SOPs. The samples were secured under OPCW
seal, while waiting for arrangements for transportation.

8.19

During the fourth deployment, original samples were transported back to the OPCW
Laboratory. The handover of the samples from the FFM team to the OPCW Laboratory
was witnessed by the representative of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.

8.20

On 22 February 2018, the FFM informed the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic
(note verbale No. ODG/213949/18) that the analyses of biomedical samples must be
targeted towards the presence (or absence) of specific chemicals or their markers,
owing to the low concentrations of such chemicals present in blood or plasma.
Therefore, the biomedical samples could be analysed once such a targeting was
possible, which would depend on the outcome of the analysis of the related
environmental samples or evidence of such chemicals and their markers.

8.21

Based on the results of the laboratory analyses of the environmental samples,
biomedical samples related to the reported incident in the neighbourhood of
Al-Hamadaniyah were not analysed by the OPCW Laboratory. Biomedical samples
connected to the reported incident in Karm al-Tarrab were also not analysed owing to
the absence of environmental samples related to the same incident and sufficient
information pointing towards specific chemicals and their markers.

8.22

The data gathered during the technical exploitation of an unexploded munition,
reported to be linked to the incident in Karm al-Tarrab, was used to identify the type
of the munition, with an emphasis on the calibre, size, model, external and internal
structures, as well as the fill, to determine whether it was a chemical weapon. A written
report was produced by the FFM team based on chemical detection, physical
measurements and non-destructive evaluation (NDE) techniques.

8.23

The data analysis methodology employed by the FFM team was consistent with OPCW
SOPs.
Analysis of the reported incident in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah
Analysis of medical information and assessment of patient symptoms

8.24
18-12289

During its deployments, the FFM received the following medical information from the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic:
17/100

S/2018/732

18/100

(a)

Hospital reports from Aleppo Military Hospital (also known as Martyr
Abdel Wahab Agha Hospital), Aleppo University Hospital, and Al-Razi
Hospital. The reports taken from these hospitals confirmed that a large
number of Syrian Arab Army (SAA) personnel were affected by “toxic
chemical gases”. The reported signs and symptoms from all three hospitals
were similar and consistent, as follows: a burning sensation in the eyes,
lacrimation, dyspnoea, tightness in the chest, fatigue, weakness and
numbness in the limbs, abdominal pain and nausea, and vomiting or
retching. The Aleppo Military Hospital also reported conjunctivitis, redness
of skin, and red mucous membranes, while the Al-Razi Hospital also
reported symptoms of headaches and dizziness. With regard to the treatment
of the casualties, the reports mention that the patients were washed at AlRazi Hospital, while they were given oxygen, bronchodilators, intravenous
(IV) fluids, steroids and broad-spectrum antibiotics at the three hospitals.
Patients were assessed, including with chest X-rays. All three hospitals
confirmed that there were no fatalities associated with this incident. The
information contained in all three hospital reports is consistent with the
interview testimonies and the medical records in relation to the reported
incident.

(b)

During the second and fifth deployments, the FFM received several
documents
containing
results
of
laboratory
analyses
of
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) level in the blood samples of individuals
connected to the reported incident. The results showed “normal AChE
activity”.

(c)

A list containing the names of the patients treated in the emergency
departments in multiple hospitals, and their signs and symptoms. The team
identified and, during the first and the fifth deployments, conducted
interviews with 11 casualties. Similarly, the team identified and interviewed
five key medical personnel.

(d)

Forty-eight medical records of individuals linked to the reported incident
were provided to the FFM: 10 from Al-Razi Hospital, 19 from Aleppo
University Hospital and 19 from Aleppo Military Hospital. Certain medical
records belonged to civilians, while the majority belonged to SAA
personnel. The team made their photocopies in electronic versions and
returned the original medical records. Throughout the course of its
deployment, the team was only able to interview SAA personnel and
treating medical staff, thus making it impossible to verify the signs and
symptoms exhibited by civilians. The administration of atropine in Al-Razi
Hospital, as mentioned by one of the interviewees, was not observed in the
medical records. It is worth noting that several entries in the medical records
were illegible, making the team unable to undertake a comprehensive
comparison. Clarification of these entries was sought from medical staff
during interviews, without success.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Analysis and assessment of incident reports
8.25

18-12289

During its deployments, the FFM received the following documents:
(a)

An incident report from the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including a description of the incident in the neighbourhood of AlHamadaniyah and Google Earth® screenshot images showing the location
of the reported incident, as well as the coordinates of the impact locations
(see Annex 10). The report describes that the incident occurred on 30
October 2016 where “armed groups attacked a number of southern areas in
Aleppo City” (including the 1070 and 3000 Apartments Projects) “using
several conventional weapons” as well as “some chemical weapons leading
to the injury of more than 60 soldiers form the army” and a “few civilians”.
A Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic,
consisting of three individuals, was able to visit the city of Aleppo on 31
October 2016. The Committee visited three hospitals to which casualties
were taken, and interviewed doctors and patients connected to the reported
incident. The committee also visited areas close to the locations of the
incident (i.e. Dahiyat al-Assad and the 1070 and 3000 Apartments Projects).
However, they were unable to visit the exact locations of the incident
because of ongoing military activities at the time. The Committee
performed a fast chemical screening on some clothing samples belonging
to the casualties. The result of the screening was not described in the report.
Furthermore, the report states that samples, whose nature and origin was
not specified, were handed over to the SSRC in Barzi for laboratory
analyses. The team assessed the incident report to get an overview of the
sequence of events which formed the initial narrative of the reported
incident. The team also identified a number of issues that needed to be
clarified, such as the exact location of the incident, the ongoing activities
on the date of the incident, the equipment used for the fast chemical
screening, and the origin of the samples. The issues were discussed during
the meetings held between the FFM and the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic throughout the deployments, as well as through correspondence.
The team was able to identify the location of the reported incident (i.e.
Dahiyat al-Assad and the 1070 and 3000 Apartments Projects) through
videos and Google Earth® screenshot images provided by the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic. The ongoing activities on the date of the reported
incident were clarified by cross-checking the information included in the
incident report with the interviews conducted with individuals identified by
the team as connected with the incident. Furthermore, the authorities of the
Syrian Arab Republic provided the FFM with a data sheet on the equipment
used for the fast chemical screening.

(b)

Individual reports produced by the military police for 36 casualties linked
to the reported incident, admitted to Al-Razi and University Hospitals in the
city of Aleppo. The names of the casualties mentioned in the reports were
cross-checked with the names of the patients on the aforementioned medical
records to confirm their identities. The content of each was assessed by the
19/100

S/2018/732

FFM and used to determine commonalities of the initial narrative. The
reports were also used to verify the date of the reported incident in the
neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah.
(c)

A list of names of “specialists and resident doctors involved in the treatment
of patients admitted for poisoning” in the Aleppo University Hospital. This
list was used to establish a link between the medical staff and the casualties.
Given that the nature of the working hours of the medical staff is driven by
operational needs, not all medical personnel involved in the treatment of the
casualties in connection to the reported incident were mentioned on the list.
The list includes only treating physicians.

(d)

The FFM was provided with additional Google Earth® screenshot images,
including a description of areas of the reported incident. The team used
them to identify the geographical location of the reported incident,
significant features, and objects in the area. These features and objects were
used during the interview process to identify the positions of interviewees
during the reported incident.

(e)

During its third deployment, the team received a “comparative study”
compiled by a group of experts from the Technical Committee of the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. The document compared the effects
of riot control agents to the effects of “toxic gases used by terrorist groups”
in several reported incidents, chief among which was Al-Hamadaniyah. It
also contained references to the names and codes of chemicals mentioned
by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. The document states that
soldiers who were affected during the reported incidents have displayed the
same symptoms that occur after exposure to riot control agents. The FFM
assessed the content of the document and concluded that it is largely based
on open-source literature. In some cases the symptoms exhibited by the
casualties, according to both their medical records and the interviews,
correspond with the effects described in the document. However, these
symptoms are not exclusive to the effects of riot control agents.

(f)

The Russian Federation provided a report with the results of laboratory
analysis of seven samples reported to be connected to the incident in AlHamadaniyah. No scheduled chemicals were found in the samples.

Analysis and assessment of electronic data
8.26

During its deployments, the FFM received the following electronic data:
(a)

20/100

Note verbale No. 26 (dated 18 April 2017) containing two videos showing
the same event in different length. The note verbale states that the videos
contain footage of “the incident from the 1070 and 3000 Apartments
Projects” showing the “use of chlorine gas”. The videos show a release of
greenish-yellowish smoke. The videos provided a 180-degree view of the
recorded area including a military post and what appears to be an exploded
18-12289

S/2018/732

vehicle-borne improvised explosive device (VBIED). Through a
geolocation process, the location of the building where the videos were
filmed, the plume shown in the video and the approximate time of day have
been established. The location and the time described in related documents
and testimonies are consistent with the results of the geolocation process.
The FFM cannot establish a link between the smoke shown in the video and
the smoke described in testimonies.

18-12289

(b)

A video reported by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to be
connected to the incident from the 3000 Apartments Project. The video
shows an impact and bursting of a projectile followed by a release of white
smoke. The main visible effect after the explosion is a quickly developing
vertical plume that reaches a height one and a half times higher than the
electric pylons close to the impact point approximately four seconds later.
Within half a minute, the plume reaches its maximum height before being
moved sideways according to the local wind speed and direction. The lower
half of the plume begins to thin out within one minute above the impact
point. The camera then moves to the right and shows two other plumes that
are further away than the first plume. The two plumes appear much darker
with a greyish tone to them. The plumes disperse in a different direction
than the first. After showing the two plumes for 15 seconds, the camera
moves back to the first plume, showing that it has become depleted.
Through a geolocation process, the location of the building where the video
was filmed, the location of the plume shown in the video and the
approximate time of day have been established. The locations and the time
described in related documents and testimonies are not consistent with the
results of the geolocation process. It was assessed that the video was made
in the afternoon, while interviewees recalled that the incident happened in
the morning hours. The interviewees said that they were facing the
neighbourhood of Dahiyat al-Assad, while the location of the plume
depicted in the video is behind their positions. Therefore, the FFM is unable
to establish a link between the smoke shown in the video and the smoke
described in testimonies.

(c)

A video including an interview with three patients who are reported to have
been affected as a result of the reported incident, lying on beds in Al-Razi
Hospital, and two doctors involved in the treatment of these patients. The
video shows patients receiving treatment, as well as the preparation of four
individuals wearing full-face chemical protective masks with canisters and
impermeable protective overalls in an outdoor location, which appears to
be a makeshift decontamination station. One doctor described the
decontamination and isolation phase. The symptoms of patients were listed
as “shortness of breath, burning sensation in the chest, lacrimation and
nausea”. The second doctor mentioned that the patients “were likely
exposed to chlorine”. After analysing all available information, the team
did not interview the two doctors identified in the video since they were not
directly involved in the treatment of the casualties. However, the FFM
interviewed another doctor who was involved in the treatment of the
21/100

S/2018/732

casualties connected to the reported incident who described a similar
decontamination station and procedures, and isolation in Al-Razi Hospital,
as those that can be seen in the video. One casualty, who was treated in
Al-Razi Hospital and interviewed by the team, recalled similar symptoms
that were mentioned in the video.
Analysis and assessment of interviews
8.27

Over the course of five deployments, the FFM conducted 17 interviews with casualties
and medical personnel linked to the incident.

8.28

The prevailing narrative established by interviews with casualties in relation to the
aforementioned incident is as follows:
(a)

Military activities between SSA personnel and armed opposition groups
(AOGs) lasted for three days in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah in
the city of Aleppo before the date of the reported incident. During the
military activities, different types of weapons were used, including small
arms, artillery projectiles, mortars, rockets, and VBIEDs.

(b)

Interviewees reported that on the morning of 30 October 2016, they were
positioned in various locations in the residential neighbourhood of the
Al-Assad Military Academy in Al-Hamadaniyah.
A group of 25 SAA personnel gathered at roundabout 3000 in
Al-Hamadaniyah. Around 7:00, the group was split into two subgroups of
12 and 13 soldiers. One subgroup was stationed at the entrance of the
Al-Assad Military Academy and the other subgroup went inside the
entrance of a structure opposite to Dahiyat Al-Assad, described by the
interviewees as a “mall”. The two locations were separated by a street. At
approximately 8:30, the entire group of 25 SAA personnel engaged in an
intense exchange of fire with AOGs. During this operation, artillery
projectiles, mortars and rockets were used by the AOGs. One interviewee
recalled that sometime between 8:30 and 8:45, a projectile landed on the
street approximately 50 metres from their location. The device did not
explode but made a “hissing sound” and released what was described as a
white-to-yellow cloud and/or smoke. After the release of smoke, all SAA
personnel began experiencing symptoms, while some collapsed. Some
interviewees stated that, with the help of other soldiers, they began the
evacuation operation of the SAA personnel who had collapsed. They
transported these casualties to a pickup truck stationed nearby. The
casualties were further evacuated to the 3000 roundabout, which is
considered to be a secure location, mentioned during interviews as a
“medical point”.

(c)

(d)

22/100

The rescue and evacuation operation lasted until approximately 10:00.
Some casualties were administered first aid at the roundabout, while others
were transported by ambulance to Aleppo University Hospital or straight
to Aleppo Military Hospital. An interviewee mentioned that he was
18-12289

S/2018/732

provided with first aid right at the roundabout, after which he was taken to
“the military camp” where he received further treatment and rested for a
few days.

18-12289

(e)

With regard to the 3000 Apartments Project, approximately 40 SAA
personnel, broken down into several groups, were positioned in the block
of buildings and the surrounding open area closest to the confrontation line,
next to the Al-Assad Military Academy. They were facing the
neighbourhood of Dahiyat al-Assad which had been taken by AOGs. Those
located in the buildings were spread among the ground, first, and second
floors. Those who were stationed in an open area were either behind
barricades or taking cover behind the buildings. Interviewees mentioned
that there are several AOGs operating in the neighbourhood of Dahiyat alAssad and that they were located inside intact buildings 30 to 60 metres
away from SAA positions. An intense clash began at midnight on 30
October 2016. It was reported that some AOGs were wearing “full-face gas
masks with filters”. Some interviewees reported that, at approximately
8:30, more than one projectile was “launched and landed” close to their
locations. One of the projectiles hit the wall of the building where the
interviewees were stationed and fell to the ground “releasing white-toyellow smoke”, making a “hissing sound”. Another projectile fell in the
passageway between buildings releasing “gas or smoke”. All the
interviewees involved in this event described experiencing the same
symptoms shortly after the gas or smoke had been released. Some of them
recalled collapsing after inhaling the gas or smoke. Others, who rescued
their colleagues who had collapsed, felt malaise afterwards. At around
10:00, another projectile described as a “chemical-filled device” was fired
toward SAA positions. The projectile did not explode and made a “small
sound”. The sound emitted by the projectile was described as “different
from regular explosions” similar to a “pressure release”. Some
interviewees said that it released a “thick yellow-to-green smoke”, while
others stated that the smoke had a “white-to-yellow colour”. Interviewees
stated that the smell, described as similar to household cleaning products,
was stronger outside than inside the building. Casualties were evacuated
straight to the Aleppo Military Hospital, while others were taken first to
Al-Razi Hospital and Aleppo University Hospital for two or three days,
before being transferred to the Aleppo Military Hospital.

(f)

In relation to the 1070 Apartments Project, interviewees were positioned
on the veranda of the first floor of a five-storey building facing the
confrontation line, at a distance of around 100 metres from the location of
AOGs. At around 13:00, one interviewee was able to see as “dense whiteto-yellow smoke” spread 5 metres upwards and then between the buildings,
25 metres from their position. The interviewee saw the smoke without
witnessing what caused it. The smell of the smoke was described as “very
bad and disgusting”. The interviewee reported the incident to their
commander via hand-held short-range radio, and then started experiencing
symptoms before collapsing. There was no recollection of where the person
23/100

S/2018/732

collapsed and how they were rescued. The same interviewee woke up in
Aleppo University Hospital, and was discharged days later. Afterwards,
they were readmitted to Aleppo Military Hospital for a few more days. The
interviewee was granted rest and recuperation (R&R) before returning to
duty. During the interviews with the medical staff involved in treating
patients coming from the three different locations, it was described that
some casualties were sent directly to Aleppo Military Hospital, while
others were taken to Al-Razi Hospital or Aleppo University Hospital. As a
standard procedure, casualties who were SAA personnel were discharged
from Aleppo University Hospital only to be taken to Aleppo Military
Hospital for monitoring, follow-up, and administrative purposes.

24/100

(g)

With regard to all three locations mentioned above, the origin of the smoke
(mentioned as gas, smoke and cloud, and identified as a projectile by some
and as a device by others) was not described. Neither the shape nor the size
was mentioned by any interviewee. None of the interviewees provided a
sketch or a drawing of the origin of the smoke. One interviewee stated that
they felt the pressure released when this projectile/device impacted on the
wall of the building where they were positioned. Based on their previous
military experience, they concluded that because of the extent of the
pressure, this device/projectile was either fired or projected. It has been
mentioned by some interviewees that there was no explosion upon impact
and that there was a hissing sound when the smoke was released. The
smoke is described as either thick yellow-to-green or dense white-toyellow, and spread upwards and sideways upon release. The smell of the
smoke was described as very bad, foul, and disgusting. Some interviewees
linked this smell to a locally available cleaning product often used in their
homes, and branded as “Flash”. Others described this smell as similar to
chlorine, while one interviewee emphasised that “it was similar to a
chlorine-based toilet cleaner, but stronger”. Some interviewees also
mentioned never having experienced such a smell before. One interviewee
did not recall smelling anything.

(h)

The means of respiratory protection of SAA personnel ranged from scarves
over the face to full-face chemical protective masks with canisters. Some
interviewees who used protective masks testified that they exhibited some
of the same symptoms experienced by some of those without respiratory
protection. Some of the same interviewees recalled seeing members of
AOGs wearing “protective gas masks”, without providing a detailed
description.

(i)

The symptoms common to all interviewees linked to the three
aforementioned locations are the following: burning sensation in the eyes
and throat, redness and tearing eyes, nose pain, fatigue, difficulty
breathing, pressure in the chest, headache, vomiting, and dizziness. In
some cases, interviewees reported to have lost consciousness during the
incident. Over half of the casualties who were interviewed described that
they had collapsed five to ten minutes following the release of the smoke
18-12289

S/2018/732

and fell unconscious, while others tried to help those who were affected
and later collapsed. After waking up in the hospital, some casualties
reported exhaustion, headache, and chest pain. Most casualties had no
lasting symptoms one week after being discharged from the hospitals.
Some were still experiencing minor symptoms upon discharge from the
hospital.

18-12289

(j)

On 30 October 2016, at approximately 10:30, the first casualties arrived to
Al-Razi Hospital, Aleppo University Hospital, as well as Aleppo Military
Hospital. Aleppo University Hospital also reported receiving casualties on
31 October 2016. In total, this hospital received 63 casualties, mostly
military personnel. On the day of the incident, Al-Razi Hospital received
around 60 to 70 casualties that included both military personnel and
civilians. Some of the soldiers who were previously treated in Al-Razi and
Aleppo University Hospitals were then sent to Aleppo Military Hospital.
This hospital received 60 soldiers in total on the day of the incident.

(k)

All casualties received in Al-Razi and Aleppo University and Aleppo
Military Hospitals were undressed, washed with soap and water, and then
dressed in hospital gowns. In Al-Razi Hospital, the staff in charge of
decontamination was “in a full gear, i.e. full protective suits, masks with
filters, protective shoes and gloves”. All patients in relation to the reported
incident were triaged and sent to isolation rooms on the wards.

(l)

At Al-Razi Hospital, some doctors noticed a smell coming from some
casualties and others reported a strange smell in the emergency department.
Some doctors described the smell as “similar to the smell of water in
swimming pools”. At Aleppo University Hospital, some doctors could not
identify the “bad smell” coming from the casualties. The FFM interviewed
a relevant specialist involved in the assessment of the activities of the
hospitals. This interviewee mentioned that he experienced a chlorine-like
smell in Aleppo University Hospital, when one of the casualties arrived
there.

(m)

In Aleppo Military Hospital, two members of the medical staff experienced
what they described as a “bad smell”, but were unable to identify it. Others,
who did not experience any smell, said that “it can likely be due to the fact
that the patients in relation to the reported incidents arrived from other
hospitals and were being washed, while others were washed in Aleppo
Military Hospital”.

(n)

One doctor from Aleppo University Hospital recalled being the first to
come in contact with the first casualties arriving into the hospital.
Approximately 30 minutes later, the doctor began experiencing a burning
(heat) sensation in the hands and itchiness in the face. The doctor
immediately requested that all casualties be washed and undressed before
receiving any treatment.

25/100

S/2018/732

8.29

26/100

(o)

During interviews with the medical staff involved in treating patients
coming from the three different locations, the common symptoms were
described as such: lacrimation, rhinorrhoea, tingling sensation in the nose,
burning sensation in the eyes and throat, and shortness of breath. Other
symptoms were acute cough, headache, tightness of chest with dyspnoea,
vomiting, numbness in the limbs and in some cases skin irritation. The
casualties predominantly had mild symptoms, some were moderate, but
none appeared to be life-threating. No fatalities were reported in relation
to the incident.

(p)

In the hospitals, medical tests and examinations were performed on the
casualties. These included chest X-Rays, oxygen saturation, lung fields
auscultation, and blood tests (electrolytes, urea, creatinine, and AChE).
The overall results of all these tests appeared to be within normal values.
Some patients had mild infiltration but this was assessed by the medical
staff interviewed by the FFM to be due to smoking. Two patients had
elevated urea and creatinine, but this returned to the normal range later on.

(q)

In most cases, the treatment was described as being “conservative”,
focusing on treating the symptoms. Intravenous access was gained for all
patients. Intravenous fluids, corticosteroids, and salbutamol inhalers were
administered. Oxygen levels were also monitored. Some patients were
described as having low blood oxygen saturation (SPO 2) levels. Some had
“wheezing in the lungs upon auscultation”, while one doctor mentioned
that they were able to hear the wheezing externally. Oxygen treatment was
used for respiratory support. Some patients were prescribed broadspectrum antibiotics. The aforementioned relevant specialist mentioned
that atropine injections were administered at Al-Razi Hospital.

(r)

Most patients were discharged within one or two days, others stayed from
three to five days, while the longest hospital stay was ten days. Most of the
patients did not come back for follow-up and were discharged in good
health. A few patients returned to the hospital after being discharged,
complaining of dyspnoea and some neurological symptoms.

(s)

The aforementioned relevant specialist also stated that the substance that
might have caused the symptoms was not investigated due to the absence
of a toxicology laboratory in Aleppo. Although this specialist made an
assessment regarding this incident, a written report was not produced
because there were no fatalities linked to the reported incident. He added
that some clothing was collected from the patients by hospital
administration and the police. Furthermore, he indicated that the police
took soil samples from the area of the incident. No clarification regarding
the fate of these samples had been received at the time this report was
drafted.

Witness testimonies were also used to identify location data. During interviews
witnesses were encouraged to explain their surroundings and events leading up to the
18-12289

S/2018/732

incident, as well as events immediately following it. This information was used to
geolocate the witnesses, other groups described by the witnesses, and other key
locations referred to. Open-source research was used to verify events where possible,
such as the location of the front line on a particular date, and other key events referred
to by witnesses. The descriptions of annotations marked on the map shown below are
the following:

18-12289

(a)

location information provided by the witness, annotated in blue, was
verified using multiple open sources;

(b)

location information for the witness and group, annotated in yellow, is
based purely on witness testimony;

(c)

location information for the witnesses and group, annotated in green, was
obtained from testimonies, a video, and open sources; and

(d)

the front line information was obtained from multiple witness testimonies
as well as open sources.

27/100

S/2018/732

28/100

Figure 1
The neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah, including Dahiyat al-Assad, and the 1070 and 3000 Apartments Projects in
the city of Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, Syrian Arab Republic

18-12289

S/2018/732

Environmental samples and analyses
8.30

The seven environmental samples and two blank samples created by the FFM team,
and transported to the OPCW Laboratory during the second deployment, were
analysed. The scope of analysis included scheduled chemicals, precursors, and
degradation products. The results of the analyses did not show the presence of such
chemicals in the samples. The report of the laboratory analysis of these samples can be
found in Annex 7.

Biomedical samples and analyses
8.31

During its third deployment, the FFM was made aware of the existence and given
access to 37 biomedical samples in relation to the incident.

8.32

Blood samples were taken from individuals connected to the reported incident by the
medical staff of the relevant medical facilities. They were given to the Technical
Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and were transported to the
SSRC in Barzi. There, the blood samples were separated into 17 blood cell and 20
serum portions. They were also analysed to determine AChE level. The results of the
analyses were provided to the team as described in subparagraph 8.24 (b).

8.33

Due to their limited quantity, it was agreed that the samples would not be split while
the team secured and packaged them for transportation. The FFM team took custody
and transported the biomedical samples back to the OPCW Laboratory during the
fourth deployment. Based on the results of the laboratory analyses of the environmental
samples in connection to the same reported incident, the biomedical samples were not
analysed, as described in paragraph 8.21.

Analysis of a technical exploitation and weapon assessment
8.34

18-12289

During its first deployment, the FFM was able to conduct a thorough technical
weapon exploitation at the SSRC in Barzi on an unexploded munition collected
by a group of specialists from the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. During
the preliminary screening of the munition, a lightweight chemical detector (LCD
3.3) did not indicate the presence of any chemical warfare agent. X-ray images
taken by the FFM displayed a conventional fragmentation internal design,
including a solid fill in the head section of the munition. At the end of the
technical exploitation, the FFM concluded that the munition was a mortar and
was not indicative of a chemical weapon design or fill. Therefore, no further
actions were taken. The full technical weapons exploitation report can be found
in Annex 9.

29/100

S/2018/732

Analysis of the reported incident in Karm Al-Tarrab of 13 November 2016
Analysis of medical information and assessment of patient symptoms
8.35

30/100

During its deployments, the FFM received the following medical information from the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic:
(a)

Hospital reports from Aleppo University Hospital and Aleppo Military
Hospital. The medical report of Aleppo University Hospital confirmed that
a large number of SAA personnel were affected by “toxic chemical gases”.
The medical report provided by Aleppo Military Hospital stated that on the
date of the reported incident, their emergency department received 27
casualties “with cases of suffocation following the inhalation of a toxic
gas”. The reported signs and symptoms from the hospitals were similar and
consistent, as follows: a burning sensation in the eyes, lacrimation,
dyspnoea, tightness in the chest, fatigue, headache, dizziness, weakness in
the limbs, nausea, and vomiting or retching. In Aleppo Military Hospital,
the following symptoms were also reported: loss of consciousness,
coughing and bradycardia. With regard to the treatment of the casualties,
the report of Aleppo University Hospital mentions that the patients were
washed, given oxygen, IV fluids and broad-spectrum antibiotics. According
to the report of Aleppo Military Hospital, the conditions of the patients
ranged from mild to medium, with the exception of four patients who
needed further follow-up and monitoring. Both hospitals confirmed that
there were no fatalities associated with this incident. The information
contained in the reports of the two hospitals is consistent with the interview
testimonies and the medical records in relation to the reported incident.

(b)

During the second and fifth deployments, the FFM received several
documents containing results of laboratory analyses of AChE level in blood
samples of individuals connected to the reported incident. The results
showed “normal AChE activity”.

(c)

List containing the names of the patients treated in the emergency
departments in multiple hospitals, and their signs and symptoms. The team
identified and, during the first and the fifth deployments, conducted
interviews with five casualties. Similarly, the team identified and
interviewed five key medical personnel.

(d)

Twenty-five medical records of SAA personnel linked to the reported
incident were provided to the FFM, all of them from Aleppo Military
Hospital. The team made their photocopies in electronic versions and
returned the original medical records. Several entries in the medical records
are illegible, making the team unable to undertake a comprehensive
comparison. Clarification of these entries was sought from medical staff
during interviews, without success.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Analysis and assessment of incident reports
8.36

During its deployments, the FFM received the following documents:
(a)

18-12289

An incident report from the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic,
including a description of the incident in the area of Karm al-Tarrab and
Google Earth® screenshot images showing the location of the reported
incident, as well as the coordinates of the impact location. The report
describes that the incident occurred on 13 November 2016 where “a number
of soldiers from the Syrian Arab Armed Forces attempted to advance in the
East of Aleppo (Karm al-Tarrab area), close to Al-Nayrab Airport” and who
“were exposed to toxic gases coming from armed terrorist groups” causing
their symptoms. The Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic, consisting of three individuals, was able to visit Aleppo “on
14 October 2016.” The Committee visited the hospital to which casualties
were taken, interviewed the hospital director, medical staff and patients
connected to the reported incident. The Committee also visited areas close
to the location of the incident. However, they were unable to visit the exact
location of the reported incident, because of ongoing military activities at
the time. The Committee received some samples from the location of the
incident, including clothing belonging to the casualties, as well as swab
samples connected to respiratory masks and filters used during the rescue
of casualties. The Committee performed a fast chemical screening on some
clothing samples belonging to the casualties. The result of the screening was
not described in the report. Furthermore, the report states that samples were
handed over to the SSRC in Barzi for laboratory analyses. The team
assessed the incident report to get an overview of the sequence of events
which formed the initial narrative of the reported incident. The incident
report stated that the incident happened on 13 November 2016 and that the
Technical Committee was able to visit Aleppo to investigate the incident
that took place in Karm al-Tarrab “on 14 October 2016”. This issue was
discussed with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, which confirmed
that the date of the reported incident was 13 November 2016. On 4 April
2018, the FFM received an update report on the incident rectifying the date
of the visit of the Technical Committee as 14 November 2016. The team
also identified other issues that needed to be clarified, such as the exact
location of the incident, the ongoing activities on the date of the incident,
the equipment used for the fast chemical screening, and the fate of the
samples. They were discussed during the meetings held between the FFM
and the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic throughout the deployments,
as well as through correspondence. The team was able to identify the
location of the reported incident through videos and Google Earth®
screenshot images provided by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic.
The ongoing activities on the date of the reported incident were clarified by
cross-checking the information included in the relevant incident report with
the interviews conducted with individuals identified by the team as
connected with the incident. Furthermore, the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic stated that the same equipment mentioned in the case of the
31/100

S/2018/732

reported incident in Al-Hamadaniyah was used for the fast chemical
screening.
(b)

A list of names of doctors who were on duty on the date of the reported
incident in Martyr Abdel Wahab Agha Hospital. This list was used to
establish a link between the medical staff who were involved in the
treatment of the casualties in connection to the reported incident. Given that
the nature of the working hours of the medical staff is driven by operational
needs, not all medical personnel involved in the treatment of the casualties
in connection to the reported incident were mentioned on the list. The list
includes only treating physicians. A doctor whose name is mentioned on
this list stated during an interview that Martyr Abdel Wahab Agha Hospital
is also known as the “Aleppo Military Hospital”. This information was
confirmed throughout other interviews and by reviewing medical records.

(c)

The FFM was provided with Google Earth® screenshot images, including
a description of areas of the reported incident. The team used them to
identify the geographical location of the reported incident and significant
features and objects in the area. These features and objects were used during
the interview process to establish a link between the positions of
interviewees during the reported incident.

8.37

During the third deployment, the team received a comparative study compiled by a
group of experts from the Technical Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic. This study compared the effects of riot control agents to the effects of “toxic
gases” used by terrorist groups in several reported incidents, including Karm al-Tarrab.
It also contained references to the names and codes of chemicals mentioned by the
authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic. The document states that soldiers who were
affected during the reported incidents had displayed the same symptoms that occur
after exposure to riot control agents. The FFM assessed the content of the document
and concluded that it is largely based on open-source literature. In some cases the
symptoms exhibited by the casualties corresponded with the effects described in the
document.

8.38

During its first deployment, the FFM team was provided with a document listing
several environmental samples, two of which were linked to the reported incident in
Karm al-Tarrab. During the first and third deployments, the authorities of the Syrian
Arab Republic provided access to all environmental samples stored at the SSRC in
Barzi. However, the team was unable to take custody of the two aforementioned
samples. This issue was discussed with the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic
during the fifth deployment conducted by the FFM. No clarification had been received
at the time this report was drafted.

Analysis and assessment of electronic data
8.39

32/100

During its deployments, the FFM received the following electronic data:

18-12289

S/2018/732

18-12289

(a)

Three videos. The first video footage shows what appears to be a hospital
or an area being used as a hospital, as several items of medical furniture,
equipment, supplies, and paraphernalia, along with people wearing
hospital-type scrubs. The person filming moves through a corridor area and
into two separate rooms accessed from the corridor. The rest of the people
in the video appear to be military personnel, as most are dressed in military
fatigues and several carry small arms. Some of the military personnel are
treated as patients, while others appear unaffected. Of those who appear to
be patients, six are initially lying supine on the floor in the corridor and
one is lying on the floor in one of the rooms. At the beginning of the video,
five are on individual examination beds, two situated in the corridor, two
in a room with the aforementioned person on the floor, and one in the
second room. During the video, one of the patients from the corridor floor
is carried, conscious, into the second room and placed onto another empty
examination bed. Retching can be heard. All the people in the video are
male, with the identifiable patients probably in their twenties or thirties.
From this video, the FFM was unable to confidently assess the symptoms
that the casualties were displaying. One patient appears to have abnormal
breathing and another is treated with a nebuliser mask. Some of these
symptoms were mentioned by interviewees and recorded in medical
information provided to the team. After conducting a metadata analysis of
the video, the FFM was unable to identify the time, date, or location. None
of the casualties interviewed by the FFM in relation to the reported incident
recalled a similar event as that shown in the video. The team was unable to
interview any further witnesses connected to the reported incident.

(b)

The second video contains footage of soldiers exiting an area of ongoing
military activities. One of them is wearing a gas mask; others are covering
their faces with pieces of cloth. None appear to be experiencing any severe
clinical symptoms, while some are coughing and retching. The soldiers
move unaided, apart from one who is seen being assisted. Later in the
video, two soldiers are seen being assisted onto the back of a pickup truck
where one soldier is already lying down. At the end of the video, the pickup
truck can be seen driving away. After conducting a geolocation analysis,
the FFM was able to accurately identify the location and confirm that it is
the same location as referred to in witness testimonies and incident reports.
However, neither the date nor the time could be verified.

(c)

The third video is a news report from Russia Today Arabic, stating that
“besieged armed groups fired devices containing toxic gases in eastern
neighbourhoods” of Aleppo. The news report also interviews a civilian who
states that “he smelled an odour”, adding that his family and himself
experienced symptoms such as “tearing of the eyes”. After conducting a
geolocation analysis, the FFM was able to accurately identify the location
and confirm that it is the same location as the video in subparagraph 8.39
(b).

(d)

Four photographs depicting people dressed in military fatigues.
33/100

S/2018/732

(i)

Photograph one depicts one male seated on the ground propped/leaning
against a tiled wall. The image is blurred and offers little further
opportunity for assessment.

(ii)

Photograph two depicts two males on the ground. The one in the centre
frame is seated cross-legged, with his back against a tiled wall, near a
door or window. He has his eyes closed and appears to have a venous
cannula in the left cubital fosse area. To his right in the left of the
photograph is a male lying supine, next to the tiled wall, with his legs
crossed. There is the partial image of someone else’s hand and leg on
the right edge of the photograph. The image offers little further
opportunity for assessment.

(iii)

Photograph three appears to depict the same scene as photograph two
but from a wider angle, offering greater clarity. The two males are
positioned as previously and the third person on the right is shown in
full. The person is in almost a right lateral, recumbent position
obscuring the face. Other people standing are also visible. There appear
to be several wet patches on the tiled floor and some form of plastic
container can be partially seen. The image offers little further
opportunity for assessment.

(iv)

Photograph four depicts two males on the ground seated against a tiled
wall. Each has a weapon propped against the wall next to them. The one
in the foreground has a cloth in his left hand held against his face. The
male to the left of the photograph in the background has his eyes closed.
There is military webbing or ammunition pouches between them. There
are several wet patches on the concrete floor. The image offers little
further opportunity for assessment.

Analysis and assessment of interviews
8.40

Over the course of five deployments, the FFM conducted 10 interviews with
casualties and medical personnel linked to the incident.

8.41

The prevailing narrative established by interviews with casualties in relation to
the aforementioned incident is as follows:

34/100

(a)

The interviewees described that, some 10 to 15 days before the reported
incident, members of AOGs were “taunting” SAA soldiers that a largescale attack was imminent.

(b)

The incident is described to have taken place in the area of Karm Al–Tarrab
in the Al-Nayrab neighbourhood. According to the testimonies of the
interviewees, on 13 October 2016 at around 14:00 to 15:30 a group of 20
to 30 SAA personnel were instructed to break into a ground floor building
containing two rooms on the confrontation line. The position of AOGs was
described as 3 to 4 metres away from that building and 50 to 70 metres

18-12289

S/2018/732

away from the “Al-Barrad” military point, which was described as a large
two-storey building.

18-12289

(c)

A group of 15 SAA personnel entered “Al-Barrad”, while a subgroup of
seven SAA personnel entered the ground floor building. The first group
was tasked with monitoring the location of the subgroup. Members of the
AOGs were described as wearing “face masks with filters”. Fighting broke
out between the SAA and AOGs, and included the use of mortars, tanks,
rockets and “gas cylinders”.

(d)

At around 15:30, a “device was thrown by hand” towards SAA personnel
and landed inside one of the rooms where the subgroup was located. Upon
landing, the device did not detonate, but “spun around releasing a whiteto-yellow smoke”. Neither the shape nor the size of the device were
mentioned by any interviewee. The released smell was described as
nauseating, disgusting, very bad and similar to the smell of cleaning
products. One interviewee said that the smell was similar to the smell of a
cleaning product branded as “Eau de Javel”, which is a bleach solution
used for disinfection.

(e)

The backup team from “Al-Barrad” was called via radio and the casualties
were evacuated to a nearby evacuation point. Some witnesses involved in
the rescue operation said that they collapsed and had to be themselves
rescued and evacuated. Some SAA personnel exposed to the smoke, with
or without respiratory protection, collapsed. One of the interviewees
reported that he had a gas mask handy but was too weak to get it on when
he began feeling a burning sensation. The casualties who were positioned
in “Al-Barrad” were affected as well, “because the wind was blowing in
their direction”.

(f)

Casualties were transported to the airport dispensary, where first aid was
provided and minor cases were treated, including administration of IV fluid
and intramuscular injections. Twenty-eight casualties described as being in
the severest condition were, later on, transferred to the Aleppo Military
Hospital for treatment.

(g)

As a result of the described events, SAA personnel had to retreat. Several
civilians who were in the area at that time, some as close as 100 to 200
metres of the reported incident, were also affected and seen at the Aleppo
Military Hospital.

(h)

Symptoms that were common among SAA personnel included: tearing
eyes, blurred vision, a burning sensation in the throat, fatigue, weakness in
the lower limbs, itchiness, twitching, difficulty breathing, suffocation,
frothing at the mouth, chest pains, vomiting, and loss of consciousness.

(i)

Some casualties received at the Aleppo Military Hospitals were undressed,
washed with soap and water, and then dressed in hospital gowns. The
35/100

S/2018/732

clothes of some casualties were collected and labelled with the name of
their names. The interviewees were unsure of the whereabouts of their
clothing. No clarification had been received at the time this report was
drafted.

8.42

36/100

(j)

In most cases, the treatment was described as conservative with a focus on
treating the symptoms. Intravenous access was gained for all patients. IV
fluids and salbutamol inhalers were administered. Oxygen levels were also
monitored and supplemental oxygen was provided, as needed. Casualties
reported that they had received injections but were uncertain of their
nature. Moreover, blood samples were taken and X-rays conducted.

(k)

Casualties stayed in the hospital between one to five days. After being
discharged, casualties reporting persistent shortness of breath were given
nebulizers to continue their course of treatment. Furthermore, in some
cases post-discharge symptoms included sore throat, fatigue, irritation in
the throat, and night coughing. Some casualties were discharged back to
their duty stations and others were given seven to twelve days for R&R.

(l)

Interviewees also stated that approximately 10 days after the reported
incident, SAA personnel, some of whom had been involved in the reported
incident, returned to the building. Their aim was to “gather evidence of this
gas attack”, including environmental samples from the area. IEDs in the
building and snipers in the area resulted in several casualties and fatalities.
Therefore, no samples were collected. Nevertheless, SAA personnel were
able to see remnants of a “device” and its landing point. The latter was
described as covered with yellowish dust. They also mentioned the
presence of a lingering bad and unpleasant smell, similar to what they
experienced during the reported incident. The building collapsed at a later
date, which was reported to be somewhere around the end of November
2016.

Witness testimonies were also used to identify location data. During interviews,
witnesses were encouraged to explain their surroundings and the events leading
up to the incident, as well as the events immediately following it. This
information was used to geolocate the witnesses, other groups described by the
witnesses, and other key locations referred to. Open-source information proved
insufficient to provide additional verification of the information.

18-12289

18-12289

Figure 2
Karm al-Tarrab in the city of Aleppo, Aleppo Governorate, Syrian Arab Republic

S/2018/732

37/100

S/2018/732

Environmental samples and analysis
8.43

The FFM did not receive any environmental samples related to the reported incident in
Karm al-Tarrab.

Biomedical samples and analyses
8.44

During its third deployment, the FFM was made aware of the existence of and given
access to nine biomedical samples in relation to the reported incident.

8.45

Blood samples were taken from individuals connected to the reported incident by the
medical staff of the relevant medical facilities. They were given to the Technical
Committee of the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic and were transported to the
SSRC in Barzi. There, the blood samples were separated into six blood cell and three
serum portions. They were also analysed to determine AChE level. The results of the
analyses were provided to the team, as described in subparagraph 8.35 (b).

8.46

Due to their limited quantity, it was agreed that the samples would not be split while
the team secured and packaged them for transportation. The FFM transported the
biomedical samples back to the OPCW Laboratory during the fourth deployment. As
described in paragraph 8.21, biomedical samples were not analysed.

38/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

9.

CONCLUSIONS

9.1

During the course of five deployments and throughout the post-deployment activities,
the FFM gathered, reviewed, and analysed all available information regarding incidents
of alleged use of toxic chemicals as weapons, as reported in notes verbales No. 109
(dated 17 November 2016) containing correspondence No. 259 (dated 16 November
2016) and No. 113 (dated 29 November 2016) containing correspondence No. 9551
(dated 29 November 2016) received from the Syrian Arab Republic.

9.2

The FFM examined and collected copies of documentation and records provided by
the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic, as well as by the Russian Federation. These
included written incident and technical reports, medical information, and electronic
data relevant to the reported incidents.

9.3

In order to establish a prevailing narrative pertaining to the reported incidents, the FFM
conducted interviews with persons connected with the reported incidents and identified
by the team upon review of the aforementioned documentation. These persons included
eyewitnesses of the reported incidents, those who underwent treatment, and treating
medical personnel.

9.4

The authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic provided access to environmental and
biomedical samples pertinent to the reported incidents. The FFM conducted an
examination of the environmental samples in accordance with approved OPCW
procedures and using approved equipment, to make a preliminary assessment to
identify the method of transportation and the scope of laboratory analysis of these
samples.

9.5

The environmental and biomedical samples were packaged and transported to the
OPCW Laboratory for analysis. When applicable, the team provided the authorities of
the Syrian Arab Republic with a duplicate or a portion of the samples.

9.6

The environmental samples were analysed at the OPCW Laboratory to confirm the
absence or presence of scheduled chemicals. Biomedical samples were not analysed by
the OPCW Laboratory.

9.7

The authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic also provided access to an unexploded
munition reported to have been collected in Karm al-Tarrab. The team conducted a
technical exploitation of this munition.

9.8

The FFM was unable to visit the locations of both incidents to conduct site exploitation,
including environmental sample collection. Furthermore, the FFM received no
substantial information or evidence related to the origin of the smoke.

9.9

With regard to the incident that took place in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah,
the FFM reviewed, assessed, and analysed all testimonies and documentation. The
FFM found consistency in the statements of the casualties and treating medical staff,
all of whom described similar events and symptoms. The narrative established by the
team through interviews is consistent with the information included in the incident

18-12289

39/100

S/2018/732

report. Although roughly 60 casualties from the same location, including civilians,
presented with similar signs and symptoms at the same time, none suffered any
long-term debilitating effects and no fatalities occurred. Neither the general clinical
presentation of those affected nor the visual and olfactory description of the smoke
clearly indicated any specific chemical. Neither the results of the laboratory analyses
of the environmental samples, nor the results of the laboratory analyses of the
biomedical samples conducted by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic,
identified the presence of any scheduled chemicals.
9.10

In relation to the incident that took place in the area of Karm al-Tarrab, the FFM also
reviewed, assessed, and analysed all testimonies and documentation. The statements of
the casualties and treating medical staff were consistent, given that similar events and
symptoms were described. Furthermore, the information included in the incident report
is similar to the narrative established by the team. Although 40 casualties from the same
location presented with similar signs and symptoms at the same time, none suffered
any long-term debilitating effects and no fatalities occurred. Neither the general clinical
presentation of those affected, nor the visual and olfactory description of the smoke
clearly indicated any specific chemical. The results of the laboratory analyses of the
biomedical samples conducted by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic did not
identify the presence of any scheduled chemicals.

9.11

On the basis of the information received and analysed, the prevailing narrative of the
interviews, and the results of the laboratory analyses, the FFM cannot confidently
determine whether or not a specific chemical was used as a weapon in the incidents
that took place in the neighbourhood of Al-Hamadaniyah on 30 October 2016 and in
the area of Karm al-Tarrab on 13 November 2016. The FFM is of the view that the
persons affected in the reported incident may, in some instances, have been exposed to
some type of non-persistent, irritating substance.

40/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

10.

SIGNATURE
This report of the Fact-Finding Mission was submitted on 2 July 2018 in English.

[Signed]
Kalman Kallo
Mission Leader

18-12289

41/100

S/2018/732

Annex 1
FACT-FINDING MISSION MANDATED AIMS AND
OPERATIONAL INSTRUCTIONS
MANDATED AIMS
1.1

Gather facts regarding the incident of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon, as
detailed in notes verbales No. 109 (dated 17 November 2016), No. 113 (dated
29 November 2016), and No. 21 (dated 7 March 2018) received from the Syrian Arab
Republic, mindful that the task of the FFM does not include the question of attributing
responsibility for the alleged use.

1.2

Examine, and if deemed necessary by the FFM team, take samples that are in the
possession of the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic which were reported to
have been taken from the incident sites.

1.3

If applicable, and subject of approval of the Director-General, conduct a visit to the
affected areas of the alleged use of toxic chemicals and collect environmental samples
connected to the incident sites.

1.4

Report to the Director-General upon conclusion of FFM activities.

OPERATIONAL INSTRUCTIONS
1.5

42/100

To meet the above requirements, the FFM team should perform, inter alia, the
following activities:
(a)

review and analyse all available information pertaining to the reported
incident of alleged use of toxic chemicals a weapon;

(b)

collect testimonies from persons alleged to have been affected by the use
of toxic chemicals as a weapon, including those who underwent treatment,
eyewitnesses of the alleged use of toxic chemicals, medical personnel, and
other persons who had treated or come into contact with persons who may
have been affected by the alleged use of toxic chemicals;

(c)

examine and, if possible, collect copies of the hospital records, including
patient registers, treatment records, and any other relevant records, as
deemed necessary;

(d)

examine and, if possible, collect copies of any other documentation and
records deemed necessary;

(e)

take photographs and examine and, if possible, collect copies of video and
telephone records;
18-12289

S/2018/732

18-12289

(f)

undertake, as necessary, the examination of samples using approved
OPCW methods and equipment, to make a preliminary determination of
the chemical agent. Provide the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic
with a duplicate or portion of each sample;

(g)

record the handover of samples and ensure that they are treated in
accordance with the established procedures, including the provisions on
chain of custody, as applicable;

(h)

undertake, as necessary, non-destructive evaluation of munitions alleged to
have been used during incidents under investigation using approved OPCW
methods, to determine the internal configuration of the items prior to
sampling activities;

(i)

if feasible, take samples of the fill material to confirm presence or absence
of chemical agent fill in the munitions alleged to have been used during the
incidents under investigation. Provide the Government of the Syrian Arab
Republic with a duplicate or portion of each sample; and

(j)

examine available evidence on the origin of the munitions, including
historical evidence as available, and obtain additional information to
support a determination of the origin of the items. This may include the
identification of recognisable labels, markings, design features of the
munitions, and a review of on-site non-destructive evaluation
measurements.

43/100

S/2018/732

Annex 2
LIST OF CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE AUTHORITIES OF THE
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
Name

DCN

Date

Remarks

SAR NV 109

#0180189

21/11/2016 Information regarding toxic gas attacks

SAR NV 113

#0182081

29/11/2016 Information regarding chemical weapons

Letter to SAR,
L/ODG/207468/16

NA

07/12/2016 Main body deployment

SAR NV 26

#0125679

Information containing footage from area 1070 –
18/04/2017 3000 Apartments Projects regarding use of chlorine
gas

NV to SAR,
NV/ODG/212724/17

NA

17/11/2017 Main body deployment

SAR NV 124

*0167003

22/11/2017 FFM team deployment

NV to SAR
NV/ODG/213949/18

NA

22/02/2018 Request to provide more information

SAR NV 21

D020066

Information in relation to incidents in 1070-3000
07/03/2018 Apartments Projects and Karm al-Tarrab, including
containing names of people to be interviewed,

NV to SAR,
NV/ODG/214355/18

NA

26/03/2018 Main body deployment

44/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 3
LIST OF INFORMATION RECEIVED FROM OR HANDED OVER TO THE
AUTHORITIES OF THE SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC DURING DEPLOYMENTS
First Deployment
No.

DCM

Description

Date Received/Handed Over

1

6666/026 70 Medical records

15/12/2016

Received

2

6666/027 List of samples held in the SSRC in Barzi (Arabic)

15/12/2016

Received

3

6666/029 SD card containing sampling photos

16/12/2016

Handed over

4

6666/030 List of samples secured in the SSRC in Barzi
17/12/2016
Document on the use of toxic gases by AOG in Aleppo
6666/036
17/12/2016
Karm al-Tarrab
Document on the use of toxic gases by AOG in Aleppo
6666/037
17/12/2016
Al-Hamadaniyah
Second Deployment

Handed over

5
6

No.

Received

10/01/2017

Handed over

2

Description
SD card containing the copies of samples recovery
6666/045
photos
6666/041 List of seals on samples for off-site analysis

10/01/2017

Handed over

3

6597/038 List of interviewees

12/10/2016

Handed over

4

6597/043 20 medical records - original

16/10/2016

Received

5

6597/044 Copy of 1 medical record

16/10/2016

Received

6

6597/046 List of seals - samples in joint custody

17/10/2016

Handed over

1

DCM

Received

Date Received/Handed Over

Third Deployment
No.

DCM

Description

Date Received/Handed Over

1

7037/032 Memo to SAR NA : Request for information

09/12/2017

Handed over

2

7037/047 Memo to SAR NA: Update

12/12/2017

Handed over

3

7037/049 AChE – result of analyses 30/10/2016

13/12/2017

Received

4

7037/050 Memo to SAR NA: Request for information

14/12/2017

Handed over

5

Handed over

8

7037/051 Memo to SAR NA: Request for information
14/12/2017
List of seals applied on the blood samples in the SSRC
7037/056
16/12/2017
Barzi
1 SD Card – photos of securing samples in the SSRC
7037/058
16/12/2017
Barzi
7037/059 AChE – result of analyses 03/11/2016
16/12/2017

9

7037/060 AChE – result of analyses 03/11/2016

16/12/2017

Received

10

7037/061 Reference to names and codes of chemicals
16/12/2017
Scientific Comparative study on the effects of toxic
7037/062 gases used by AOGs in several incidents including Al- 16/12/2017
Hamadaniyah and Karm al-Tarrab
7037/063 AChE – result of analyses 20/11/2016
16/12/2017

Received

6
7

11
12

18-12289

Received

Received
Received

45/100

S/2018/732

Fourth Deployment
No.
1
2
3
4
5

DCM

Description

Date Received/Handed Over

7061/010 Memo to SAR NA: Request for meeting and visits
03/01/2018
1 SD Card – photos of samples repacking and recovery
7061/014
11/01/2018
in the SSRC Barzi
7061/015 List of seals on blood samples for off-site analysis
11/01/2018
List of seals on environmental samples for off-site
7061/016
11/01/2018
analysis
7061/071 List of samples with AChE results of analyses
11/01/2018

Handed over
Handed over
Handed over
Handed over
Received

Fifth Deployment
No.

DCM

Description

Date Received/Handed Over

1

7153/018 Memo to SAR NA: Request for meeting

2

7153/030 Package about Karm al-Tarrab incident on 13/11/2016 04/04/2018
Package about Al-Hamadaniyah, 1070-3000
7153/031 Apartments Projects, Academy, Manian incident on
04/04/2018
30/10/2016

3

46/100

27/03/2018

Handed over
Received
Received

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 4
LIST OF CORRESPONDENCE WITH THE AUTHORITIES OF THE
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Name
Data Laboratory Analysis

18-12289

DCN

Date

6666/069

30/03/17

Info
Data of environmental samples analysis
updated into OPCW Proficiency Testing
format

47/100

S/2018/732

Annex 5
LIST OF SAMPLES TRANSPORTED FOR OFF-SITE ANALYSIS
Second Deployment – Environmental Samples
No.

48/100

Sample Code

Description

Incident place

10

10BLS

Organic sample (DCM) with soil SAR

11

11SLS

Mud mixed with DCM - SAR

12

12SLS

Soil from asphalt with DCM - SAR

13

13SLS

14

14SDS

15

15WPS

Dry soil from apartment - SAR
Clothing from soldier room - SAR DCM
extract
Wipe sample in DCM - SAR

16

16SLS

Dry soil from building column - SAR

23.

23WPB

24.

24SDB

No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Fourth Deployment – Environmental Samples
Sample Code
Description
Incident Place
01SDS
Clothing belonged to 3 persons
Al-Hamadaniyah
02SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
03SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
04SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
05SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
06SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
07SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah
08SDS
Clothing – uniform of one person
Al-Hamadaniyah

No.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Fourth Deployment – Biomedical Samples
Sample Code
ID
Description
01BDS
LFB
Blood with EDTA
02BDS
01F
Blood with EDTA
03BDS
LM0
Blood with EDTA
04BDS
LFB
Blood with Heparin
05BDS
01F
Blood with Heparin
06BDS
LM0
Blood with Heparin
07SRS
LFB
Serum
09SRS
01F
Serum
08SRS
LM0
Serum
10BDS
R0J
Blood with EDTA
11BDS
Z0F
Blood with EDTA
12BDS
Q5K
Blood with EDTA
13BDS
R2M
Blood with EDTA
14BDS
K32
Blood with EDTA
15DBS
T2F
Blood with EDTA
16BDS
F4B
Blood with EDTA

DCM solution used by SAR for wipes,
swab and liquid samples
DCM blank for 14SDS 15 WPS and 21
WPS

Al-Hamadaniyah

*OPCW Blank

Incident Place
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Karm al-Tarrab
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
18-12289

S/2018/732

No.
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46

18-12289

Sample Code
17BDS
18BDS
19BDS
20BDS
21BDS
22BDS
23BDS
24BDS
25BDS
26BDS
27SRS
28SRS
29SRS
30SRS
31SRS
32SRS
33SRS
34SRS
35SRS
36SRS
37SRS
38SRS
39SRS
40SRS
41SRS
42SRS
43SRS
44SRS
45SRS
46SRS

Fourth Deployment – Biomedical Samples
ID
Description
AB0
Blood with EDTA
SN4
Blood with EDTA
TQ3
Blood with EDTA
4DB
Blood with EDTA
EM3
Blood with EDTA
R03
Blood with EDTA
JC1
Blood with EDTA
HT1
Blood with EDTA
N52
Blood with EDTA
SA1
Blood with EDTA
TQ3
Serum
R0J
Serum
F4B
Serum
K32
Serum
HT1
Serum
JC1
Serum
Q5K
Serum
SA1
Serum
T3B
Serum
R03
Serum
KB9
Serum
SN4
Serum
4DB
Serum
Z0F
Serum
EM3
Serum
N52
Serum
AB0
Serum
R2M
Serum
SPM
Serum
T2F
Serum

Incident Place
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah
Al-Hamadaniyah

49/100

S/2018/732

Annex 6
SELECT SAMPLE PHOTOGRAPHS
Figure 3: Environmental samples provided to the FFM during its first
deployment at the SSRC in Barzi

Figure 4: Environmental samples provided to the FFM during its third
deployment at the SSRC in Barzi

50/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Figure 4: Biomedical samples repacked by the FFM during its third
deployment at the SSRC in Barzi

Figure 5: Environmental samples packed and secured under OPCW
seals and left at the SSRC in Barzi

18-12289

51/100

S/2018/732

Annex 7
REPORT ON THE ANALYSIS OF FACT-FINDING MISSION SAMPLES RELATED TO
THE ALEPPO INCIDENT, RETURNED BY TEAM BRAVO IN JANUARY 2017
10 March 2017
Hugh Gregg, Head, OPCW Laboratory
Executive Summary
The environmental samples returned by FFM team Bravo have been analysed by the OPCW
Laboratory.
The following table summarises the findings for a subset of the samples.
Incident
place

Aleppo
AlHamadaniyah

No.

Sample
Code

Description

Results

10

10BLS

Organic sample
(DCM) with soil

No findings

11

11SLS

Mud mixed with DCM

Elemental sulfur
only

12

12SLS

13

13SLS

14

14SDS

15

15WPS

16

16SLS

23

23WPB

24

24SDB

OPCW Blank

Soil from asphalt with
DCM
Dry soil from
apartment
Clothing from soldier
room - DCM extract
Wipe sample in DCM
Dry soil from building
column
DCM solution used by
SAR for wipes, swab
and liquid samples
DCM blank for
14SDS 15 WPS and
21 WPS

Fuel oil only
No findings
No findings
No findings
No findings
No findings
No findings

Narrative
The FFM team returned 26 environmental samples in connection with a number of incidents to
the OPCW Laboratory on Friday 13 January 2017.
All 26 environmental samples were analysed at the OPCW Laboratory.
All transfers of samples and materials were documented, and the chain of custody of all
samples was maintained.
The OPCW Laboratory analysed 26 samples following its standard practices. All gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry data was analysed using AMDIS and OPCW and
commercial databases.
The scope of analysis included scheduled chemicals, precursors, and degradation products, as
well as the aim to gain further understanding of the characteristics of the sample
Results
Elemental sulfur (not a scheduled chemical) was found in mud sample 11SLS and fuel oil was
found in the soil sample from asphalt 12 SLS.
Apart from the aforementioned, the results of analysis for samples related to the
Aleppo
1070 incident did not show any relevant chemicals.
52/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 8
REPORT ON THE ANALYSIS OF FACT-FINDING MISSION SAMPLES RELATED TO
THE ALEPPO INCIDENT (RETURNED BY TEAM BRAVO IN JANUARY 2017)
19 June 2018
Marc-Michael Blum, Head, OPCW Laboratory
Executive Summary
The environmental samples returned by the fourth deployment of FFM team Bravo have been
analysed by the OPCW Laboratory.
The following table summarises the findings related to environmental samples (clothing).
No.
1

Sample
Code
01SDS

2

02SDS

3

03SDS

4

04SDS

5

05SDS

6

06SDS

7

07SDS

8

08SDS

Fourth Deployment – Environmental Samples
Description
Incident Place
Clothing
belonged to 3 persons
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person
Clothing –
uniform of one person

Results

No findings
No findings
No findings
No findings
Al-Hamadaniyah
No findings
No findings
N,N-Dimethylamino ethanol
(CAS 108-01-0)
No findings

Narrative
The FFM team returned to the OPCW Laboratory eight environmental samples (clothing)
related to the incident in Al-Hamadaniyah. The OPCW Laboratory took custody of the samples
on 29 January 2018 and all eight environmental samples were analysed at the OPCW
Laboratory. All transfers of samples and materials were documented, and the chain of custody f
all samples was maintained.
The OPCW Laboratory analysed eight samples following its standard practices. All gas
chromatography/mass spectrometry data was analysed using AMDIS and OPCW and
commercial databases.
The scope of analysis included scheduled chemicals, precursors and degradation products, as
well as the aim to gain further understanding of the characteristics of the sample. A specific
focus was on (non-scheduled) riot control agents and their degradation products. Findings of
other non-scheduled irritating chemicals would have been reported as well but none were found
during the course of analysis.
Results
N,N-Dimethylaminoethanol (CAS 108-01-0) was found in sample 07SDS. This chemical is
explicitly exempted from Schedule 2.B.11. Its presence in the sample can be explained as it is
widely used in the synthesis of dyestuffs and textile auxiliaries as well as surfactants and
18-12289

53/100

S/2018/732

detergents. As no corresponding (organo)phosphorus chemicals were detected, the chemical is
not related to a V-type nerve agent.
Apart from the aforementioned, the results of analysis did not show any chemicals related to
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the scope of analysis.

54/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 9
TECHNICAL WEAPONS EXPLOITATION REPORT
Location: Barzi, Syrian Arab Republic (SSRC – Institute 6000)
Date: 16 December 2016
Time: 13:30
Nomenclature/Munition ID: suspected CW Munition
Country of Origin/Found: Recovered from Aleppo 1070 Apartments Project
Team Chain of Command:
1. FFM Team Leader
2. Technical Weapons Exploitation Team Leader
Personnel Make-up of the Team:
1. Munitions Assessment/NDE Lead
2. Munitions Assessment/NDE
3. Analytical Chemist, Sampling
4. Health and Safety Specialist, Safety and Decontamination
Equipment:
1.
Measuring Tools:
a. Tape Measure
b. Steel Callipers (inside & outside)
c. Scale
2.

Assessment Equipment:
d. RTR-4N (with XRS-3 & XRS-4 X-ray Sources)
e. Quantum UPE
f. LCD 3.3
g. Calid Paper

3.

Photography Equipment:
h. Digital Camera (2)
i. Tripod

4.

Leak, Seal, and Packaging Equipment:
j. Plaster-of-Paris
k. Large Plastic Bags

18-12289

55/100

S/2018/732

l. Duct Tape
m. Rags
5.

Decontamination:
n. Shuffle Pit Tray
o. Buckets
p. BX-24
q. Fast Act

6.

Other Equipment:
r. Sand Bags
s. Table
t. Tarpaulin (drop cloth)
u. Leather Gloves
v. Various Tools

Technical Data Checklist
1.
Complete Round
a. Model: Unknown
b. Type: Projectile
c. Calibre: 66 mm
d. Condition: Fired but failed to function as designed
e. Overall Length (with fuze): No fuze present
f. Overall Weight: ≈ 1 kg
g. Fuze Model: No fuze present, explosive fill visible
h. Fuze Type: N/A
2.

56/100

Projectile Model:
a. Overall Length (without fuze): 366 mm
b. Length (with screws protruding from base of stabiliser boom): 370 mm
c. Adapter Length (visible): No adapter present
d. Adapter Length (overall): N/A
e. Ogive Length:
i. 155 mm (to main body joint)
ii. 27 mm (to first seam)
f. Bourrelet Length: N/A
g. Number of Gas Checks: 0
h. Body Length: 155 mm
18-12289

S/2018/732

i.
j.
k.
l.

Stabiliser Boom Length (visible):
Stabiliser Boom Length (overall): 110 mm
Fin Length: 33 mm
Number of Fins: 9*
*Three screws protruding from base of fins – possibly used for electrically
static firing munition
m. Diameter at Fuze Well: 44 mm
n. Adapter Diameter (maximum): N/A
o. Adapter Thread Diameter: N/A
p. Gas Check Width: N/A
q. Body Diameter (maximum OD): 66 mm
r. Body Diameter (minimum OD): 33 mm
s. Wall Thickness: N/A
t. Stabiliser Boom Diameter (OD): 29 mm
u. Stabiliser Boom Diameter (ID): Not taken
v. Stabiliser Boom Thread Diameter: N/A
w. Number of Gas Ports: No gas ports present
x. Fin Diameter: 4 mm
y. Main Filler Cavity Depth: ≈155 mm
z. Ignition Cartridge Cavity Depth: No ignition cartridge present
aa. Number of Fuze Well Threads: 7 – 8 visible above explosive fill
bb. Number of Adapter Threads: N/A
cc. Number of Stabiliser Boom Threads: N/A
dd. Adapter Weight: N/A
ee. Booster Charge Weight: N/A
ff. Main Filler Weight: ≈ 800 grams
gg. Adapter Material: N/A
hh. Booster Charge Material: N/A
ii. Projectile Material: Plastic
jj. Main Filler Material: Solid HE fill with pre-formed fragmentation sleeve (≈ 650
ball bearings)
kk. Stabiliser Boom Material: Plastic
ll. Fin Material: Plastic
3.

18-12289

Ignition Cartridge
No Ignition charge present

57/100

S/2018/732

4.

Propellant Charge
No propellant charge present

5.

Painting and Markings
a. Adapter Markings: N/A
b. Projectile Colour; Markings:
i. Black Plastic
ii. No visible markings
c. Fin Colour; Markings:
i. Black Plastic
ii. No visible markings
d. Ignition Cartridge Colour; Markings: No ignition cartridge present
e. Primer Colour; Markings: No primer present
Additional Information
N/A

6.

Figure 8. Photograph of the unexploded
munition.

58/100

Figure 9. X-Ray image of the unexploded
munition depicting a pre-formed fragmentation
sleeve in the head section.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 10
MAPPING OF INCIDENT LOCATION IN AL-HAMADANIYAH
Geolocation from videos related to note verbale No. 26
The Situation Centre was provided with a USB storage device with two short video
clips, received by the FFM (note verbale No. 26, dated 18 April 2017) and asked to
identify where the videos were filmed from and to attempt to identify the location of a
plume that can be seen in the video referenced above. The Situation Centre was also
asked if it was possible to provide the approximate time of day the video was filmed.
The videos were checked for metadata which may have provided information
regarding the location, date or time, but there was none present.
Location
The Situation Centre studied the videos for identifying features which could be used to
geolocate the location from where the film was recorded. These identifying features
were then categorised into primary and secondary features, depending on how
critical/useful they could be in the identification process.
The primary features were then searched for on open source maps such as Google
Earth® and Bing Maps. Google Earth® provided several images spanning the date of
interest.
The water tower was the primary identifying feature due to its unusual shape, and
proximity to a long wall and multiple electricity pylons. A shadow analysis was
performed and one water tower matching the profile and in the location of interest
(LOI) was identified.
Electricity pylons (from shadow analysis), key buildings, a road layout, road type, and
roadblock were all used as secondary geolocaters to confirm the location and provide a
trajectory to identify the building from where the film was recorded.
The angle (line of sight) from the building to the yellow plume was then
calculated. Without knowing the precise height of the plume it is not possible to
provide a specific location for the plume, however an area has been identified.
A total 28 snapshots were taken from the videos and then stitched together using Hugin
Pamorama Stitcher software. The result is a panorama picture of the scene covering the
whole angle of the video from the left to right border. This image has been used in the
report to verify the locations identified in the steps above on a satellite image/map.
Colour coding was used on all features identified on all pictures to demonstrate the
geolocation factors.
Using the angles provided from the line-of-sight work carried out, the area the plume
is seen in has been located. The distance cannot be precisely calculated; however an
approximate area has been identified.
Time
Using the date of the alleged incident, the location calculated in the steps above, and
the shadows provided, the Situation Centre was able to approximate at what time of
day the video was filmed.
The primary feature used for this analysis was the building the video was filmed from.
This is a three-storey building and, as such, the approximate height of the building was
calculated.
Assuming the video was taken on 30 October 2016 (according to prior information), an
estimated time frame was calculated using suncalc.org.
All assumption and fix points were cross-referenced with various open source satellite
imagery as well as with open source aerial images.
18-12289

59/100

S/2018/732

Geolocation of the area captured in the video

These images show a comparison
between the video analysed and a
satellite image of the area,
highlighting the reference points used.
The water tower highlighted in yellow
is the primary reference point and was
used due to its unique shadow pattern.

60/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Geolocating the camera position
These images show how the camera
position was identified. The reference
points used were the water tower,
buildings and wall in front of it, and the
position of the electricity pylons.

18-12289

61/100

S/2018/732

Geolocating the plume

The location of the yellow plume seen in the film and marked in dark red i n the first image was
identified using the minaret beyond the end of the street, marked in all images in pink. Drone
footage from open source as well as satellite imagery was used. The location of the yellow plume
from the video is within the white ellipse marked above.
62/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Estimated time of recording using shadow analysis

The length and direction of the shadow of the building from where the video was filmed was
used to calculate the approximate time of day the video was recorded.

18-12289

63/100

S/2018/732

Geolocation from video connected to the 3000 Apartments Project
The Situation Centre was provided with a USB storage device containing a video
reported by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic to be connected to the incident
from the 3000 Apartments Project. The video shows the impact and bursting of a
projectile followed by a release of white smoke, and the Centre was asked to identify
where the videos were filmed from and to attempt to identify the location of a plume
that can be seen in the video reference above. The Situation Centre was also asked if it
was possible to provide an approximate time of day the video was filmed.
Location
Initial georeferencing was done using primary identifying features from a previous
analysis. The Al-Assad Military Academy and the perimeter road running south of the
academy can clearly be seen, as well as the previously described water tower with a
funnel shape.
Due to the low quality of the video, the colours in the snapshot below, taken from the
video, were altered to highlight the water tower.
Date
EXIF data shows that it was created on 30 October 2016 at 15:30.

64/100

18-12289

18-12289

Geolocating the plume

S/2018/732

65/100

S/2018/732

66/100

The yellow star,
annotated on both
the snapshot from
the video and the
satellite image,
marks the white
plume and
geolocates the
white plume
referred to in the
text of this report.
The camera
symbol shows
where the video
was filmed from,
while other
annotations
highlight
secondary features
used for
geolocation.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 11
MAPPING OF INCIDENT LOCATION IN KARM AL-TARRAB
Geolocation from video
The Situation Centre was provided with a USB storage device containing two short
video clips [Filenames:13.11.mp4 & VID-20161212-WA0011.mp4] and a number of
still images, and asked to identify where the videos were filmed from. The Situation
Centre was also asked if it was possible to extract information pertaining to the
creation time and date of the first video.
Location
The Situation Centre studied the videos for identifying features which could be used
for geolocation. These identifying features where then categorised into primary and
secondary features, depending on how critical/useful they could be in the identification
process.
The primary features were then searched for on open source maps such as Google
Earth® and Bing Maps, as well as on satellite imagery obtained from 8 and 17
November 2016.
A building with an unusual set of blue and white blocks around the edge of the roof,
and two small towers behind the soldiers as they move into the vehicle, were the
primary identifying features.
Approximately 30 snapshots were taken from the 13.11.mp4 video and then stitched
together using Hugin Pamorama Stitcher software and Microsoft Image Composite
editor. The images were stitched into three different products. A single stitch could not
be generated due to the different filming positions within the area and the zoom used
for some parts of the video. These images have been analysed and geolocated to a
satellite image of the area.
Colour coding was used to show that the two stitched images are part of the same
panorama and also to match the stitched images to the satellite image, therefore
geolocating the film.
Date
EXIF data extracted from the film shows that it was created on 15 November 2016,
whereas the still images are from 13 November 2016. The video is not from one single
cut, but has either been edited down or is made up of multiple videos. The EXIF date
for the film might relate to the date on which this video was created (edited).

18-12289

67/100

S/2018/732

Creating and verifying a panorama from the stitched images

The red, blue, and
yellow ellipses on
these images
identify points on
the images that
highlight the
overlap.

68/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Geolocating the video

These images (panorama from the video and a satellite
image of the same area) have been annotated using
matching coloured ellipses to identify matching location
features. The camera indicates the approximate position
of filming for this part of the video.
The purple circle at the bottom of the satellite image
matches a hole in the roof, as seen from the inside of the
building at 00:13 in video VID-20161212-WA0011.mp4.

18-12289

69/100

S/2018/732

These images (panorama from the video and a satellite image of the same area) have been annotated
using matching coloured ellipses to identify the building with the blue and whi te blocks around the
roof and a partially demolished building captured to the right of the panorama. The camera indicates
the approximate position of filming for this part of the video.

70/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 12
LIST OF EVIDENCE GATHERED DURING THE INTERVIEW PROCESS
First Deployment
No

ERN

DCN

1

201612141006501 10065

2

201612141006502 10065

3

201612141006301 10063

4

201612141006302 10063

5

201612141005701 10057

6

201612141005702 10057

7

201612141000801 10008

8

201612141000802 10008

9

201612151007101 10071

10

201612151007102 10071

11

201612151006401 10064

12

201612151006402 10064

13

201612151007001 10070

14

201612151007002 10070

15

201612151006901 10069

16

201612151006902 10069

17

201612151006201 10062

18

201612151006202 10062

19

201612151006701 10067

20

201612151006702 10067

21

201612151006801 10068

18-12289

Evidence Description
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording

Evidence
Collected/Received
DTG
Where
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:56
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:56
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:42
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:42
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:35
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:35
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:24
14/12/2016
Damascus
19:24
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:22
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:22
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:25
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:27
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:25
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:27
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:29
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:29
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:32
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:32
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:39
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:39
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:42

71/100

S/2018/732

No

72/100

ERN

DCN

22

201612151006802 10068

23

201612151005501 10055

24

201612151005502 10055

25

201612151005601 10056

26

201612151005602 10056

Evidence Description
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording
1 x MSD Audio
recording
1 x MSD Video
recording

Evidence
Collected/Received
DTG
Where
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:42
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:44
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:44
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:48
15/12/2016
Damascus
18:48

18-12289

S/2018/732

Fifth Deployment
No

ERN

DCN

Evidence Description

Evidence
Collected/Received
DTG
Where

1

201803311002801

10028

1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

31/03/18
16:00

Damascus

2

201803311002802

10028

1 SD Card Video
Recording

31/03/18
16:01

Damascus

3

201803311002601

10026

1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

31/03/18
17:39

Damascus

4

201803311002602

10026

1 SD Card Video
Recording

31/03/18
17:39

Damascus

5

201804011001601

10016

1 microSD Card Video
Recording w/ adapter

01/04/18
19:00

Damascus

6

201804011001602

10016

1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

01/04/18
19:00

Damascus

7

201804011001603

10016

1 page drawing

Damascus

8

201804011001401

10014

1 microSD Card Video
Recording w/ adapter

01/04/18
19:00
01/04/18
20:14

9

201804011001402

10014

1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

01/04/18
20:14

Damascus

10

201804011007201

10072

1 microSD Card Video
Recording w/ adapter

01/04/18
20:18

Damascus

11

201804011007202

10072

1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

01/04/18
20:19

Damascus

12

201804011007203

10072

01/04/18
20:20

Damascus

13

201804011006602

10066

Drawing of building (1
page), 3 maps of affected
areas (3 pages), 1 SD card
containing maps and area
S/N P425629
1 Micro SD Audio
Recording

01/04/18
20:25

Damascus

14

201804011006601

10066

1 microSD Card Video
Recording w/ adapter

01/04/18
20:26

Damascus

15

201804011006603

10066

01/04/18
20:27

Damascus

16

201804021001202

10012

5 maps of affected area (5
pages), 1SD card w/ 4
maps (S/N P093671)
1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:35

Damascus

17

201804021001201

10012

02/04/18
19:35

Damascus

18

201804021003101

10031

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:37

Damascus

18-12289

Damascus

73/100

S/2018/732

74/100

No

ERN

DCN

Evidence Description

19

201804021003103

10031

20

201804021003102

10031

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
Drawing(1) page

21

201804021002402

10024

1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

22

201804021002401

10024

23

201804021003002

10030

24

201804021003001

10030

25

201804021003001

10050

26

201804021003002

10050

27

201804021003003

10050

28

201804021001001

29

Evidence
Collected/Received
DTG
Where
02/04/18
19:38

Damascus

02/04/18
19:38
02/04/18
19:45

Damascus

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:46

Damascus

02/04/18
19:47

Damascus

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:48

Damascus

02/04/18
19:15

Damascus

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 page drawing, 3 pages
printed maps

02/04/18
19:16

Damascus

02/04/18
19:17

Damascus

10010

1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:18

Damascus

201804021001002

10010

02/04/18
19:19

Damascus

30

201804021001003

10010

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 page drawing

Damascus

31

201804021001101

10011

1 SD card containing video
recording of interview

02/04/18
19:20
02/04/18
19:21

32

201804021001102

10011

02/04/18
19:22

Damascus

33

201804021001103

10011

1 micro-SD card
containing audio recording
of interview
1 page drawing

02/04/18
19:23

Damascus

Damascus

Damascus

18-12289

S/2018/732

Enclosure II
[Original: Arabic, Chinese, English,
French, Russian and Spanish]
NOTE BY THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT
INTERIM REPORT OF THE OPCW FACT-FINDING MISSION IN SYRIA
REGARDING THE INCIDENT OF ALLEGED USE OF TOXIC CHEMICALS
AS A WEAPON IN DOUMA, SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC, ON 7 APRIL 2018

1.

INTRODUCTION

This document contains an update on the work of the OPCW Fact-Finding Mission in
Syria (FFM) regarding the alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma, the
Syrian Arab Republic, on 7 April 2018. The work of the FFM was conducted in
accordance with preambular paragraph 8 and operative paragraphs 5 and 6 of decision
EC-M-48/DEC.1 (dated 4 February 2015) and other relevant decisions of the OPCW
Executive Council (hereinafter “the Council”), as well as under the Director-General’s
authority to seek to uphold at all times the object and purpose of the Chemical Weapons
Convention, as reinforced by resolutions 2118 (2013) and 2209 (2015) of the United
Nations Security Council as applicable to this investigation. The mandates for the
investigation of the alleged incident are referenced in note verbale NV/ODG/214589/18
(dated 10 April 2018) of the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter “the Secretariat”) and
note verbale No. 38 of the Syrian Arab Republic (dated 10 April 2018).
2.

SUMMARY

2.1

On 10 April 2018, the Secretariat and the Permanent Representation of the Syrian
Arab Republic to the OPCW exchanged notes verbales regarding the urgent
dispatch of an FFM team to Damascus to gather facts regarding the incident of
alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in Douma on 7 April 2018. An
advance team was dispatched on 12 April and a follow-on team the next day, with
the full complement arriving in Damascus on 15 April 2018. A second team
deployed to a neighbouring country on 16 April to conduct further activities in
relation to the allegation.

2.2

The FFM team was not able to enter Douma for almost a week after its arrival,
owing to the high security risks to the team, which included the presence of
unexploded ordnance, explosives, and sleeper cells still suspected of being active
in Douma. On 18 April 2018, during a reconnaissance visit to two sites of interest,
the security detail was confronted by a hostile crowd and came under fire from
small arms and a hand grenade that exploded. The incident reportedly resulted in
two fatalities and one injury.

2.3

On 21 April 2018, after security concerns had been addressed, the FFM team
conducted its first visit to one of the alleged sites of interest, and it was deemed
an acceptable risk to enter Douma. The FFM team deployed four additional times

18-12289

75/100

S/2018/732

to other sites of interest over the following 10 days, which included on-site visits
to a warehouse and a facility suspected by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic of producing chemical weapons. There were no further security
incidents and the FFM team was at all times isolated from local crowds and media
personnel during the on-site visits, thereby allowing it to conduct its activities
without interference. At one location, the FFM team was unable to gain access to
some apartments at Location 2. The representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic
stated that they did not have the authority to enter the locked apartment.
2.4

The FFM activities in Douma included on-site visits to collect environmental
samples, the conduct of interviews with witnesses, and the collection of data. All
of the environmental samples were collected by the FFM team in the presence of
representatives of the Syrian Arab Republic, following the Organisation’s chainof-custody procedures. In a neighbouring country (hereinafter “Country X”),
biological and environmental samples were gathered or received by the FFM
team and interviews with witnesses, including alleged casualties, were
conducted.

2.5

The results of the analysis of the prioritised samples submitted to OPCW
designated laboratories were received by the FFM team on 22 May 2018. No
organophosphorus nerve agents or their degradation products were detected,
either in the environmental samples or in plasma samples from the alleged
casualties. Various chlorinated organic chemicals were found in samples from
Locations 2 and 4, along with residues of explosive. These results are reported in
Annex 3. Work by the team to establish the significance of these results is
ongoing.

2.6

The FFM team visited Locations 2 and 4, where it observed the presence of an
industrial gas cylinder on a top floor patio at Location 2, and the presence of a
similar cylinder lying on the bed of a top floor apartment at Location 4. Close to
the location of each cylinder there were crater-like openings in the respective
reinforced concrete roofs. Work is ongoing to assess the association of these
cylinders with the incident, the relative damage to the cylinders and the roofs,
and how the cylinders arrived at their respective locations.

2.7

Based on the equipment and chemicals observed during the two on-site visits to
the warehouse and the facility suspected by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic of producing chemical weapons, there was no indication of either
facility being involved in the production of chemical warfare agents.

2.8

The FFM team needs to continue its work to draw final conclusions regarding the
alleged incident and, to this end, the investigation is ongoing.

3.

BACKGROUND

3.1

On 7 April 2018, reports began to circulate on social media and in the press
regarding an alleged chemical attack that had taken place around 16:00 local time
on the same day in Douma, a district of eastern Ghouta in Damascus, the Syrian

76/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Arab Republic and another attack the same evening at approximately 19:30.
Casualty levels ranging from 40 to 70 deaths, including large numbers of
children, and hundreds of chemical-related injuries, were reported. There were
mixed reports of what toxic chemicals had been used, with some citing chlorine
and others citing sarin, or mixtures of chlorine and sarin. Images and videos
posted online showed casualties in a residential building as well as victims being
treated at a hospital, reportedly for chemical exposure. Photos and videos of
cylinders allegedly used in the two attacks were also posted online.
3.2

Widespread condemnation of the incident ensued, with armed opposition groups
assigning responsibility for the alleged incident to the forces of the Syrian Arab
Republic. The Syrian Arab Republic denied the attack and accused the media
wing of Jaysh al Islam of fabricating the incident to incriminate the Syrian Arab
Republic Government Forces.

3.3

On 10 April 2018, the Secretariat sent note verbale No. NV/ODG/214589/18 to
the Syrian Arab Republic expressing its intention to deploy a team to Damascus.
This correspondence coincided with note verbale No. 38 from the Permanent
Representation of the Syrian Arab Republic to the OPCW requesting that an FFM
team be dispatched urgently to visit the town of Douma to verify the information
surrounding the alleged use of toxic chemicals on 7 April 2018. On the same day,
the Permanent Representative of the Russian Federation to the OPCW submitted
a letter to the Secretariat in which he welcomed the request from the Syrian Arab
Republic and pledged to facilitate the work of the FFM.

3.4

An advance FFM team was mobilised and dispatched on 12 April 2018, with a
follow-on team dispatched the next day.

4.

AIMS AND SCOPE OF THE FACT-FINDING MISSION

4.1

The aim of the FFM, as specified in mandate FFM/050/18, was to gather facts
regarding the incident of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon on 7 April 2018
in Douma, eastern Ghouta, the Syrian Arab Republic, as reported in the media, and to
report to the Director-General upon conclusion of the FFM activities. The sites for
investigation included Damascus and any other relevant sites, subject to consultation
with the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic and in accordance with paragraphs
12 and 13 of the FFM’s terms of reference. All activities of the FFM were to be
undertaken in accordance with the relevant Secretariat procedures relating to the
conduct of inspections during contingency operations, as applicable. The operational
instructions were to:

18-12289

(a)

review and analyse all available information pertaining to the reported incident
of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon;

(b)

collect testimonies from persons alleged to have been affected by the use of
toxic chemicals as a weapon, including those who underwent treatment; from
eyewitnesses to the alleged use of toxic chemicals; from medical personnel who
had provided treatment to or came into contact with persons who may have
been affected by the alleged use of toxic chemicals;
77/100

S/2018/732

(c)

where possible and deemed necessary, carry out medical examinations,
including autopsies, and collect biomedical samples of those alleged to have
been affected;

(d)

if possible, visit hospitals and other locations as deemed relevant to the conduct
of its investigations;

(e)

examine and, if possible, collect copies of the hospital records including patient
registers, treatment records, and any other relevant records as deemed
necessary;

(f)

examine and, if possible, collect copies of any other documentation and records
as deemed necessary;

(g)

take photographs and video recordings and examine and, if possible, collect
copies of video and telephone records;

(h)

if possible and deemed necessary, physically examine and collect samples from
remnants of munitions, devices, cylinders, containers, etc. alleged to have been
used during the incident under investigation;

(i)

if possible and deemed necessary, collect environmental samples at or from the
alleged points of the incident and surrounding area; and

(j)

arrange transport for the off-site analysis of the collected samples.

4.2

On 20 April 2018, the Syrian Arab Republic submitted a note verbale to the
Secretariat formally requesting the Director-General to instruct the FFM team to
carry out a visit, within the framework of its mission, to gather facts surrounding
the allegations of 7 April 2018, to a warehouse suspected by the authorities of the
Syrian Arab Republic of storing chemicals related to the production of chemical
weapons.

4.3

Two further mandates (FFM/049/18 and FFM/051/18) were issued by the
Director-General instructing the FFM team to conduct activities in Country X in
relation to the investigation of alleged use of toxic chemicals as a weapon in the
Syrian Arab Republic on 7 April 2018.

5.

PRE-DEPLOYMENT ACTIVITIES AND TIMELINE

5.1

Following reports in the media of the alleged incident on 7 April 2018, the
Information Cell of the Secretariat immediately informed the FFM team and
initiated a search of open-source information to assess the credibility of the
allegation. The major sources comprised news media, blogs, and the websites of
various non-governmental organisations. The assessment by the Information Cell
was that the credibility of the allegation was high. Based on this information, the
Director-General initiated an on-site investigation.

5.2

An FFM team comprising nine inspectors and two interpreters was mobilised on
9 April 2018 and pre-deployment activities commenced immediately.
Preparations were made to deploy an advance team of three inspectors and an

78/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

interpreter on 12 April and a follow-on team on the next day. The team was
briefed by the Information Cell on all relevant information that had been gathered
to date.
6.

SECURITY AND ACCESS TO THE SITES OF THE ALLEGED
INCIDENTS

6.1

Given the recent military activities and the volatile situation in Douma at the time
of the FFM deployment, security and safety considerations were of paramount
importance. Considerable time and effort were invested in discussions and
planning to mitigate the inherent security risks to the FFM team and others
deploying into Douma. According to Syrian Arab Republic and Russian Military
Police representatives, there were a number of unacceptable risks to the team,
including mines and explosives that still needed to be cleared, a risk of
explosions, and sleeper cells still suspected of being active in Douma. This
assessment was shared by the representative of the United Nations Department
of Safety and Security (UNDSS). Moreover, the operation to evacuate residents
who had accepted an offer to leave Douma was ongoing, using the same road the
team would have to take.

6.2

At the outset, the formal position of the FFM team, as instructed by the
Director-General, was that security of the mission should be the responsibility of
the Syrian Arab Republic. During the initial meetings in Damascus, the FFM
team was informed by Syrian and Russian representatives that the Syrian Arab
Republic could guarantee the safety of the FFM team only if the security was
provided jointly with the Russian Military Police.

6.3

Following consultations with OPCW Headquarters it was agreed between the
Secretariat, the Syrian Arab Republic, the Russian Military Police, the United
Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS), and UNDSS representatives that
security within Douma could be provided by the Russian Military Police. This
was formalised on 16 April 2018. Consequently, it was agreed that the Syrian
Arab Republic would provide security from the hotel where the inspectors were
staying to the final checkpoint at El Wafadin before entering Douma. From that
point on, the Syrian Arab Republic would relinquish responsibility for security
to the Russian Military Police. It was also agreed that the FFM team would be
accompanied by Syrian Arab Republic representatives during the on-site
activities, with Russian personnel limited to providing security.

6.4

During the reconnaissance visit by UNDSS on 18 April 2018 to assess the first
two locations planned to be visited the following day, the security detail was
confronted by a hostile crowd and came under fire from small arms and a hand
grenade that exploded at Location 2 (see Figure 2 in section 8 below). The
incident reportedly resulted in two fatalities and an injury to a Russian soldier.

6.5

Following the incident, the planned deployment of the FFM team was postponed
until the security situation could be reassessed. Additional measures to mitigate

18-12289

79/100

S/2018/732

the high security risks were proposed by the UNDSS representative, which
included:
(l)

clearing the areas to be visited by the FFM team;

(m)

securing the areas during the 24-hour period before deployment;

(n)

increasing the number of escorts and having advance teams from the UNDSS
and the Russian Military Police monitor the area prior to the arrival of the team
at the sites;

(o)

using the police force for crowd control;

(p)

minimising the movement of civilians near the areas of interest given the
possibility of suicide bombers getting within close proximity of the inspection
team; and

(q)

deploying snipers on rooftops around the sites of interest.

6.6

New routes of access to the locations of interest were identified and modifications
to the initial FFM deployment plans were formulated. These included reducing
the size of the FFM teams deploying to the field to facilitate better security
control and limiting the number of sites to be visited during each deployment. All
parties agreed that media reports and public pronouncements on operational
aspects of the FFM were compounding the security risk for the team and efforts
were made to mitigate this risk element.

6.7

Once the security reassessment had been concluded and the proposed additional
mitigation measures implemented, the FFM team deployed to the sites of
investigation in accordance with the updated priorities and proposed schedule.

6.8

For the remainder of the mission, the deployment by the FFM team proceeded
without any security incidents. Access was granted to locations identified by the
team as soon as adequate security conditions could be assured by the Syrian Arab
Republic, the Russian Military Police, and the UNDSS. The Russian Military
Police ensured that the team was fully isolated from local crowds and media
personnel during the on-site visits, thereby allowing it to conduct its activities
without interference.

6.9

The FFM visited Location 4 (see Figure 2) on two occasions. During the visit to
Location 2, Syrian Arab Republic representatives did not provide the access
requested by the FFM team to some apartments within the building, which were
closed at the time. The Syrian Arab Republic representatives stated that they did
not have the authority to force entry into the locked apartments.

7.

MISSION ACTIVITIES
Methodological considerations

7.1
80/100

The FFM followed the same general methodology outlined in previous FFM
reports, with the team adhering throughout its deployment to the most stringent
18-12289

S/2018/732

protocols available. Three FFM subteams were deployed to two locations at
different time intervals to conduct activities relevant to the respective mandates.
7.2

Environmental sampling at the alleged incident sites in Douma was conducted by
the FFM team, using its own equipment and ensuring full chain of custody
throughout the operation in accordance with OPCW standard operation
procedures (SOPs), work instructions (WIs), and guidelines. Samples were
collected, sealed, and documented in photos and video recordings in the presence
of Syrian Arab Republic representatives, and unpacked at the OPCW Laboratory
for splitting and redistribution to the OPCW designated laboratories in the
presence of the Permanent Representative of the Syrian Arab Republic to the
OPCW.

7.3

Some environmental and biological samples were received by the FFM in
Country X (see Annex 4). From the moment of receipt, these samples were
handled as described above. The FFM team also directly oversaw the drawing of
blood samples in Country X from witnesses allegedly exposed to toxic chemicals
on 7 April 2018.

7.4

Interviews were conducted by inspectors proficient in interviewing techniques,
following the strict procedures set out in the OPCW WIs. Prior to commencing
the interviews, the process was described to the interviewee, with emphasis on
the fact that, with the consent of the interviewee, the interviews would be audio
and video recorded. After confirming that the process had been understood,
interviewees were requested to sign a consent form. The interview process
followed the free-recall approach, with follow-up questions to elicit information
of potential evidentiary value and to clarify aspects of the testimony.

7.5

Open-source materials including but not limited to videos and photos were used
primarily for planning activities, but also for comparative purposes with material
collected by the FFM team during the course of the investigation.
Activities

7.6

The individual activities of the FFM were conducted in accordance with OPCW
guidelines as well as SOPs and WIs (Annex 1).

7.7

The activities included:

18-12289

(a)

collecting environmental samples at sites relevant to the alleged incident,
namely Locations 1, 2, and 4, as well as at locations reported by the Syrian
Arab Republic as being a suspected chemical weapons production facility and
warehouse;

(b)

receiving and documenting biomedical and environmental samples brought to
Country X by alleged casualties or witnesses, as well as overseeing the direct
taking of blood samples;

81/100

S/2018/732

(c)

taking photographs and collecting data on the cylinders found at Locations
2 and 4, as well as the physical surroundings;

(d)

taking photographs and collecting data from a facility and a warehouse
suspected by the authorities of the Syrian Arab Republic of producing chemical
weapons;

(e)

conducting interviews with medical staff, casualties, first responders and
witnesses of the alleged chemical attack in Douma;

(f)

reviewing open-source materials; and

(g)

the tagging of two cylinders.

7.8

The possibility of exhuming bodies from mass graves to collect biomedical
samples and examining bodies reportedly exposed to toxic chemicals from the
alleged attack on 7 April 2018 was considered by the Secretariat. The intention
to do so was communicated to the Syrian Arab Republic in note verbale
NV/ODG/214827/18, and preliminary preparations were undertaken by the
Secretariat for this eventuality.

8.

FACTUAL FINDINGS
Alleged sites

8.1

The sites visited during the FFM deployment included the hospital where victims
were allegedly treated for chemical exposure (Location 1), the residential block
with the cylinder on the balcony (Location 2), and the apartment with the cylinder
lying on a bed (Location 4). Location 3 was initially considered a site of interest
but was discarded on the basis of subsequent information. Two other locations, a
facility and a warehouse, were visited to gather information to assess any possible
connection with the manufacture of chemical weapons.

8.2

Locations 1 to 4 are shown on the satellite images of Douma in Figure 2 below.

82/100

18-12289

S/2018/732

Figure 1: LOCATION OF DOUMA IN THE SYRIAN ARAB
REPUBLIC

Figure 2: LOCATIONS OF INTEREST FOR THE FACT-FINDING MISSION
IN DOUMA

18-12289

83/100

S/2018/732

8.3

The local meteorological conditions on 7 April 2018 around the time of the
alleged incident, as registered in open sources (darksky.net), are shown in Table
1 below.
TABLE 1: LOCAL METEOROLOGICAL CONDITIONS ON 7 APRIL 2018
Time

Temperature

Wind
Direction

Wind Speed

Precipitation

Clouds

Humidity

19:00

26°C

From SE

11 km/h

0.0 mm

overcast

27 %

Sampling
8.4

The FFM team formulated detailed sampling plans for each site of allegation.
The plans relied on robust scientific principles, supported where necessary and
possible by peer-reviewed scientific literature or proven experience, to identify
sample types and locations of greatest potential probative value to the mission.

8.5

The team executed the original sampling plans to the extent possible, adapting to
actual conditions on site where necessary.

8.6

Given the number of locations visited and the diversity of potential evidentiary
material available, over 100 samples in total were collected and transported to
the OPCW Laboratory. To expedite the analysis of environmental samples
considered at this stage to be of the greatest probative value or of the highest
susceptibility to degradation, 31 samples were selected for the first round of
analysis by the OPCW designated laboratories. The results of analysis are
presented in Annex 3.
Analysis results

8.7

The results of analysis of the prioritised samples submitted to the designated
laboratories were received by the FFM team on 22 May 2018. No
organophosphorus nerve agents or their degradation products were detected,
either in the environmental samples or in plasma samples from the alleged
casualties. Various chlorinated organic chemicals were found in samples from
Locations 2 and 4, along with residues of explosive. These results are reported in
Annex 3. Work by the team to establish the significance of these results is
ongoing.
Physical data collection

8.8

Aside from sampling, a large volume of information was gathered by the FFM
team and included photographs, video recordings, detection measurements,
dimensions of the cylinders and attached metallic structure, and the spatial
arrangement in the environment of the cylinders.
Location 2 (cylinder on the roof)

8.9

84/100

The team deployed to Location 2 (N 33 0 34’ 25.6”, E 360 24’ 17.3”) on 21 April
2018.
18-12289

S/2018/732

8.10

During the visit to Location 2, Syrian Arab Republic representatives did not
provide the access requested by the FFM team to some apartments within the
building, which were closed at the time. The Syrian Arab Republic
representatives stated that they did not have the authority to force entry into the
locked apartments. This situation was relayed to OPCW Headquarters during the
post-deployment debrief that same evening.

8.11

The FFM had full access to other areas of interest within the same building,
namely the balcony where the cylinder had allegedly impacted, the apartment
directly below this, and the basement of the same apartment block.

8.12

Work is in progress regarding the location of the cylinder, its provenance, and the
damage to both the reinforced concrete balcony and the cylinder. A
comprehensive analysis by experts in the relevant fields will be required to
provide a competent assessment of the relative damage.
Location 4 (cylinder on the bed)

8.13

The team deployed to Location 4 (N 33° 34’ 24”, E 36° 23’ 41.1”) on 25 April
2018. The team gathered a broad selection of sample types, took videos, photos,
detection measurements, and relevant dimensions of the location and the cylinder.

8.14

Work is in progress regarding the location of the cylinder, its provenance, and the
damage to the reinforced concrete roof terrace and the cylinder. It is planned that
a comprehensive analysis will be conducted by suitable experts, possibly in
metallurgy and structural or mechanical engineering, to provide an assessment of
how the cylinders arrived at its location, in addition to the observed damage to
the bed and other furniture of the room, the roof, and the cylinder itself.
Location 1 (hospital)

8.15

The FFM team visited Location 1 (N 33° 34’ 27.3”, E 36° 24’ 25”) on 1 May
2018. The hospital operates in the basements of two multistorey buildings
connected by an underground tunnel. The FFM team was guided through the
hospital, including underground access tunnels, and took environmental samples
and held discussions with medical personnel.
Warehouse and facility suspected of producing chemical weapons

8.16

18-12289

At the warehouse and the facility suspected by the authorities of the Syrian Arab
Republic of producing chemical weapons in Douma, information was gathered
to assess whether these facilities were associated with the production of chemical
weapons or toxic chemicals that could be used as weapons. From the information
gathered during the two on-site visits to these locations, there was no indication
of either facility being involved in the production of chemical warfare agents or
toxic chemicals for use as weapons.

85/100

S/2018/732

Interviews
8.17

86/100

The FFM team interviewed a total of 34 individuals; 13 of these interviews were
conducted in Damascus and the remainder in Country X. Analysis of the
testimonies is ongoing.

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annexes (English only):
Annex 1: Reference Documentation
Annex 2: Open Sources
Annex 3: Analysis Results
Annex 4: Samples Obtained by the Fact-Finding Mission
Annex 5: Documents Received From the State Party

18-12289

87/100

S/2018/732

Annex 1
REFERENCE DOCUMENTATION
Document Reference
QDOC/INS/SOP/IAU01
(Issue 1, Revision 1)
QDOC/INS/WI/IAU05

Standard Operating Procedure for Evidence Collection,
Documentation, Chain-of-Custody and Preservation during an
Investigation of Alleged Use of Chemical Weapons

(Issue 1, Revision 2)

Work Instruction for Conducting Interviews during an Investigation
of Alleged Use

QDOC/INS/SOP/IAU02

Standard Operating Procedure

(Issue 1, Revision 0)

Investigation of Alleged Use (IAU) Operations

QDOC/INS/SOP/GG011

Standard Operating Procedure for Managing Inspection Laptops
and other Confidentiality Support Materials

(Issue 1, Revision 0)
QDOC/LAB/SOP/OSA2
(Issue 1, Revision 2)
QDOC/LAB/WI/CS01
(Issue 1, Revision 2)
QDOC/LAB/WI/OSA3
(Issue 2, Revision 1)
QDOC/LAB/WI/OSA4
(Issue 1, Revision 3)

88/100

Full Title of Document

Standard Operating Procedure for Off-Site Analysis of Authentic
Samples
Work Instruction for Handling of Authentic Samples from
Inspection Sites and Packing Off-Site Samples at the OPCW
Laboratory
Work Instruction for Chain of Custody and Documentation for
OPCW Samples On-Site
Work Instruction for Packing of Off-Site Samples

18-12289

S/2018/732

Annex 2
OPEN SOURCES
To be provided in the final report.

18-12289

89/100

S/2018/732

90/100

Annex 3
ANALYSIS RESULTS
TABLE A 3.1:
MISSION
Entry
number

ENVIRONMENTAL SAMPLES RECEIVED OR COLLECTED BY THE FACT-FINDING
Evidence
Reference
Number

Sample
Code

Description

1.

01SLS

Concrete debris from the street,
left side below window (level 0)

20180421190901

B

2.

03SLS

Concrete debris from the middle
of street opposite to the window
(level 0)

20180421190903

C

3.

10WPS

Swab from inside the cylinder
orifice (level 3)

20180421190910

D

4.

11WPS

Swab with water from inside the
cylinder orifice (level 3)

20180421190911

E

19SLS

Concrete debris from the crateredge in front of the cylinder nose
(level 3)

5.

20180421190919

DL02
code

DL 03
code

Results DL03

C01

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

C03

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

E10

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.

Dichloroacetic acid,
chloride.

E11

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.

F

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
chloral hydrate,
trichlorophenol.

C19

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

V25

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
Phenol, 2,4,6trichlorophenol † ,
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

S30

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.

Results DL02

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
chlorophenol,
trinitrotoluene *.
Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
chlorophenol,
dichlorophenol,
trinitrotoluene *.
No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

6.

25SDS

Wood fragment from kitchen
door (level 2)

20180421190925

G

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
chlorophenol.

7.

30WPS

Dry wipe from bicycle rear
cassette in basement (level -1)

20180421190930

H

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

18-12289

18-12289

Entry
number

Sample
Code

Description

Evidence
Reference
Number

DL02
code

Results DL02

DL 03
code

8.

32SDS

Water tank wood support in
basement (level -1)

20180421190932

I

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid.

V32

9.

34SDS

Wood from partition frame in
basement (level -1)

20180421190934

J

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid.

V34

10.

35AQS

Water from water tank in
basement (level -1)

20180421190935

K

11.

04SDSL4

Blanket under cylinder

20180425178804

L

12.

06SDSL4

Wet wood from under the
cylinder

20180425178806

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.
Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
chloral hydrate,
trichlorophenol,
trinitrotoluene *,
chloride.
†

M

10SDSL4

Pillow cover on the bed , closer
to the wall

20180425178810

N

14.

13WPS
-L4

Dry wipe from stains on the wall,
behind the bed

20180425178813

O

Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
trichlorophenol,
tetrachlorophenol,
chloral hydrate,
trinitrotoluene *,
chloride.
No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
alpha-Pinene, bornyl
chloride †, phenol,
2,4,6-trichlorophenol †,
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.
No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
Phenol,
2,4,6-trichlorophenol †,
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

W35

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.

TL4

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

V06

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
alpha-Pinene, bornyl
chloride †, phenol,
2,4,6-trichlorophenol †,

T10

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

S13

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
2,4,6-Trinitrotoluene *.

91/100

S/2018/732

13.

Bornyl chloride ,
chloride.

Results DL03

DL02
code

Swab sample with water from
outlet valve on reactor

20180430150804

P

S7

Grouting from 5-13 c. 1 m out
from LHS wall

20180501177907

Q

17.

FFM49-18SDS04 1

Piece of clothes from victim

20180421178219

S

18.

FFM49-18SDS05 1

Pieces of timber

20180421178220

T

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

V05

19.

FFM49-18SDS07 1

Scarf collected from the
basement

20180422174805

U

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

T07

20.

FFM49-18SDS08 1

Stuffed animal collected
from basement

20180422174804

V

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.

T08

Sample
Code

15.

04WPS
-PF

16.

Description

Results DL02

No chemicals relevant
to CWC have been
found.
No chemicals relevant
to CW have been
found.
Dichloroacetic acid,
trichloroacetic acid,
dichlorophenol,
trichlorophenol.

DL 03
code

E04

C07

T04

Results DL03

No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
No nerve agent related
chemicals detected.
Triethanolamine ‡ , 2,4,6No nerve agent related
chemicals detected.
Triethanolamine ‡ , 2,4,6trinitrotoluene *.
No CWC-scheduled
chemicals detected.
Phenol, 2,4,6trichlorophenol † , 2,4,6trinitrotoluene *.
No nerve agent related
chemicals detected.
Triethanolamine ‡ ,
"AmgardV19" phosphonate ♦ ,
malathion, 2,4,6trinitrotoluene *.
No nerve agent related
chemicals
Triethanolamine ‡ , 2,4,6trinitrotoluene *.

Samples in rows 17, 18, 19 and 20 were received by the FFM team from witnesses. * Explosive, † Chlorinated compounds from wood, ‡Surfactant for
textiles ♦ Flame retardant.

S/2018/732

92/100

Evidence
Reference
Number

Entry
number

18-12289

18-12289

TABLE A 3.2:

BIOMEDICAL SAMPLES RECEIVED OR COLLECTED BY THE FACT-FINDING MISSION

Entry
number

Sample
Code

Description

Evidence Reference
Number

DL02
code

1.

178201

Plasma

20180421178201

A

No relevant chemicals found

A

2.

178204

Plasma

20180421178204

B

No relevant chemicals found

B

3.

178207

Plasma

20180421178207

C

No relevant chemicals found

C

4.

178210

Plasma

20180421178210

D

No relevant chemicals found

D

5.

178213

Plasma

20180421178213

E

No relevant chemicals found

E

6.

175704A

Plasma

20180418175704A

F

Sample was not analysed

F

7.

175703A

Plasma

20180418175703A

G

Sample was not analysed

G

8.

1748PL

Plasma

201804211748PL

H

No relevant chemicals found

H

9.

1753PL

Plasma

201804251753PL

I

No relevant chemicals found

I

10.

1770PL

Plasma

201804211770PL

J

No relevant chemicals found

J

11.

1795PL

Plasma

201804211795PL

K

No relevant chemicals found

K

Results DL02

DL 03
code

Results DL03

Nerve agent-adducts of BChE
derived nonapeptide (G- and V-type
agents):
No compound found.

Aged G agent-adduct of BChEderived nonapeptide:
No compound found.

Nerve agent-adduct of tyrosine (Gand V-type agents):
No compound found.

BChE = butyrylcholinesterase

S/2018/732

93/100

S/2018/732

94/100

Annex 4
SAMPLES OBTAINED BY THE FACT-FINDING MISSION
TABLE A 4: LIST OF SAMPLES COLLECTED OR RECEIVED BY THE FACT-FINDING MISSION
Entry
number

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

18-12289

1

Concrete debris from the street, left side below window (level 0)

20180421190901

Collected by the FFM

2

Concrete debris from the street opposite side of the entry of Location 2 (level 0)

20180421190902

Collected by the FFM

3

Concrete debris from the middle of street opposite the window (level 0)

20180421190903

Collected by the FFM

4

Control sample: debris 20 m west of building's entrance (level 0)

20180421190904

Collected by the FFM

5

Swab blank with DCM

20180421190905

Collected by the FFM

6

Wipe blank with DCM

20180421190906

Collected by the FFM

7

Swab blank with water

20180421190907

Collected by the FFM

8

Wipe blank with water

20180421190908

Collected by the FFM

9

Fabric stuck to metal bars from the balcony with the cylinder is (level 3)

20180421190909

Collected by the FFM

10

Swab from inside the cylinder orifice (level 3)

20180421190910

Collected by the FFM

11

Swab with water from inside the cylinder orifice (level 3)

20180421190911

Collected by the FFM

12

Metal fragment from the balcony (level 3)

20180421190912

Collected by the FFM

13

Wipe with DCM from the external surface of the cylinder (level 3)

20180421190913

Collected by the FFM

14

Wipe with water from the external surface of the cylinder (level 3)

20180421190914

Collected by the FFM

15

Dry wipe of the cylinder thread (level 3)

20180421190915

Collected by the FFM

16

Metal object from the balcony (Level 3)

20180421190916

Collected by the FFM

17

Concrete debris from the base of the cylinder (level 3)

20180421190917

Collected by the FFM

18

Metal bar at cylinder nose (Level 3)

20180421190918

Collected by the FFM

19

Concrete debris from the crater-edge in front of the cylinder nose (level 3)

20180421190919

Collected by the FFM

20

Tile from the balcony wall (level 3)

20180421190920

Collected by the FFM

21

Wipe with water from the burnt wall in the room located under the cylinder
(level 2)

20180421190921

Collected by the FFM

18-12289

Entry
number

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

Wipe with DCM from burnt wall from room under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190922

Collected by the FFM

23

Swab with water from wall plug in the room under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190923

Collected by the FFM

24

Dry wipe from kitchen wall above the oven (level 2)

20180421190924

Collected by the FFM

25

Wood fragment from kitchen door (level 2)

20180421190925

Collected by the FFM

26

Towel from the room located under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190926

Collected by the FFM

27

Exposed electrical wires from room under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190927

Collected by the FFM

28

Lump of concrete from floor-debris from room under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190928

Collected by the FFM

29

Soap bar from room under the cylinder (level 2)

20180421190929

Collected by the FFM

30

Dry wipe from bicycle rear cassette in basement (level -1)

20180421190930

Collected by the FFM

31

Swab with DCM from bicycle rear cassette in basement (level -1)

20180421190931

Collected by the FFM

32

Water tank wood support in basement (level -1)

20180421190932

Collected by the FFM

33

Light bulb from basement(level -1)

20180421190933

Collected by the FFM

34

Wood from partition frame in basement (level -1)

20180421190934

Collected by the FFM

35

Water from water tank in basement (level -1)

20180421190935

Collected by the FFM

36

Telephone from basement (level -1)

20180421190936

Collected by the FFM

37

2 nails and 2 screws from Basement wall (level -1)

20180421190937

Collected by the FFM

38

Swab with water from electric socket Basement (level -1)

20180421190938

Collected by the FFM

39

Swab with DCM from electric socket basement (level -1)

20180421190939

Collected by the FFM

40

Damp wall board from basement left of stairs (level -1)

20180421190940

Collected by the FFM

41

Wipe with water from basement wall (level -1)

20180421190941

Collected by the FFM

42

Wipe with DCM from basement wall (level -1)

20180421190942

Collected by the FFM

43

Wipe with water from lavatory extractor pipe in basement (level -1)

20180421190943

Collected by the FFM

44

Insect from lavatory in basement (level -1)

20180421190944

Collected by the FFM

45

Pillow from bed under the cylinder

20180425178801

Collected by the FFM

46

Metal fragment from bedroom floor

20180425178802

Collected by the FFM

47

Metal object from dresser

20180425178803

Collected by the FFM

S/2018/732

95/100

22

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

18-12289

48

Piece of blanket under cylinder

20180425178804

Collected by the FFM

49

Control sample: piece of blanket opposite side of bed, on the floor

20180425178805

Collected by the FFM

50

Wet wood from under the cylinder

20180425178806

Collected by the FFM

51

Insects and dust from tray in bedroom shower

20180425178807

Collected by the FFM

52

Bedside lamp on top of mattress

20180425178808

Collected by the FFM

53

Copper wire attached to the roof, hanging from the ceiling lamp

20180425178809

Collected by the FFM

54

Pillow cover on the bed , closer to the wall

20180425178810

Collected by the FFM

55

Dry wipe from nozzle , front part next to thread

20180425178811

Collected by the FFM

56

Dry wipe from cylinder thread

20180425178812

Collected by the FFM

57

Dry wipe from stains on the wall, behind the bed

20180425178813

Collected by the FFM

58

Chips of paint from wall behind bed .

20180425178814

Collected by the FFM

59

Wipe with DCM blank

20180425178815

Collected by the FFM

60

Wipe with DCM from headboard

20180425178816

Collected by the FFM

61

Wipe with DCM of cylinder nozzle

20180425178817

Collected by the FFM

62

Calid paper from wall

20180425178818

Collected by the FFM

63

Gloves from stairs

20180425178819

Collected by the FFM

64

Wipe with DCM from door threshold, entrance of apartment

20180425178820

Collected by the FFM

65

Solid sample from white bag under jar labelled as hexamine

20180427191401

Collected by the FFM

66

Solid sample from jar labelled as hexamine

20180427191402

Collected by the FFM

67

Solid sample from white bag next to jar labelled as hexamine

20180427191403

Collected by the FFM

68

Solid sample from white bag with Cheminol label and labelled as hexamine

20180427191404

Collected by the FFM

69

Solid sample of unknown blue crystalline solid

20180427191405

Collected by the FFM

70

Solid sample of unknown green solid

20180427191406

Collected by the FFM

71

Swab blank with DCM

20180430150801

Collected by the FFM

72

Swab blank with water

20180430150802

Collected by the FFM

73

Swab sample with DCM from outlet valve on reactor

20180430150803

Collected by the FFM

S/2018/732

96/100

Entry
number

18-12289

Entry
number

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

Swab sample with water from outlet valve on reactor

20180430150804

Collected by the FFM

75

DCM wipe of wall and floor at hose down area seen in open source video

20180501177901

Collected by the FFM

76

Water wipe of wall and floor at hose down area seen in open source video

20180501177902

Collected by the FFM

77

Swab blank with DCM

20180501177903

Collected by the FFM

78

Wipe blank with water

20180501177904

Collected by the FFM

79

Concrete dust scraping at pillar 51 (control)

20180501177905

Collected by the FFM

80

Concrete dust 5-13 on right hand side at wall

20180501177906

Collected by the FFM

81

Grouting from 5-13 c. 1 m out from LHS wall

20180501177907

Collected by the FFM

82

Piece of clothing from victim

20180421178219

Handed over by 1782

83

Piece of wood

20180421178220

Handed over by 1782

84

Dark blue vest

20180421178215

Handed over by 1782

85

Scarf collected from the basement

20180422174805

Handed over by 1748

86

Stuffed toy collected from basement

20180422174804

Handed over by 1748

87

Plasma samples

20180421178201

Handed over by 1782

88

Plasma samples

20180421178204

Handed over by 1782

89

Plasma samples

20180421178207

Handed over by 1782

90

Plasma samples

20180421178210

Handed over by 1782

91

Plasma samples

20180421178213

Handed over by 1782

92

Plasma samples

20180418175704A

Handed over by 1757

93

Plasma samples

20180418175703A

Handed over by 1757

94

Plasma samples

20180418175702A

Handed over by 1757

95

Plasma samples

20180418175701A

Handed over by 1757

96

Plasma samples

201804211748PL

Collected by the FFM

97

Plasma samples

201804211795PL

Collected by the FFM

98

Plasma samples

201804211770PL

Collected by the FFM

99

Plasma samples

201804251753PL

Collected by the FFM

S/2018/732

97/100

74

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

18-12289

100

Blood cells samples

20180421178202

Handed over by 1782

101

Blood cells samples

20180421178205

Handed over by 1782

102

Blood cells samples

20180421178208

Handed over by 1782

103

Blood cells samples

20180421178211

Handed over by 1782

104

Blood cells samples

20180421178214

Handed over by 1782

105

Blood cells samples

20180418175704B

Handed over by 1757

106

Blood cells samples

20180418175703B

Handed over by 1757

107

Blood cells samples

20180418175702B

Handed over by 1757

108

Blood cells samples

20180418175701B

Handed over by 1757

109

Blood cells samples

201804211748BC

Collected by the FFM

110

Blood cells samples

201804211795BC

Collected by the FFM

111

Blood cells samples

201804211770BC

Collected by the FFM

112

Blood cells samples

201804251753BC

Collected by the FFM

113

Full blood samples

20180421178203

Handed over by 1782

114

Full blood samples

20180421178206

Handed over by 1782

115

Full blood samples

20180421178209

Handed over by 1782

116

Full blood samples

20180421178212

Handed over by 1782

117

Hair samples

20180418175705HS

Handed over by 1757

118

Hair samples

20180418175706HS

Handed over by 1757

119

Hair samples

20180418175707HS

Handed over by 1757

120

Hair samples

20180430178226

Handed over by 1782

121

Hair samples

20180430178227

Handed over by 1782

122

Hair samples

20180430178228

Handed over by 1782

123

Hair samples

20180430178229

Handed over by 1782

124

Hair samples

20180430178230

Handed over by 1782

125

DNA samples

20180426178221

Collected by the FFM

S/2018/732

98/100

Entry
number

18-12289

Entry
number

Sample description

Evidence Reference
Number

Source

126

DNA samples

20180426178222

Collected by the FFM

127

DNA samples

20180426178223

Collected by the FFM

128

DNA samples

20180426178224

Collected by the FFM

129

DNA samples

20180426178225

Collected by the FFM

S/2018/732

99/100

S/2018/732

Annex 5
DOCUMENTS RECEIVED FROM THE STATE PARTY
To be provided in the final report.

100/100

18-12289
