General Assembly-Forty-second Session

270

2. Requests the Secretary-General to submit a final financia! report on the project to the General Assembly at
its forty-third session.
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987

42/217.

Feasibility of establishing a single administrative tribunal

The General Assembly,
Taking note of the report of the Secretary-General entitled "Feasibility of establishing a single administrative
tribunal", 48
Noting that the International Labour Organisation has
under consideration proposals corresponding to those appearing in the report of the Secretary-General,
l. Requests the Secretary-General:
(a) To arrange for consultations among Member
States to take place in New York during the first part of
1988 for the purpose of examining the proposals included
in bis report entitled "Feasibility of establishing a single
administrative tribunal", bearing in mind the technical, legal and administrative aspects of the matter;
(b) To invite the Director-General of the International
Labour Office to be represented at such consultations;
(e) To report to the General Assembly at its fortythird session on the outcome of such consultations and to
present proposals designed to enable the Assembly to conelude its consideration of this item at that session;
2. Decides to include in the provisional agenda of its
forty-third session under the item entitled "Administrative and budgetary co-ordination of the United Nations
with the specialized agencies and the International
Atomic Energy Agency" a sub-item entitled "Harmonization of the statutes, rules and practices of the administrative tribunals of the International Labour Organisation
and of the United Nations".
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987

42/218.

Joint Inspection Unit

The General Assembly,
Recalling its resolutions 40/259 of 18 December 1985
and 41/213 of 19 December 1986,
Having considered the report of the Joint Inspection
Unit on its activities during the period l July 1986 to
30 June 1987, 49 welcoming the recommendations for selfimprovement contained in section VI thereof, and noting
the observations and suggestions of Member States
thereon,
Recognizing the need to avoid duplication and overlapping in the activities of subsidiary organs of the General
Assembly,
Convinced that the General Assembly should give the
Joint Inspection Unit greater guidance on its programme
of work with respect to the United Nations,
Convinced also that more systematic follow-up activity
regarding the implementation of recommendations of the
Joint Inspection Unit would increase the usefulness ofthe
48 A/42/328.
49 Official Records of the

General A.ssembly, Forty-.second Session.
Supp/ement No. 34 (A/42/34 and Corr. l ).

inspection function, particularly in encouraging constructive dialogue between the Unit and the various organizations of the United Nations system,
Bearing in mind the recommendations regarding the
Joint Inspection Unit in the report of the Group of Highlevel Intergovernmental Experts to Review the Efficiency
of the Administrative and Financial Functioning of the
United Nations, 22
l. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit to introduce immediately the improvements recommended in section VI
of its report 49 in order to increase the quality and effectiveness of its reports;
2. Calls upon the Joint Inspection Unit to adopt a
more collective approach in the preparation of its programme of work, in the conduct of its work and in the
writing of individual reports;
3. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to include in its
annual report a section on its findings regarding the implementation of its recommendations;
4. Invites the Joint Inspection Unit, with due regard
for its other responsibilities, to include in its proposed programme of work the provision of advice to participating
organizations on their methods for interna! evaluation and
the conduct of more ad hoc evaluations of programmes
and activities;
5. Requests the Joint Inspection Unit to include in its
next report the guidelines it follows for selecting, conducting and reporting on its inspections;
6. Also requests the Joint Inspection Unit to ensure
that its reports are co-ordinated, as far as possible, with
the programmes of work of the various bodies of the
United Nations and that they are submitted in a timely
manner;
7. Further requests the Joint Inspection Unit, in exercising its functions, powers and responsibilities, to take
fully into account the mandates of other relevant bodies,
especially the Committee for Programme and Coordination, the Board of Auditors and the International
Civil Service Commission;
8. Invites the Committee for Programme and Coordination and the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions, within their respective
mandates, to provide the General Assembly with their
views on the future programme of work of the Joint Inspection Unit;
9. Requests the Committee for Programme and Coordination to advise the General Assembly on those cases
in which the Joint Inspection Unit might perform ad hoc
externa! evaluations of programmes and activities;
lO. Urges Member States to apply the highest standards in selecting candidates for appointment as inspectors, to give special emphasis to relevant experience and
qualifications in the fields of personnel management, public administration, inspection and evaluation, and to give
consideration to different disciplines;
11. Requests the Secretary-General to bring to the attention of the appropriate bodies of the United Nations
system ali reports of the Joint lnspection Unit on matters
within their respective areas of competence and to include
reference to ali reports of the Unit in the documentation
listed in the annotated preliminary agendas ofthe General
Assembly and other United Nations bodies under the
most appropriate substantive agenda item;
12. Requests ali bodies ofthe United Nations system to
examine closely those reports ofthe Joint Inspection Unit
which are within their respective areas of competence and

-·..-·--·- ··-

----VIII.

Resolutions adopted on the reports of the Fifth Committee

to comment, as appropriate, on the recommendations contained therein;
13. Requests the Joint lnspection Unit to report to the
General Assembly at its forty-third session on the progress
made in the implementation of the present resolution;
14. Requests the Secretary-General to bring the present resolution to the attention of the executive heads of the
participating organizations of the Joint Inspection Unit.
99th plenary meeting
21 December 1987
42/219.

Respect for the privileges and immunities of officials ofthe United Nations and the specialized
agencies and related organizations

The General Assembly,
Recalling that, under Article 100 of the Charter of the
United Nations, each Member of the United Nations undertakes to respect the exclusively international character
of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General and the
staff and not to seek to inftuence them in the discharge of
their responsibilities,
Recalling that, under Article 105 of the Charter, all officials of the Organization shall enjoy in the territory of
each of its Member States such privileges and immunities
as are necessary for the independent exercise of their functions in connection with the Organization,
Recalling the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations, so the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the Specialized Agencies, 51 the
Agreement on the Privileges and Immunities of the International Atomic Energy Agency and the United Nations
Development Programme Standard Basic Assistance
Agreements,
Recalling also its resolution 76 (1) of 7 December 1946,
in which it approved the granting ofthe privileges and immunities referred to in articles V and VII of the Convention on the Privileges and Immunities of the United Nations to ali members of the staff of the United Nations,
Reiterating the obligation of ali officials of the Organization in the conduct of their duties to observe fully the laws
and regulations of Member States,
Mindful of the responsibilities of the Secretary-General
to safeguard the functional immunity of ali United Nations officials,
Mindful also of the importance in this respect of the
provision by Member States of adequate and timely information concerning the arrest and detention of staff members and, more particularly, their granting of access to
them,
Bearing in mind the wider considerations of the Secretary-General to guarantee mínimum standards of justice
and due process to United Nations officials,
Reaffirming its previous resolutions, in particular resolution 41/205 of 11 December 1986,
1. Takes note with concern of the report submitted by
the Secretary-General, 52 on behalf of the Administrative
Committee on Co-ordination, and of a number of developments indicated therein, in particular those regarding new
cases of arrest and detention and those regarding previously reported cases under this category;
SO Resolution 22 A (1).
SI Resolution 179 (11).
S2 A/C.S/42/14 and Corr. l.

271

2. Also takes note with concern of the information provided by the Secretary-General in his report regarding
other questions involving the status, privileges and immunities of officials;

3. Further takes note with concern of the restrictions on
duty travel of officials as indicated in the report;
4. Deplores the growing number of cases where the
functioning, safety and well-being of officials have been
adversely affected, including cases of detention in Member
States and abduction by armed groups and individuals;
5. Also deplores the increasing number of cases in
which the lives and well-being of officials have been placed
in jeopardy during the exercise of their official functions;
6. Cal/s upon ali Member States scrupulously to respect the privileges and immunities of ali officials of the
United Nations, the specialized agencies and related organizations and to refrain from any acts that would impede
such officials in the performance of their functions,
thereby seriously affecting the proper functioning of the
Organization;
7. Also calls upon ali Member States currently holding
under arrest or detention officials of the United Nations,
the specialized agencies and related organizations, as spelt
out in the Secretary-General's report, to enable the Secretary-General or the executive head of the organization
concerned to exercise fully the right of functional protection inherent in the relevant multilateral conventions and
bilateral agreements, particularly with respect to immediate access to detained staff members;
8. Further calls upon ali Member States otherwise
impeding officials of the United Nations, specialized agencies and related organizations in the proper discharge of
their duties to review the cases and to co-ordinate efforts
with the Secretary-General or the executive head ofthe organization concerned to resolve each case with ali due
speed;
9. Calls upon the staff of the United Nations and the
specialized agencies and related organizations to comply
with the obligations resulting from the Staff Regulations
and Rules of the United Nations, in particular regulation
1.8, and from the equivalent provisions governing the staff
of the other agencies;
10. Calls upon the Secretary-General to use ali such
means as are available to him to bring about an expeditious solution of the cases still pending, which were referred to in the report;
11. Also calls upon the Secretary-General, as chief administrative officer ofthe United Nations; to continue personally to act as the focal point in promoting and ensuring
the observance of the privileges and immunities of officials
of the United Nations and the specialized agencies and related organizations by using ali such means as are available to him;
12. Urges the Secretary-General to give priority,
through the United Nations Security Co-ordinator and his
other special representatives, to the reporting and prompt
follow-up of cases of arrest, detention and other possible
matters relating to the security and proper functioning of
officials ofthe United Nations and the specialized agencies
and related organizations;
13. Requests the Secretary-General, as Chairman of
the Administrative Committee on Co-ordination, to review and appraise the measures already taken to enhance
