UNITED
NATIONS

S
Security Council
Distr.
GENERAL
S/PRST/1997/54
3 December 1997
ORIGINAL:

ENGLISH

STATEMENT BY THE PRESIDENT OF THE SECURITY COUNCIL

At the 3838th meeting of the Security Council, held on 3 December 1997 in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled "The situation
between Iraq and Kuwait", the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
"The Security Council endorses the conclusions and recommendations of
the report of the emergency session of the Special Commission (UNSCOM)
(S/1997/922) aimed at full and expeditious implementation of the relevant
resolutions and at increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of UNSCOM
work to this end.
"The Security Council reiterates its demand that Iraq fulfil all its
obligations as set out in all the relevant resolutions, including
resolution 1137 (1997), and cooperate fully with UNSCOM and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in implementing their respective
mandates. The Council stresses that the effectiveness and speed with which
UNSCOM may accomplish its responsibilities is, above all, determined by the
degree to which the Government of Iraq cooperates in disclosing the full
extent and disposition of its proscribed programmes and in granting UNSCOM
unimpeded access to all sites, documents, records and individuals. The
Council acknowledges the conclusion of the UNSCOM report that UNSCOM
respects the legitimate national security, sovereignty and dignity concerns
of Iraq in the context of the need for full application of the mandate
given to it by the Council.
"The Security Council welcomes the progress achieved by UNSCOM and the
IAEA in various disarmament areas. The Council encourages intensified
efforts, in line with the conclusions and recommendations of the emergency
session of UNSCOM, in order to implement fully the UNSCOM and IAEA mandates
in each of their respective disarmament areas. The Council acknowledges
that, as Iraq complies with its obligations under the relevant resolutions,
and UNSCOM and the IAEA so report and the Council agrees, UNSCOM and the
IAEA would make the transition from investigation to monitoring in their
respective areas, expanding the use of the ongoing monitoring system
functioning in Iraq.

97-34846 (E)

031297

/...

S/PRST/1997/54
English
Page 2

"The Security Council urges Member States to respond positively to the
requests contained in the report of the emergency session of UNSCOM, in
particular related to the provision of additional personnel, equipment and
information required by UNSCOM and the IAEA for more efficient and
effective implementation of their respective mandates.
"The Security Council will remain seized of the matter and will
consider whether additional action may be necessary."

-----
