UNITED NATIONS / NATIONS UNmS

SECURITY COUNCIL
r

OFfIC1Al RECORDS

l

f FOURTH YEAR

I

NO. 44

f448th MEETING: 27 SEPTEI'A.BER 1949
1-949---

~448-'eme-SEAN-C-E:-27-SE-PTB--M-'B,R-E

CONSEIL DE 'SECURITE
PROCES·VERBAUX OfflCIElS
QUATRlEME A...~E

LAUSUCCESS~ NEW YORK.

. ( 38 p.. )

TABLE OF CON'I'&FffS

TABLE DES MATIERES

Four hundred and forty-eighth meeting

Quatre cen~ quarante-huitieme seance

Page

Pages

1. Provisional agenda •.................
2. Method of interpretation
.
3. Adoption of the agenda •.............
4. Travelling expenses and subsistence
allowances of alternate representatives on
Security Council Commissions
.
5. Future costs of military observers in
Indonesia • • • . . • . . • . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . •

1 1. Ordre du jour provisoire ..•.•....... 1
2 2. Mode d'interpretation
2
_2 .3. Adoption de l'ordre du jour
,... 2
4. Frais de voyage et indemnites d~ sUbsistance aux suppleants des. representants
2
aux cominissions du Conseil de securite· 2
5. Frais occasiDnnes a. l'avenir par la presence d' observateurs militaires en lndo10
ne~;ie
~ . , • . . . . . • . . • . . . . .. . . .. 10

RJevant documents not reproduced in full in the texts of the meetings
of the Security Council are published in monthly supplements to the Official
Records.

All United Nations documents are designated by symbols, i.e., capital
letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference
to a United Nations document.
Les documents pertinents qui ne sont pas reproduits in extenso clans le
texte des seances du Conseil de securite sont publies dans des supplements
mensuels aux Proces-verbaux ofJiciels.

Les documents des Nations Unies portent tous une cote, qui se compose
de lettres majuscules et de chiffres. La simple mention d'une cote dans
un texle signifie qu'il s'agit d'un document ~es 'Nations Unies.

UNITED NATIONS

NATIONS UNIES

SECURITY
COUNCIL

CONSEIL
DE SECURITE

OFFICIAL RECORDS

PROCES..VERBAUX OFFICIELS

FOURTH YEAR

No. 44 QUATRIEME ANNEE

No 44

FOUR HUNDRED AND FORTY·
EIGHTH,MEETING

QUATRE CENT QUARJ\NTE.
HUITIEME SEANCE

Held at Lake Success, New York,
on Tuesday, 27 September 1949, at 3 p.m.

Tenue a Lake Success, New-York,
le 11Zm'di 27 septembre 1949, a15 heures.

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland).

President: Sir Alexander CADOGAN
(Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et d'Irlande
du Nord).

Present: The representatives of the following
countries: Argentina, Canada, China, Cuba,
Egypt, France, Norway, Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America.

Presents: Les representants des pays suivants:
A.rgentine, Canada, Chine, Cuba, Egypte,
France, Norvege, Republique socialiste sovietique
d'Ukraiue, Union des Republiques socialistes
sovietiques, Royaume-Uni de Grande-Bretagne et
d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unisd'Amerique.

1. Provisionall agenda (S/Agenda 448/
Corr.l)

1. Ordre dn jour provisoire
(S/Agenda 448/Corr. 1)

1. Adoption of the agenda.

1. Adoption de 1'ordre du jour.

2. Letter dated 17 June 1949 from the representatives of Australia, Belgium, Colombia and
France addressed to the President of the
Security Council, concerning travelling expenses and subsistence allowances of alternate representatives on ,Security Council Commissions (S/1338).

2. Lettre, en date du 17 juin 1949, adressee au
President du Conseil de securite par les
representants de l'Australie, de la Belgique,
de la Colombie et de la France, relativement
au paiement des frais de voyage et des indemnites de subsistance aux suppleants des
representants aux commissions du· Conseil de
securite (S/1338).
.
a) Note du Secretaire general sur le projet
de resolution presente au Conseil de securite et relatif au remboursement retroactif
des frais de voyage et des indemnites de
subsistance aux suppleants des representants aux Commissions des Nations Unies
pour la Grece, l'Indonesie et l'IndePa1{istan (S/1355).

(a) Note by the Secretary-General on the

proposed resolution to the Security
Council on retroactive payment of travei
and subsistence expenses for alternates on
United Nations Commissions in Greece,
Indonesia, and India-Pakistan (S/1355).

3. Cablegram dated 5 August 1949 from the
Consular Commission at Batavia to the
Sec~etary-General requesting that the United
Nations assume future costs of military
observers in Indonesia (S/1366).

3. Cablogramme, en date du 5 aout 1949, adresse
au Secretaire general par la Commission
corisulaire a Batavia, dt;mandant. que les
Nations Unies assument a 1'avenir les frais
occasionnes par la presence d'observateurs
. militaires en Indonesie (S/1366).

4. Regulation and reduction of armaments and
armed forces.
(a) Let1;er dated 4 August 1949 from the
ChaIrman of the Commission for ConVt ntional Armaments addressed to the

4. Reglementation et reduction des armements
et des forces armees.
a) Lettre, en date du 4 aout 1949, adressee
par le President de la Commission· des
armements de type classique au President

President of the Security Council transmitting the second progress report of the
Commission (S/1371).
(b) Letter dated 4 August 1949 from the
Chairman of the Commission for Conventional Armaments addref.sed to the
President of the Security Council transmitting a working paper and other documents (S/1372).

2. Method of interpretation

C:~nseil

de securite et transmettant lel
du
deUXleme rapport sur les travaux accomplis par la Commission (S/1371).
b) Lettre, en date du 4 aout 1949, adressee
par le President de la Commission des
armements de type classique au President
du Conseil de securite et transmettant un
document de travail et divers autres
documents (S/1372).
I·

2. Mode d'interpret:.ttion

The PRESI"'i:NT: Before proceeding to the
adoption of the agenda, I must consult the
Sc:curity Council on the subject of interpretation.
Members of ~~le Security Council will recall that
at our last leeting, and I think the one before,
we used a modified form of simultaneous
interpretation. When a speech was made in a
language other than French or English, there was
a simultaneous interpretation into French followed
by a consecutive interpretation into English. Also,
speeches made in French or in English were
interpreted simultaneously into Russian. and
Spanish and there followed a consecutive interpretation into the other working language.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Avant que
nous ne passions a l'adoption de l'ordre du jour
je dois consulter les membres du Conseil d~
securite au sujet de l'interpretation. Les membres
du Conseil se souviendront qu'a notre derniere
seance et, je le crois, a l'avant-derniere se:mce
egalement, nous avons modifie dans une certaine
mesure la forme usuelle de l'interpretation simultanee. Lep discours pronoIlces dans unc langue
autre que le fran~ais ou l'anglais ant fait l'objet
d'une interpretation simultanee en fran~ais, puis
d'une interpretation consecutive 'en anglais.
D'autre part, les disc')urs prononces en f:ran~ais
ou en anglais ant ete interpretes simultanement
en rl.1sse et en espagnol et consecutivement dans
l'autre langue de travail.
I am informed that, if it is the desire of the
J'ai ete informe que, si les membres du Conseil
Security Council, that practice could be continued · le desiraient, nous pourrions proceder .de la meme
today. 1 have been unable to obtain any assurance maniere aujourd'hui. On n'a malheureusement
that it could be done regularly during the fourth pas pu me donner l'assurance que cette methode
sessiqn of the General Assembly, owing to purely pourrait etre appliquee regulierement pendant la
technical difficulties, but, if the Security Council quatrieme session de l'Assemblee generale, pour
desires to follow that practice today, 'I can arrange des raison& d'ordre purement technique;. neanmoins, si le Conseil desire adopter cette methode
that it be done.
aujourd'hui, je prendrai les dispositions necessaires.
As there is no objection, we shall follow that
En i'absence d'objection, nous suivrons cette
· methode aujourd'hui.
procedure today.

3. Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was' adopted.

3. Adoption de l'ordre du j'llur
L'ordre du jour est adopte.

4. Travelling expenses and subsistence 4. Frais de voyage et indemnites de
allowances of alternate representa..
tives on Security CouncU Commissions

subsistance aux suppleants des
representants aux commissions du
ConseU de securite

The PRESIDENT: We shall proceed to a disLe PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Nons
cussion of, item number 2 of the agenda. The abordons le point 2 de 1'0rdre d'l jour. Les
members of the Security Council will recall that membres du Conseil de securite se souviendront
we began to address ourselves to this matter at que 110US en aVOllS deja commence l'examen lors
our last [447th] meeting, but did not get very de. notre derniere [447eme] seance, mais que nous
far with the discussion. As indicated, the question ne l'avons pas pousse tres avant. Ainsi que no11S
arises from a letter [5/1338] from the rept'esen- l'avons indique, la question a ete posee par une
tatives of Australia, Belgium, Colombia and lettre [S/1138] adressee par les representants de
France, in which it is suggested that the Security l'Australie, de la Belgique, de la Colombie et de
Council might be' willing to adopt a resolution, la France qui suggeraient que le Conseil de seeUthe text of which was set forth. There was some ·rite adopte une resolution dont its avaient redige
discussion, and some doubt was expressed as to le texte. Une breve discussion est intervenue et
whether the proposal made therein should properly quelques dohtes ant ete exprimes quant ala possiapply to one of the Commissions enumerated· in bilite d'appliquer les dispositions contenues dans
that draft resolution.
le projet de resolution a l'une des commissions
qui y sont en~merees.
Le .representant de la France, le senl des
The representative of France, being the only
signatory of the letter who was also a member cosignataires de la' lettre. qui s01t membre d?
of the Security Council, was good enough to Conseil de securite, a bien voulu indiquer qu'11
indi~ate at our last meeting that he would sponsor
rep'renait a son compte le projet de resolution. n

the resolution. He also indicated that, in view of
the comment that had been made, to which I
have just referred, he would consult with the
other co-signers of the letter and see if they
would agree to any amendment.
We now have a proposed a..'11endment, which
is to be found in document S/1395, the effect of
which is to delete the first of the three Commissions mentioned in the draft resolutionnamely, the Commission of Inquiry concerning
Greek Frontier Incidents.
I take it, therefore, that the resolution in the'
letter from the four delegations, which is to be
found in document S/1338, as amended by document 5/1395, is nay" open for discussion.

a ajoute que, a la lumiere des observations qui
avaieut ete faites et auxquelles le viens de faire
allusion, it consulterait les autres cosignataires de
la lettre pour leur demander s'ils consentiraient
a. accepter des amendements.
Le ,-onseil est maintenant saisi d'un projet
d'amendement qui figure au document S/1395,
tendant a. supprimer la premier" des trois commissions mentionnees dans le projet de resolution,
cl savoir la Commission d'enouete sUl'les incidents
survenus le long de la frontiere grecque.
La discussion est done ouverte sur le projet de
resolution figurant dans la lettre adressee par les
quatre delegations,. lettre faisant l'objetdu
document 5/1338, et modifiee seIon le document
S/1395.

Mr. DE LA TOURNEILE (France) (translated
from' French): The question which was submitted to the Council by the Australian, Belgian,
Colombian and French delegations was thoroughly
discussed on 27 July last [432nd meeting}. The
representative of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic, who presided at that meeting, ended by
asking the Council not to take a decision until
the following meeting. As some considerable
time has elapseci since the meeting of 27 July,
it may perhaps be well to recall briefly the facts
of the case.
Resolution 231 I (IIIt-was-adopted on 8 October 1948 during the first part of the third' session
of the General Assembly. Paragraph 2 of that
resolution states that travelling and subsistence
expenses of one alternate for each member of
cOlTh"llissioils of inquiry or conciliation shall be
payable by the United Nations when the organ
concerned-in this case it is the Security Council
-decides that an alternate for each member is
necessary. Paragraph 3, which I quote, states that
the General Assembly "authorizes the SecretaryGeneral to reimburse· retroactively, on the basis
of paragraph 2 above, travelling and subsistence
expenses incurred by Members participating in
~xis.ting commissions of inquiry or conciliation
mstltuted by the General Assembly or the Security
Council."

M. DE LA TOUJiNELLE (France): La question
qui a ete soumise au Conseil par les delegations
de l'Australie, de la Belgique, de la Colombie et
de la France a deja fait l'objet d'une discussion
approfondie le. 27 juillet derIiier 1432eme seance}.
Le representant de la RepubEque. socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine, qui presidoait alors, avait condu
en demandant au Conseil de ne prendre une
decision que. lors de sa prochaine reunion.
Malheureusement, la seance du 27 juillet est deja.
assez lointaine; peut-etre ne sera-t-il pas inutile
de rappeler brievement les faits.
Au cours de la premiere partie de la troisiem.e
session de l'Assemblee generale, a ete adoptee, le
8 octobre 1948, la resolution 231 I (Ill). Cette
resolution dispose, dan!:' son paragraphe 2, que
les frais de voyage et les indemnites de subsistance
des suppleants, a. raison d'un suppleant pour
chaque membre des commissions d'enquete et de
conciliation, seront supportes par I'Organisation,
lorsque l'organe interesse - en l'espece le Conseil
de securite - stipulera la necessite d'un suppleant
puur chaque membre. Le paragraphe 3, que je
cite, stipule que l'Assemblee generale "autorise .le
Secretaire general a remboUrser, a titre retroacti£
et conformement au paragraphe 2 ci-dessufl, les
frais de voyage et a. payer les indemnites de
subsistance engages par les Etats Membres participant aux commissions d'enquete ou de conciliation deja existantes instituees par 1'Assemblee
generale ou le Conseil de securite".
La decision que nous demandons aujourd'hui
au Conseil de prendre est precisement celle qui
est, prevue au paragraphe 2 que je viens de
rappeler, c'est-a.-dire de decider qu'un suppleant
est necessaire pour· chaque membre des commissions pour l'Indonesie et pour 1'Inde-Pakistan. Le
debat du 27 juillet dernier me parait avail'
demontre cette necessite.

The. decision which we are today asking the
CounCIl to take is in fact that provided fO,r in
paragr.aph 2 which I have just quoted, namely,
to deCIde that an alternate is necessary for each
member of the two Commissions for Indonesia
and for India-Pakistan. The debate on 27 July
last seems to me to have proved that need.
I shall emphasize only two points.
The discussions which took place in the
Council on 27 July brought out the fact that the
~rst Commission sent to Greece was not included
m the provisions of General Assembly resolution
?3l I (lIT). It is for that reason that we propose,
m the amendment which has been distributed, that
th~ reference made to that Commission in our
angInal draft resolution should be deleted.
.. lee decision which the Counci! will take, if it
accepts oUr draft resolution .will no doubt have
~nandal implications, but it' cannot be said that
It .will have budgetary consequences. If' our
•
. resolution is adopted it will be only a matter
_;;raft

- ..

Je sou,lignerai seulement deux points.
De la discussion qui a eu lieu au Conseil le 27
juillet, i1 est ressorti que la premiere commission
envoyee en Grece n'avait pasete comprise dans
le benefice de la resolution 231 I (1II) de
l'Assemblee generale.• C'est la raison pour la:quelle
nous suggerons, par l' amendement qui a ete distribue, de supprimer la mention qui avait ete faite
de cette commission dans notre projet de resolution initial.
La decision que prendra le Conseii, s'il accepte
notre projet de resolution, comporte sans doute
des incidences financieres; mais il ne s'agit nulle.:.
ment d'une resolution a. portee. budgetaire. Si
notre projet de resolution' est adopte, il appar-

of the Secretary-General's or the Assembly's
applying it, with regard to the budget, in accordance with regular procedure, within the framework 'of resolution 231 I (HI). Although document S/1355, which has been distributed by the
Secretariat, is very interesting, it is not relevant
to our discussions. As a matter of fact, it should
have been submitted to the Fifth Committee.

tiendra seulement, conformement a la procedure
ordinaire, au Secretaire general Ott a l'Assemblee
de l'appliquer sur le plan budgetaire dans le
cadre de la 'resolution 231 I (HI). A ce titre, le
document S/1355 qui nous a ete distribue par
le Secretariat n'est pas, bien qu.e tres interessant
pertinent pou.r notre debat. It aurait du, en realite'
etre soumis cl la Cinquieme Commission.
'

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): The
delegatiop.. of the Ukrainian SSR has already had
an opportunity to give its views on the request
for the payment of the' "alternates", a request
which is absolutely unfounded and contrary to
the resolution of the General Assembly to which
the French representative has referred.
First of all I shall briefly recal1 that resolution.
Paragraph 2 of resolution 231 I (Ill) entitled
"Payment of travelling and subsistence expenses
to representatives to the General Assembly and
members of commissions and ether bodies", states
that the Assembly "decides that travelling and
subsistence expenses shall be payable out of United
Nations funds to one represf',!ltative of any
Member participating in a commission of inquiry
or conciliation instituted by the General Assembly
or by the Security Council . . ." That is the rule
laying down the method of procedure in the
present case. .

M. MANUILSKY (Republique sodaliste sovietique d'Ukraine) . (traduit du russe): La delegation de la RSS d'Ukraine a deja ell 1'0ccasion
d'exposer son attitude a 1'egard de la retribution
des "suppleants". Cette demande lui semble
depourvue de tout fondement et contraire a la
resolution de l'Assemblee generale a laquelIe se
rHere le representant de la France.
Tout d'abord, je vais rappeler en quelques mots
le contenu de cette resolution. It est dit au paragraphe 2 de la resolution 231 I (HI) intitulee:
"Paiement des frais de voyage et d'une indemnite
de subsistance aux representants a l'Assemblee
generale, ainsi qu'aux membres des commissions
et autres organes", que l'Assemblee "decide que
les frais de voyage et les indemnites de subsistance
dpivent etre a la charge de 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies lorsqu'il s'agit d'un representant
de tout Etat Membre participant a une commission d'enquete ou de conciliation instituee par
l'Assemblee generale ou par le Conseil de
securite .. ." Telle est donc la regIe a laquelle
'nolls devons nous ccnformer dans le cas present.
Paragraph 2 of the resolution continues
Le paragraphe 2 continue ainsi: "... sous
". . . subject to the proviso that an exception reserve qu'une exception a cette regIe pourra etre
to this rule may be permitted on the decision of admise sur cette decision de l'organe interesse
the organ concerned that ,an-a1te-rnate--ro~€~·· stipulant la necessite d'un 3uppleant pour chaque
member is necessary."
membre".
The rulei~ quite clear. \Ve are now to be
La regIe est claire. Or, on nOllS dem3.nde mainasked to pay the expenses of an alternate. Why tenant de retribuer des suppleants. Pourquoi
was this question not raised before? Has the n'a-t-on pas souleve cette question plus tot?
United Nations Commission for Indonesia begun Est-ce d'aujourd'hui que date la Commission des
its work only today? Was the United Nations .Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie? Est-ce hier
Commission for India and Pakistan set up yester- qu'on ~. constitue la Commission des Nations
day? Alternates were arbitrarily appointed to Unies pour, l'Inde et le Pakistan? Apres avoir
these Commissions and now we are asked that designe, d'une maniere arbitraire, des membres
the United Nations should pay the expenses.
suppleants a ces commissions, on vient demander
a l'Organisation de couvrir les depenses qui en
re~ultent.

I would ask whether this is a correct and
economical way of dealing with United Nati()Us
f~nds, which have to be covered by Members'
contributions? This action is just as arbitrary
as if a Member of the Organization were to
announce that it was reducing its contribution
and, having done so, were to appeal to the
Security Council to authorize that reduction
retroactively. Even an important State 'like
France cannot be permitted to act in such an
arbitrary way.
That is the first reason for which I am opposed
to the payment of those expenSes.,
I should like to mention the budget, to which
I did not refer at our last meeting. The budget
of the United Nations will be increased by 50
per cent in 1950. If we compare it with the budget
of the League of Nations, the figure is colossal.
Indeed, we are demanding excessive expenditure
'from Member States, yet now, in spite of our
enormous budget, we are being asked to pay
supplementary expenses.

, Est-ce la une maniere correcte, une maniere---.
econome de disposer des fonds de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies qui proviennent des contributions ,fournies par l~s Etats Membres? En procedant de la sorte, les Membres de 1'0rganisation
des Nations Unies agissent d'une maniere aussi
arbitraire que si, apres avoir, declare qu'ils reduisaient le montant de leur contribution, its demandaient au Conseil de securite d'autoriser cette
reduction a titre retroactif. On ne saurait tolerer
des actes aussi arbitraires, meme s'ils sont commis
par un Etat aussi important que' la France.
TeIle est la 'premiere consideration qui me
pousse a m'opposer ~u paiement de ces depenses.

Ten viens maintenant' au budget dont je n'ai
pas parle a, laderniere seance. Le budget de
l'Organisation des Nations Unies va augmenter
de 50 pour 100 en 1950. Ce chiffre est enorme,
si on le compare au budget de la Societe des
Nations. Nous' avons impose aux Etats Membres
des depenses qui sont, .en fait, hors de toute
proportion, et voici que, en depitde ce qudget
enorme, 011 vient nous demander de couvnr des
depenses supplementaires.

p

5

Why should such small Latin American States
as Cuba, or States such as Egypt, the Arab
countries and Lebanon, bear expenses incurred
by the French Government? That country has
undertaken an honorary task, that of representing
the United Nations on a given Commission. If it
is unable to carry it out, it should turn over that
task to other States.
I should like to go further and say that such
a war-devastated country as the Ukrainian SSR
would not come here with outstretched hands and
ask for the payment of travelling and subsistencf'
expenses, but would undertake to bear those
expenses itself. How can we ask the United
Nations to pay the expenses of such States as
Australia, Belgium, Colombia, and especially
France? France is a large State; furthermore,
I have read a communication in the newspapers,
emanating, unless I am mistaken, from the President of the Council of Ministers, Mr. Queuille,
to the effect that France's financial position has
reached a reccrd level, approaching that of 1927.
Why, then, can it not defray costs amountingonly to this ridiculous sum of 250,000 dollars?
Why does it ask that it be paid by other economically under-developed small States and by Stat~s
which have been devastated by the war and ar
now in need of technical assistance for' the rehabilitation of their economy? VVhere is the
principle of equality that is proclaimed by the
Unit<,;d Nations? It is not enough to impose the
consequences of the economic crisis on the small
States, but they must also bear the expenses incurred in connexion with all kinds of commissions.

I consider these claims to be absolutely unfounded,. the more so as we shall have to give
serious consideration in the Fifth Committee to
the advisability of putting an end to such expenditures, such frittering away of the funds of
Member States.
Would the owner of any private undertaking
incur such supplementary expenses? If he d1d,
he would soon declare bankruptcy. As regards
United Nations funds, they come from outside
sources, and attempts are therefore made to profit
by them.

Pourquoi les petits Etats de l'Amerique latine,
ccmme Cuba par exemple, ou les pays comme
l'Egypte, les pays arabes, le Liban, doivent-ils
couvrir les depenses engagees par le Gouvernement de la France? Ce pays a assume une mission
honorifique, la mission de representer 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies au sein d'une commission. S'il n'a pas les moyens des'en acquitter,
qu'il s'en desiste en taveur d'autres Etats.
Je diI'ai plus. Un Etat aussi devaste par la
guerre que la RSS d'Dkraine ne serait pas venu
tendre la main et demander qu'on lui remboursat
les frais de voyage et les indemnites qu'il aurait
da payer. I1 en aurait pris la charge lui-meme.
Comment pent-cm demander a 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies de couvrir les frais d'Etats tels
que l'Australie, la BeIgique, la Colombie et,
surtout, la France? La France est un grand pays.
D'autre part, j'ai Iu dans les journaux une declaration faite, si je ne me trompe, par M. Queuille,
President du COIiseil, seIon laquelle la situation
financiere de la France serait extremement favo..
rable, presqu'aussi favorable qu'en 1927.
PourqtlOi alors la France ne peut-eIle pas payer
cette somme derisoire de 250.000 dollars?
Pourquoi detllande-t-elle a d'autres Etats, a de
petits Etats dont l'tkonomie est peu developpee,
a des Etats qui ont ete devastes par la guer-re et
qui ont besoin d'assistance technique pour relever
leur economie, pourquoi leur demande-t-elle de
payer cette somme? OU est donc le· principe de
l'egalite, proc1ame par l'Organisation des Nations
Unies? On ne se contente pas de rejeter les consequences de la crise economique sur les·. petits
pays, Ofl veut encore leur faire payer les depenses
qui ont ete occasionnees par la constitution de
toutes sortes de commissions.
Cette pretention me semble depourvue de tout
fondement et la Cinquieme Commission devra
d'ailleurs trouver une methode pour mettre fin a
ces depenses, voire a ce gaspillage des fonds
fournis par les Etats Membres.
Le proprietaire d'une entreprise privee consentirait-il a assUmer des depenses supplementaires
de ce genre? S'il le faisait, il ne tarderait pas a
faire faillite. Quarit aux fonds de 1'0rganisation,
ils viennent du dehors; c'est pourquoi oq che.rche
a en profiter.

~-Fitlally, I want to say frankly, and I consider

Enfin, je tiens a declarer - j'estime que c'est
It my dutyto-do-,-so, that a number of organs have la mon devoir - qu'on a cree, aupres clel'Orgabeen established arotmdthe United Nations which nis~tion des Nations Dnies, toute une'serie
offer nothing but sinecures: compensations, d'organes qui n'offrent que des sinecures. Indemtravelling expenses, subsistence expenses. It may nites, frais de voyage, allocatiolls journalieres!
be seen from the budget of the United Nations It suffit de se reporter au budget de l'Organisation
that we have a whole series of divisions the desN:ations Dnies pour voir qu'il existe toute une
members of which are continually travelling on serie de -divisions· dont les membres. voyag:ent
- pe.rsonal business, while their expenses are sub- . constamrnent pC)ul"r€gler leurs affaires personmItted to the United Nations for payment.
nelles et dont 1'0rganisation-4~it_~ouvrir les frais.

.H. a S~ate has agreed to carry out an honorary
mISSIon, It should pay for that honour itself and
should not make others bear the costs. I, there~ore, propose the rejection ofthisproposal, which
IS. completely unfounded and not in conformity
;'VIth resolution 231 I (HI) for it only further
,lUc:;eases the expenses of the United Nations,
whlch are already too burdensome for many
small States.

.m

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
French) : The representative of the Ukrain-

>

Si un Etat a consenti a remplirune.mission
pour ainsi direhonorifique, c'est 'lui:'meme-qui
doit. supporter .1es frais de l'honneur. qui luia -'-~-.
ete fait; il ne doit pas faire supporterces frais
par d'autres. Je propose donc de rejeter cette
proposition, depour.vue de tout .£ondement et
contraire a la resolution 23.1 I (III) , car dIe ne
fait qu'augmenter les depenses de 1'0rganisatio!1,
des Nations Unies, depenses qui sont deja trop
lourdes pour un grand nombre de petits Etats.
M. DE: LA TOURN"ELLE (France): Le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine n'aime pas certaines

6

ian SSR does not like certain General Assembly
resolutions, in particular that of 8 October 1948.
That he also greatly dislikes commissions of
inquiry we all know, and he has the right to do
so. But he is dearly wrong in indulging h
trifling arguments in the Security Council concerning resolutions of which he does not seem to
know the purport. If in fact he had studied the
resolutions which set up the United Nations Commission for Indonesia or that for India and
Pakistan, he 'vould have noticed that France is
not a member of those Commissions, and that,
consequently, despite his statements to that effect,
France is not seeking, by means of its draft
resolution, to obtain a refund of expenses in
which it had no part since it is not a member of
the Commissions.
The representative ,of the Ukrainian SSR has
claimed that he is defending the interests of the
small Powers; he has described their budgets as
being weighed down '. by expenditureinconsiderately incurred by the commissions of inquiry. It
is, however, in order to protect the interests of
the small Powers, which have no possibility of
voicing .their views in the Security Council, and
which have representatives on the cqmmissions of
inquiry, that France, in agreement with a certain
number of other Powers, has submitted its draft
resolution.
.

resolutions de l'Assembleegenerale, notamment
celle du 8 octobre 1948. Il a egalement une profonde aversion pour les commissions d'enqt1~te
nOllS le savons tous, et c'est son droit. Mais il ~
manifestement tort de se livrer devant le Conseil
de .securite a des developpements oiseux sur des
resolutions dont il ignore evidemment la teneur
Si, en effet, il avait pris connaissance des r~solu~
tions qui ont constitue les COr::Imissions des
Nations Unies pour l'Indor.esie ou pour l'Inde
et le Pakistan, i1 aurait constate que la France
ne fait pas pariie de ces commissions et que par
consequent, contrairement a ce qu'il a bien ~oulu
affirmer, la Fran~e·necherche pas par son projet
de resolution a obtenir le remboursement de frais
auxquels elle n'a nullement participe, puisqu'elle
ne fait pas partie de ces commissions.
Le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine a feint
de defendre les interets des petites Puissances, i1
nous a represente leurs budgets oberes par les
frais incoo.sideres occasionnes par les commissions
d'enquete. C'est precisement pour defendre les
interets de ces petites Puissances, qui ne peuvent
pas se faire entendre au Conseil de securite et qui
ont des representants dans les <:ommissions d'enquete, que la France, d'accord avec un certain
nombre d~autres Puissances, a depC!'se son projet
de resolution.

M. TSARA];'KINE (Union des Republiques sociaMr; TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist"
Republics) (translated from Rztssian): The listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe) : Le reprerepresentative of France has just said that J:rance sentant de la France vient de declarer que son
is not a member of the Commission for' India pays ne faisait partie ni de la Commission pour
and Pakistan, nor of the Commission for lndo- l'Inde et le Pakistan, ni de la Commission pour
nesia, and that, consequently, it is not a directly l'Indonesie, et que, par consequent, il n't~tait pas
interested party. As far as I know, however, directement interesse a, la question. Mais, pour
France was_a member of the Commission of autant que je le sache, la France a fait partie de
Investigation concerning Greek Frontier Inci- la, Commission d'enquete sur les incidents survedents, which no longer exists, and the French nus le long de la frontiere grecque, qui a Cesse
representative, in the fi~st version of his letter, d'exister depuis; or, le represent~ ,t de la France
requested the United Nations tOIJay the expenses a demand6, dans sa premiere lettre a I'Organiof alternates to that now non-.existent Commis- sation des Nations Unies; que 1'0n retribuat les
sion. Therefore it was only after the shelving membres suppleants de cette commission qui
of the question of paying alternate represen!:atives n'existe plus. C'est done seulement apres que .la
on the Commission of Investigation concerning question de la retribution des membres suppleants
Greek Frontier Incidents that France apparently de la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents
bec~me a disinterested party. But that is not the survemis le long de la frontiere grecque eut ete
substance of the matter.
retiree que la France a cesse d'y etre directement
interessee. Mais ce n'est pas la le fond du
probleme.
Irrespective of whether or not France is a
member of the Commissions for which payment
is requested, one point is quite clear: the request
is unfounded. It is legally absolutely groundless
and is contrary to General Assembly resolution
231 I (Ill) of 8 October 1948, which has been
mentioned here. Paragraph 2 of that resolution
states quite definitely that the expenses of only
one representative of any Member participating
in a commission shall be payable; an· exception
to this rule could be lna,de only by special decision
of the appropriate organ, that is to say, .the
General Assembly or the Security Council, determining that each representative needed an
alt.ernate. We have no such decision in the
present case.

Que la France fasse ou non partie de ces
commissions dont on demande de couvrir les frais,
une chose est certaine: cette demande n'est .pas
legitime. Elle est depourvue de tout fondement.
juridique, et elle est en contradiction flagrante
avec'la resolution qu'an a invoquee. id, a savoir
la resolution 231 I eIlI) de l'Assemblee generaIe
en date du 8 octobrel948. Au paragraphe 2de
cette resolution,.il est dit clairement que l'Organi~
sation prend a sa charge les frais d'u,n seul repre- '
sentant de chaque Etat membre de la commission
interessee; une· exception a cette regIe ne pourra
etre admiseque sur decision de l'organe interesse,
en l'occurrence, de l'Assemblee general\': ou du
ConseiJ de' securite, stipulant la necessite d'un
suppleant pour chaque inembre. Or, aucune decision de ce genren'est intervenue dans le cas
present.

Furthermore, I should like to refer to the
authoritative conclusions presented to us by the
, ._ Secretariat [S /1335]. The representative of
-Fr;t.!1.ce has said that there is no need to consider

Je tiens a rappeler en outre l'opinion autorisee
du Secretariat [S/1355]. Le representant de la
France a ditqu'il n'y avait pas lieu de prend~e
cette opinion en consideration, car eUe n'a~

p.

/

these conclusions because they are irrelevant. I rien a voir avec la question. Je ne puis accepter
-la not agree with this view. The conclusions of cette maniere de voir. Cette opinion du Secre,)le Secretariat are authoritative, have been drawn tariat fait autorite; dIe a ete emise en connaisup with f~U knowledge of .the facts, an.d ha,:e a sance de cause et elle a directement trait -cl. la
direct bearw:g on the question we are. dlscussmg. question dont le Conseil est saisi. Il y est. dit que
These conclusions state that the Commission of la Commission d'enquete sur les incidents surveInvestigation concerning Greek Frontier Inci- nus le long de la frontiere grecque; commbsion
dents, in connexion with which a monetary claim a propos de laquel1e on adresse a l'Orga:nisation
is beir-g submitted to the United Nations, no des Nations Unies des demandes cl'atgent, a cesse
longer exists. The representative of France d'exister. Le representant de la France le savait
lmew this when he signed this letter. He knew au moment de signer cette lettre. Il savait que la
that the General Assembly resolution provides for :':~solution de l'Assemblee generale ne prevoyait
the payment of alternates only in exceptional la retribution de suppleants que dans des cas
Circumstances, and only in the case of existing exceptiollnels, et seulement pour les commissions
Commissions. Nevertheless he submitted his existahtes. Neanmoins, it a presente une demande
claims in conne.....:ion with a non-existent Com- concernant une commission qui n'existe plus.
mission. Is this a legitimate request or a loyal Est-ce la une demande legitime ou une attitude
or conscientious attitude toward the United loyale et honnete a. l'egard de 1'Organisation des
Natiops? It is not.
Nations Unies? Non.
Le Secretariat. declare en outre que les resoluThe· Secretariat further states that the decisions
to set up conciliation commissions for India and tions portant creation des commissions de mediaPakistan and for Indonesia contain no provisions tion pour 1'Inde et le Pakistan et pour l'Indonesie
indicating the necessity of alternates. That means ne stipulaient pas la necessite de suppleants. Par
that a claim or request in connexion with alter- consequent, cette demande relative aux membres
nates on those Commissions is also contrary to suppleants de ces comm1ssions est, elle aussi, conresolution 231 I (HI) of 8 October, whichstatcs, traire a la i"esolution 231 I (IlI) du 8 octobre,
I :repeat, that expenses shall be payable only if ou it est dit -'- je le repete - que les frais ne
the relevant decision of the Genera! Assembly or seront couverts qu'au cas ou la resolution pertithe Security Council contains a special indication nente de l'Assemblee generale ou du Conseil de
.- that an alternate for each member is necessary. . securit6 prevoit expressement la necessite d'un
Hence, the payment of alternate:? to the Com- suppleant pour tel ou teI representant. Il n'est
missions for India and Pakistan and for Indo- done pas legitime de demander qu'on retribue
nesia is also illegal.
les membres suppleants des commissions pour
nnde et le Pakistan et pour l'Indonesie.
This contradicts the very decision of the
General Assembly on the basis of which it is
desited to obtain money from our Organization.
The Secretariat points out that since this resolution did not permit the payment of alternates on
the Commissions for India and Pakistan, for
Indonesia, and for Greece, the Secretarv-General
does not have the funds in his budget for the
payment of these alternates. No provision was
made for these payments and the SecretaryGeneral never requested these funds because
there was no provision wnatever in the resolution
for the payment of any expenses of alternates of
the:,;~ Commissions. Payment was not provided
for 111 the resolution and is incompatible with it.

Cela est contrair~ a cette meme resolution de
1'Assemblee generale que 1'on invoquepour
demander de l'arger.t a 1'Organisatior.. des Nations
Unies. Le Secretariat precise que le Secretaire
general ne dispose pas, dans son budget, de fonds
pour payer ces suppleants, parce que la resolution
en question ne prevoyait pas la retribution des
membres suppleantsdes commissions pour l'Inde
et le Pakistan, pour l'Indonesie et pour la Grece.
Ces depenses n'bnt pas ete prevues et le Secretaire
general n'a jamais demande de credits a cet efIet,
etant donne que la resolution ne stipulai~ pointle
remboursement des depenses engagees par les
membres suppIeants de· cescommissio'rrs. La resolution ne le prevoyait pas; cela est incompatible
ayec cette resolution.

. Disregarding this fact, the Security Council
Nonobstant ce fait, on demande au Conseil de
IS t;ow.asked to pay these alternates retroactively, securite de faire retribuer ces suppleants a titre
WhICh IS illegitimate and in contradiction to the retroactif, ce qui est parfaitement illegitime et
the decisbn of the General Assembly, and it is contraire a la resolution de 1'Assemblee generale,
asked to request the Fifth Committee and subse- et on 1'invite a prier la Cinquieme Commission,
quently, the General Assetnbly, to rel~ase supple- puis l'Assemblee generale, de mettre a la dispomentary funds to the Secretary-General. In the sition. du Secretaire general des fonds supplemenfirst place, 200,000 dollars have to be provided to taires. Il s'agit tout d'abord de demander 200.000
c0;ID~ensate the expenses of alternates on Com- dollars pour retribuer les membres suppIeants des
.-mIsslOns:which have been incurred up to the commissions qili ont ete creees jusqu'ace jour,
present tIme. Then credit must be provided for puis de prevoir des credits pour couvrir les aepenexpenses which may be incurred in the future. ses qui pourraient etre engagees a 1'avenir. Que
How can tJ:is be viewed? I must apologize for faut-it en conclure? Il s'agit bel et bieIt the expressIOn, but in view of this resolution of excusez-moi d'utiliser ce mot, mais je- ne puis
the General Assembly: I can only describe such m'exprimer autrement etant donne cette resoluan act as an unconscionable attempt to extort tion de l'Assemblee - d'une tentative demauvaise
money from the United Nations for the reim- foi pour extorquer l'Organisation des Nations
burs.ement of individuals who have no right to Unies des sommes destinees cl. payer des personnes
receIve any funds from the United Nations in qui n'ont aucun droitd'exiger que l'Organisation
payment of their tra.veUing expenses.
couvre leurs frais de voyage..
Ther~fore, on the basis of the authoritative
C'est pourquoi, se fondant sur 1'opinion emise
btcluslOn of our Secretariat contained in docu- par le Secretariat dans le document S/1355 en

a

CiiiiI
ment S/1355 of 26 July 1949, and on the basis
of General Assembly resolution 231 I (HI) of
8 October 1948, the delegation of the Soviet
Union considers that there are no grounds for
complying with the request contained in the letter
of Australia, Belgium, Colombia and France.
The request is illegal and we cannot comply with
it. The USSR delegation is opposed to granting it.

date du 26 juillet 1949, en se fondant egalement
sur la resolution 231 I (lII) adoptee par 1'Assemblee generale le 8 octobre 1948, la delegation de
l'Union sovietique estime que le Conseil de secu~
rite n'est ntlllement fonde a. donner suite
la
demande qui fait l'objet de la lettre envoyee par
l'Australie, la Belgique, la Colombie et la France.
Cette demande n'est pas legitime et i1 n'y a pas
lieu de la satisfaire. La delegation de l'URSS
s'oppose a. ce qu'il y soit donne suite.

Mr. DE LA TOURNELLE (France) (translated
from French): The representative of the
l.Jkrainian SSR carries heavy responsibi1iti~s in
his country. He always stays o::lly a very short
time with us, too short a tim,;, in my opinion.
It is therefore no doubt excusable for him to
refer to the· representation of France on commissions of which that countrJ has never been
a member. I had hoped, however, that the representative of the USSR, who is permanently
attached to the Security Council, would know
all the General Assembly resolutions. Unhappily,
even that is a vain hope. The representative of
the Soviet Union has evidently not read the
resolution of 8 October 1948 to which he has
referred at great length, the text of which reads
"... subject to the proviso that an exception to
this rule may be permitted on the decision of the
organ concerned that an alternate for each member is necessary." What does that mean? It
means that the organ concerned-obviously the
commission of inquiry-is free to take a decision,
if it deems necessary, nominating an alternate
for each member.

M. DE LA TOURNELLE (France): Le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine exerce des charges tres
lourdes dans son pays. Son sejour parmi nous est
toujours tres brei, trop bref a. mon gre personnel.
Il est donc sans doute excusable de mentionner
la representation de la France dans des commissions dont eUe n'a jamais fait partie. En revanche,
j'avais l'espoir que le representant de 1'URSS qui,
lui, siege de fa<;on permanente au Conseil de securite connut toutes les resolutions de l'AssembIee generale. Malheureusement, cet espoir est
vain, lui aussi. Le representant de l'Union sovietique n'a evidemment pas lu la resolution du 8
octobre 1948, a. laquelle it a fait longuement allu~
sion, qui dec:1are textuellement: "... sous reserve
qu'une exception a. cette regIe pourra etre admise
sur decision de l'organe interesse stipulant la
necessite d'un suppleant pour chaque membre".
Que signifie ce texte? I1 signifie que l'organe interesse - c'est evidemment la commission d'enquete
- est libre de prendre une decision stipulant; s'il
l'estime necessaire, la designation d'un suppleant
pour chaque membre.

Consequently, the proposal we submit to the
Security Council is perfectly logical and legal.
Whether that resolution pleases or displeases th",
USSR representative is another matter, which is
none of my affair.

Par consequent, la proposition que nous faisons
au Conseil de securite est parfaitement logique et
legale. Que cette resolution plaise ou non all
representant de l'URSS, je n'y suis pour rien.

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian. Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from. Russian): The
speech of the representative of France was unconvincing and could not be convincing for the
simple reason that we have quoted a resolution
in 'Nhich it is quite c1earlystated in black and
white that the United Nations will assume the
payment of expenses for only one representative.
That is how the resolution reads. Whether the
representative of France likes it or not, whether
I like it or not, this resolution exists and must be
applied. Furthermore, it is stated in this resolution that alternate representatives would not be
compensated, but that their expenses would be
covered only by way of exception. Yet, for some
reason or other, the representative of F1;'ance
insists upon interpreting the resolution precisely
in the sense that alternates can be paid, and
retroactively at that.
The representative of France takes the position
that, while he was once a representative on the
Commission c> ( Inquiry concerning Greek Frontier Incidents, now he is altruistically protectingthe interests of other States. I cannot· call
generosity at someone else's expense altruism.
Charity at another's expense is very easy. If
the Government of Fravt:e wishes to be generous
and pay these expenses, let it pay them, but why
should other Governments have to pay them?
Why pay them at someone else's expense? That
is why I am objecting to this proposal, and the
representative of France has no cause for a1Jger.
The arguments he has advanced cannot withstand

M. MANUILSKY, (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (traduit dZ6 russe): La declaration du representant de la France n'a convaincu
ni ne pouvait convaincre personne, pour la simple
raison que nous avons cite une resolution ou i1
est dit c1airement, noir sur blanc, que l'Org-anisation aes Nations Unies se charge de retribuer
un seul representant. T el est le texte de la resolution. Que le representant de la France ou moimeme le voulions ou non, cette resolution existe
et il faut l'appliquer. D'autre part, cette resolution
precise que'les membres suppleants ne seront pas
retribues et que leurs frais ne seront couverts qu'a
titre d'exception. Or, le representant de la France·
tient, on ne sait pour ql.lelle raison, a. interpreter
ce texte en ce sens que l'on peut retribuer les
suppleants et qu'on pettt memele faire retroactivement.

a

Le representant de la France affirme qu'il a fa!t
partie de la Commission d'enquete sur les inCIdents survenus le long de la frontiere grecque
mais que, en ce moment, i1 defend, d'une fa~on
tout cl fait desinteressee, les inh~rets d'autres pays.
A mon sens, la generosite aux frais d'autrui n'a
rien de desinteresse. I1 est bien facile de faire de
la- biertfaisance avec l'argent des atttres. Si le
Gouvernement de la France veut etre genereux
et assumer le paiement de ces frais, qu'il le fasse
lui-meme. Pourquoi faire appel cl d'autres Eta~s?
Pourquoi couvrir ces depenses cl leurs f:~lS?
Voila pourquoi je m'oppose a cette propOSitIOn,
et le representant de la France aurait tort de.

..

9

;

criticism. I regret very much that we have ha!'
to take up so much time discussing this matter
involving 250,000 dollars. Nevertheless, I must
say that it was no accident that I raised this
question. I am very much afraid of the precedent
that may be established. Tomor row some member
of the Security Council may come forwar d and
say: "It was so decided and we shall continue
in the same way in the future. " That will mean
further expenditure for the United Nations.

m'en vouloir. Les arguments qu'il a avances ne
resistent pas a. la critique. J e regrette vivement
que nous ayons perdu tellement de temps a discuter de cette question de 250.000 dollars ; mais
je dois dire que j'ai souleve cette question intentionnellement. Je redoute fort qu'it ne se cree
un precedent. Je redoute en effet que, demain, un
membre du Conseil de securite ne vienne declaie r:
"H en a ete decide ainsi et it faut
confor mer
a cette decision a l'avenir", ce quinous
ne manqu erait
pas d'entra iner de nouvelles depenses pour l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
On several occasions I have heard representaLes representants
tives of the United States, and particularly ment M. Vandenberg, des Etats-U nis et, notam~·
nous ont donue, a plusieurs
Mr. Vandenberg, teaching us the need for economy reprises, des le<;ons
d'economie et nous ant invites
and exhorting us to spend United Nations funds a ne depenser les fonds
economically. Now, when we want to follow une extreme prudenc... de l'Organ isation qu'avec
Et void que, mainte nant
this advice, the representative of France comes ou. nous voulons suivre
ces
bons conseils, le reprealong and violates the principles of economy by sentant de la France
formule des revendications
his request. That is the reason why I am afraid incompatibles avec ce regime
d'6conomie. Voila
of this extremely dangerous precedent.
pourquoi yai peur d'un precedent, d'un precedent
extremement dangereux.
I must apologize for having taken up the time
Je dois m'excu ser aupres
of the Council but I will vote against any pro- de lui avail' pris telleme du Conseil de securite
posals whatsoever to satisfy the claims of the voterai contre toute proposnt de temps, mais je
ition tend<:"l1t a donner
representative of France .
satisfaction aux demandes formulees par le representan t de la France .
Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russia n): I wish
to reply very briefly to the representative of
France since he has attemp ted-to be sure, unsuccessful ly-to assert that the representative of the
USSR had not clearly understood the resolution.
I want to show that I did and do understand the
resolution correctly, and that the delegation of
France---whetller intentionally or not-is attempting to interpret the resolution incorrectly and is
making an unfounded demand on the United
Nations.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques) (trailttit ilu russe): Je voudrais
repond re brievement au represe ntant de la
France , qui s'est efforce de montre r - 2. vrai
dire, en vain - que le representant de l'URSS
n'avait pas saisi le SellS de la resolution. Je tiens
a prouve r que j'ai bien compris ce texte et que
j'en interprete correctement le sens, alors que la
delegation de la France - intentionnellemerit ou
non - interprete cette resolution d'une fa<;on
erronee et presente a l'Organisation des Nations
Unies une demande depourvue de fondement.
The representative of France has stated that
Le represe ntant de la France a declare id que
the organ concerned should decide whethe r an c'est l'organe interesse qui
alternate was needed or not, and whether or not ou non designer un supplea doit decider s'il faut
nt et s'il faut ou· non
he was to be paid. According to him, the "organ le retribuer. Selon lui,
cet
"organe interesse",
concerned" is the commission or committee in c'est la commission ou le
comite
dont font partie
which a particular representative having an alter- le membre ou le supplea
nt en question. Or, it
nate participates. But in paragr aph 2 of the ressort du paragr aphe
2 de la resolution que cet
~esolution it is stated that this "organ concernec1"
"organe interesse" est l'Assemblee generale ou le
IS the General Assembly or the Securit y Council. Conseil de securite.
That is the way the Secretary-General also under- prete la resolution deLe Secretaire general interla meme fa<;on. J e ne crois
stands it. I do not think that the Secretary- pas que dans cette questio
General of the United Nations was mistaken in general de l'Organisation n ce soit le Secretaire
this question and that the representative of France se trompe et le represe des Nation s,Unie s qui
was correct. I shall read from tlle Secretary- raison. J e vais donner ntant de la France qui ait
lecture d'un passage de la
General's note of 26 July set forth in document note du Secretaire genera
~/1355. Among his conclusions he says: reproduite au document l en date du 26 juillet
S/1355. Le Secretaire
Further, ..the Securi ty Council in establishing general ecrit dans ses conclus
ions: "D'aut re part,
the CommIttee of Good Offices for Indonesia in . en instifuant la Commi
October 1947 and the Mediation Commission on l'Indonesie en octobre ssion de. bons offices pour
1947 et la Commission de
the India-Pakistan question in April 1948, did mediation sur la questio
n Inde-P akistan en avril
110t determine the necessity for alternates."
1948, le Conseil de securite n'a pas stipule la
necessit:e de supplements".'
.That is. how the Secretary-General understands
Voila comme
thIS qu.es~lOn. The Security Counc il-and not the question. C'est nt le Secretaire general voit l~
CO~mlsslOn, as the representative of France is la commission, le Conseil de securite et non pas
trymg .to demonstrate---had· to determine, in the de la France , quicomme le pretend le teprese ntant
aurait du stipuler, dans Sa resoresolution whereby it established the Commission, lution portan t creatio
whether the members of the Commission needed ses membres auraien n de cette commission, que
t besoin de suppleants.
alternates.
'
That is ~y reply to the statement made by the
~:sentatIve of Fr.a.nce that the representative
_
t _ _.

. Telle est donc ma reponse a la declaration du
represe ntant de la France selon laquelle le repre-

of the Soviet Union had not clearly undersroo<tlUsentant de rUnicn sovietique u'aurait pas ,omptis
the resolution.
la resolution.

l.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Personne
ne demandant plus la parole, je mets aux vaix
le projet de resolution. Le texte de ce projet de
resolution qui figure au document S/1338, modifie
par l'amendement figurant au document S/13951
est le suivant:
'

.

The PRESIDENT: Since there is no further discussion on this item, 1 shall put the draft resolution to a vote. The text as set forth in document S/1338 and as modified by the amendment
set forth in document S/1395,1 reads as follows:

"The Seclwity Council,

"Le Conseil de secttrite,

ttConsidering that in virtue of resolution 231
(Ill) adopted by the General Assembly on
8 October 1948, it is a matter for its own decision
whether, in the case of commissions of inquiry or
investigation instituted by it, the representative
of a Member participating in such commission
needs to be assisted by an alternate;

"Considerant que, selon la resnlution 231 (Ill)
adoptee par l'Assemblee generale le 8 octobre
1948, it lui appartient de determiner, en ce qui
concerne les commissions d'enquete ou de conciliation instituees par lui, s'it est necessaire que le
representant d'un Etat Mell1.bre faisant partie
d'une telle commission soit assiste par un
suppleant;

"Considering that, in cases where this need has
been found by the Security Council to exist, the
Secretary-General is authorized by the same resolution to reimburse retroactively to States Members the travelling and subsistence expenses of the
alternate of their representatives on the said
commissions;

"Considerant que, la OU cette necessite a ete
ainsi constatee par le Conseil de securite, le
Secretaire~general, seIon la meme resolution, est
autorise a rembourser retroactivement aux Etats
Membres les frais de voyage et indemnites de
subsistance du suppleant de leurs representants
aux dites commissions;

UNotes that since the institution of the undermentioned Commissions the representatives of
Members that are participating or have participated have each had to be assisted by an alternate:

ttConstate que, depuis l'institution des .commissions ci-dessous mentionnees, it a ete neccssaire
que les representants des Etats Membres qui en
font ou en ont fait partie fussent assistes chacun
par un suppleant :
"1. La Commission de bons offices, devenue
la Commission des Nations Unies pour l'Indonesie;
"2. La Commission de mediation pour la
question lnde-Pakistan".

"1. The Committee of Good Offices, which
has now become the United Nations Commission
for Indonesia;
"2. The United Nations Commission for India
and Pakistatl."
A vote was taken by show of hands, as follows:

It est pmcede attvote a main levee.

Votent pour: Argentine, Canada, Chine,
In favottr: Argentina, Canada, China, France,
Norway, United Kingdom of Great Britain and .France, Norvege, Royaume-Uni de GrandeBretagne et d'Irlande du Nord, Etats-Unis
Northern Ireland, United States of America.
d'Amerique:
Against: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic.

VotJnt contre: la Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine.

Abstaining: Cuba, Egypt, Union of Soviet
Socialist Republics.

S'absiiennent: Cuba, Egypte, Union des Republiques socialistes sovietiques.

The'resolution was adopted by 7 votes to, 1, with
3 abstentions.

Par 7 voix contre une, avec 3 abstentions, la
resolution est adoptee.

5. Future costs of military observers in 5. Frais occasionn~s El l'avenir par la
Indonesia
,.
presence d'ohservateurs miIitaires
.en Ind.onesie
The PRESIDENT: I should like to remind members of ,the Security Council that I had the
honour to address to them on 22 September a
letter in the following terms:
"I have the honour to refer to the cablegram
dated August 5, 1949 from the Consular Commission of Batavia, requesting that the United
Nations assume future costs of allowances of the
military observers in Indonesia (S/1366). In
order to handle the request expeditiously and
save the time of the representatives on the
Security Council, I should like to suggest that

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Je desire
rappeler a~x membres du Conseil de securite que
j'ai eu l'honneur de leur adresser, le 22 septembre,
une lettre qui se lit cornme suit:
"J'ai l'honneur de me rHerer au cablogr~m?le
en date du 5 aout 1949 adresse par la Commlssl0~
consulaire de Batavia,clemandant que l'O~ganl­
sation des Nations Unies assume a l'avemr les
frais de subsistance des observateurs militaires
en Indonesie (S/1366). Afin de permettre. un
examen rapide, de cette demande et d'econOlll1Ser
le temps du Conseil de securite, .je propose que ce

3 The resolution, as amended, was subsequently issued
under the symbol 8/1401.

1 Le '::exte de la resolution, aitlJsi amende, a ete
distribue par la suite sous la cote 8/1401.

•

11

this cablegram be referre d to the SecretaryGeneral with the request that this matte4 be
dealt with in conformity with the practice now
established for other United Nations missions.
"If I have not received any objections from
members of the Council by 30 September, I shall
consider that the Security Council agrees to this
procedure. "
I must admit that we have not yet reached
SO September; it may be that some members of
the Council have not yet made up their minds in
regard to this proposal. If so, they might like
to ask for postponement of the item, or it may
be that they are opposed to the suggestion which
I made, in which case perhaps they may wish
. to explain their objection.
Mr. MANUI LSKY (Ukrai nian Soviet Socialist
Repuplic) (translated from Russia n): In the
first place, I wish to object on the same grounds
as in the case of allowances for alternate representatives. The United Nations should not incur
unnecessary expenditure and inflate its budget.
I was afraid that a precedent might be created,
and now we are already faced with a new case
and are asked to defray the costs. of military
observers in Indonesia, and so on.

cablogramme soit transmis au Secretaire general
en l'invitant a traiter cette question conformement
a la pratique suivie pour les autres missions des
Nations Unies.
"Dans le cas ou aucune objection ne serait
soulevee par les membres du Conseil d'ici au
30 septembre, je considererai que le Conseil de
securite approuve cette proced ure!'
N ous ne sommes pas encore, naturellement, le
30 septembre; il se peut done que certains membres du Conseil n'aient pas encore pris de decision
a l'egard de ma proposition. Dans ce cas, ils
dem1p1deront peut-etre l'ajourn ement de la discussion de cette question. D'autre part, dans le cas
ou ils seraiellt opposes a ma proposition, ils tiendront peut-etre a expliquer leur point de vue.
M. MANUI LSKY (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukra ine) (traduit dtt russe): Les objections que je tiens a formuler en tout premier lieu
sont du meme ordre que ce1les que j'avais opposees a la retribution des suppleants. En effet,
l'Organisation des Nations Unies ne doit' pas
engager des depenses inutiles qui gonflent son
budget. J'avais peur qu'll ne se creat un precedent et, en effet, on demande maintenant au
Conseil de securite de retribuer les observateurs
militaires envoyes en Indonesie, etc.
But apart from those considerations, I should
Outre les conside
like first of all to draw attention to a very je voudrais attirer rations que j'ai deja exposees,
l'attention du Conseil sur un
irregular phenomenon. ¥Jhat is the real nature phe~omene tout
a
fait
of the Commission in Indonesia, the so-called au Juste cette commi anorma!. Que represente
Consular Commission which consists of those cette Commission ditession qui opere en Indonesie,
States having consular repre~entatives there? It Etats dont les consulsconsulaire qui c~mprend les
would seem that, if the Security Council has en- Le Conseil de. secutit se trouvent sur les lieux?
trusted those consuls with observing the situation surveiller la situatio e a charge ces consuls de
n dans ce pays et it semblerait
in Indonesia, this should be enough. However. que cela doive suffire.
we are now being asked to pay the costs of some on propose de retribu Or, void que maintenant
kind of military observers, a matter which I taires, dont je parlera er des observateurs milii, du reste, plus tard. En
shall take up later. In other words, it is proposed d'autres termes, on
propos
e au Consell d'augmenthat we should increase the consular staff, of ter, aux ftais
de l'Organisation des Nations
States which have consular representatives in Unies, bien entendu
Indonesia, again at the United Nations' expense. entretenus par ces , le personnel des consulats
Etatse n Indonesie. Est-ce la
Is this a normal state 0 f affairs? No, it is quite une situation normal
e? Non, elle est absolument
an abnormal one.
anormale.
.
The truth is that a question of the greatest
Une question de la plus haute importance a ete
importance has been entrusted to an artificially confiee en realite a un
organe etabli d'Une maniere
and accidentally created organ. First, few States pour ainsi dire artificie
lIe et fertuite. On comwhich have consuls in Indonesia are entrusterl mence par confier a quelque
s Etats qui ont des
,with observing a most important situation there; consuls en Indonesie
le sain d'observer sur place
then the Security Council is asked to increase une situation extremement
their staffs by the appointment. of military au Consell d'augmenter grave; puis on propose
observers and to pay these observers. These are sulats en designant desle personnel de ces conobservateurs miIitaires
the results of squandering United Nations funds qu'it aura lui-meme
a
which result from what I should call a biased aboutit le gaspillage des retribuer. Voila a quoi
fonds de l'Organisation
approach to the problem.
des Nations Unies, associe a une maniere d'abotder le probleme que je qualifierai de partiale,
.But I have other reasons as well for opposing
Toutefois, j'ai encore
thiS proposal, reasons of a political character. raisons d'ordre politiqu d'autres raisons, des
e, de m'opposer a cette
What, let me ask, will those observers do in the proposition. Je me
demand
e ce que feront ces
prevailing circumstances in Indonesia? 'When- obsel'vateurs en Indone
sie
dans les conditions
ever the question of Indonesia is raised, we are actuelles. Lorsque nous
soulevons la question
told: "Do not interfere with the work of the indonesienne, on nous
Round Table Conference now taking place at gener les travau x de repond : "Il ne faut pas
la
The' Hague." At the same time, however, we ronde qui se tientacfuellemConference de la table
are asked to create a group of military observers. en meme temps, on noUs ent a La Haye" . Mais,
propose de designer des
But the President himself knows what those observateurs militaires. Or,
le Preside nt sait luiobservers and that Consular Commission have meme ce que ces observa
teurs
et cette Commission
really accomplished in Indonesia. Was not an consulaire ont fait en
Indone
:greement,2 the Linggadjati Agreement, con- les Pays-Bas n'oat-its pas sie. L'Indonesie et
abouti aun accord,2
N=§.ee The Political E!,ents in the Republic of Indonesia,
e~lerlands In£onnation Bureau, New York, page 34.

2Voir The Political Events in the Republic of
Indonesia, puJblie par le Burea!1 d'in£ormation des
Pays-Bas, New-York, page 34.

--------------~12~-----------q
eluded between Indonesia and the Netherlands?
"Vas that Agreement observed? It was not. It
was not observed because the Netherlands Government authorities did not wish to observe it,
and the Security Council-or, more correctly,
the majority in the Security Council-did nothing
about it.
There was yet another agreement which, in
reality, was rather like a yoke around the neck
of the Indonesian people, the Agreement concluded aboard the USS Renville, [S/649, Appendices VIII, XI and XIII]. But was that Agreement observed? No, it was not, because the
Netherlands Government refused to abide by it
and the Security Council, which discussed this
matter, merely shrugged its shoulders over it
and did nothing to ensure the implementation of
its own decisi.ons.
Lastly, there was a whole series of other
Security Council decisions regarding a cease-fire.
It was thus decided that the Consular Commission
should supervise the cease-fire [S/525 I]. Did the
Netherlands authorities obey this Security Council decision? They did not. They continued mili- .
tary operations; they burned down villages; they
massacred the Indonesian populations of Java
and Sumatra; they continued hostilities and failed
to carry out the decisions of the Security Council,
although the Consular Commission was in Batavia
at the time.

l'Accord de Linggadjati? Cet accord a-t-il ete
respecte? Non, il ne l'a pas ete, parce que le
Gouvernement neerlandais a refuse de s'y conformer et parce que le Conseil de securite, ou pltttot
la majorite qui s'etait creee au sein de cet organe
n'a rien fait a cet egard.
'
I1 existe un autre accord, celui qui a ete concltt

a bord du navire americain Renville [S/649

appendices VIII, XI et XIII] et qui n'est e~
realite qu'un joug impose au peuple d'Indonesie.
Mais cet accord a-t-il ete respecte? Non, il ne l'a
pas ete. I1 a ete viole d'une facson flagrante par
les representants·du Gouvernement des Pays-Bas.
Le Conseil de securite, qui a examine cette
question, s'est montre parfaitement impuissant et
n'a rien entrepris pour faire respecter ses propres
decisions.
Enfin, le Conseil de securitc a adopte toute une
serie de resolutions relatives a la cessation des
hostilites. C' est ainsi qu'i! a charge la Commission
consulaire de veiller a ce que les operations militaires prennent fin [S/ 525, I]. Or, les Hollandais
se sont-ils conformes a cette decision du Conseil?
Non; ils'ont poursuivi les operations militaires'
ils ant incendie des villages; ils ant massacre le~
populations indonesiennes de Java et de Sumatra;
ils ont poursuivi les hostilites et ils n'ont pas
donne suite aux resolutions du Conseil de securite
bien que la Commission consulaire £Ut present~
a:Batavia.

Let me recall another incident which occurred
J e vais vous rappeler un autre incident qui
when we met in Paris just before Christmas. s'est produit a la veille de Noel, lorsque le Conseil
The Dutch are known to be a religious people; s'est reuni a Paris. On sait que les Hollandais
nevertheless, despite the fact that it was Christmas sont un peuple religieux mais, en depit des fetes
time, they took advantage of the absence of some de Noel, ils ont profite de l'absence de certains
of the members of the Security Council to launch . membres du Conseil de securite pour lancer des
military operations. I shall leave aside the ques- operations militaires. Je ne sais pas comment cela
tion of how this action could be reconciled with s'accorde avec le sentiment religieux des membres
the religious feelings of the believing members . croyants du Conseil de securite, mais c'est hien
of the Security Council, but this action was a ce qui s'est produit. Le ConseH de securite s'est
fact. The Security Council met and ordered the reuni, il a ordonne la cessation des operations
cessation of military activities [S/1150] but its militaires [S/1150], mais rieD. n'a ete fait, en
orders were not carried out although the Consular depit du fait que la Commission consulaire
Commission was meeting in Batavia. And now siegeait a Batavia. Et maintenant, on nous prowe are being asked to defray the costs of that pose de payer les frais de cette Commission consuConsular Commission. My conscience as a laire. Ma conscience d'homme politique m'interdit
statesman does not permit me to vote in favour .de voter en faveur de cette resolution.
of this resolution.
The truth of-the matter is that, with the connivance of the United Kingdom and the United
States, a noose has been slung around the neck
of' the Indonesian people, who are being virtually
strangled, and the Round Table Conference is
merely noting a fait accompli. And now we are
being asked to pay the costs into the bargain. If
costs are to be paid, let them be paid by those
States which are responsible for such a policy,
and which have their observers in Indonesia. I
do not think that the Security Council should
have to cover expenses of such a nature.

Le Royq.ume-Uni et les Etats-Unis ont permis,
en realite, d'imposer un joug au peuple indonesien; ce peuple est ecrase, et la Conference de la
table ronde nesert qu'a constater ce fait accompli.
Et maintenant, on propose a l'Organisation des
Nations Unies de prendre a sa charge les frais
qui en sont resultes.. Si tant est qu'il faille couvrir
ces depenses, il convient d'en charger les Etats
qui sont responsables de cette poiitique, qui ont
la-bas des observateurs~ Je ne crois pas que le
Conseil doive prendre ces depenses a sa charge.

Mr. ARcE (Argentina) (translated from
Spanish): In item 3 of the agenda there is a
reference to the future cost of military observers
in Indonesia. As the news 'seems to indicate that,
things are already settled there, I feel that henceforth there will be no call for any military
observers and that, consequently, there will be no
expenditure on that score.

M. ARCE (Argentine) (traduit de l'espagnol) :
I1 est question, au point 3 de l'ordre du jour, de
demander a l'Organisation des Nations Unies
d'assumer, a l'avenir, les frais occasiones par la
presence d'observateurs militaires en' Indonesie.
Pplsqu'il semble, d'apres les nouvelles, que la
situation est deja reglee, je pense que nous n'enverrons pas d'observateurs militaires a l'avenir,
et que l'Organisation des Nations Uriies n'aura,
par consequent, rien a payer.
~

...

13

I might have agreed with the Ukrainian representative had it been a matter of meeting past
expenditure, but as future expe~diture is. contemplated, it seems to me ~ost lOgIcal that, 1~ the
United Nations has to mtervene at a gIven
juncture to maintain order or to protect the lives
of its officers or for some other reason, it should
pay the costs.
.
The proof is that we have on the agenda an
item according to which we are going to set up
-or we are apparently going to set up-a United
Nations Guard.
I should also like to point out that the Consular
. Commission's request refers to "future ~osts"
and that therefore we have absolutely nothmg to
pay up to the present.

J'aurais peut-etre ete d'accord avee le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine s'il s'etait agi d'assumer des frais qui ont ete occasionnes dans le
passe; mais, puisqu'il s'agit de depenses futures,
le plus logique serait, a. man avis, que I'Organisation couvre de ,-e1les depenses si elle doit intervenir, dans une region particuliere, pour assumer
le maintien de 1'0rdre ou proteger l'existence des
personnes qui travaillent a. son service.
La preuve en est que, d'apres une question
qui est inscrite a. notre ordre du jour, nous allons
cree~ OU, tout au moins, il semble que nous
allons creer - une garde des Nations Unies.
Je me permets dcme de faire observer que la
Commission consulaire demande que les Nations
Umes assument les frais e..'l question "a "l'avenir";
par consequent, l'Organisation n'a rien a. payer
pour le moment.

The PRESIDENT: Perhaps I might say a word
of comment on what has been said by the representative of the Ukrainian SSR and the representative of Argentina.
I hope that no member of the ~ouncil will
succumb to the temptation to use this· particular
point on our agenda as a pretext for indulging
in a wide-ranging political discussion of the
situation in Indonesia in general.
'When he dealt with the particular item under
discussion, the representative of the Ukrainian
SSR referred to this body as an artifiicially
created organ. I do not think it is necessary to
go into the past history of the creation of this
organ. I would only observe, however, that these
observers whom we are now discussing have
been taken over by the United Nations Commission, and they are serving the United Nations.
Now I know that the representative of the
Ukrainian SSR thinks that it would be very
wrong that the United Nations should bear any
cost of that kind. He spoke, in regard to an
earlier item of today's agenda, of these "honorary"
functions-at least I think it was the representative of the Ukrainian SSR who did so. They are
honourable functions, but they are also very
onerous and very important and responsible and
difficult-and sometimes even dangerous. In any
case, the expenses of observers placed, as are
these officers, under the instructions and command
of a United Nations organ, should not, it seems
to me, be paid by their own Government; such
payment should come from the funds of the
United Nations.

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de ['anglais): Permettez-moi de faire quelques observations sur les
declarations des representants de la RSS
d'Ukraine et de I'Argentine.

Moreover, I am informed that there are funds
.that could be so used, if the Council were disposed to decide that these expenses should be
met in this way.

En outre, j'ai appris qu'il existe des fonds qui
pourraient etre utilises pour couvrir les depenses
de cet ordre si le Conseil decidait que les frais
encourus dussent etre couverts de cette f.ar;on.

r would, incidentally, draw the attention of the
Council to the fact, already referred to, I think,
that it is only future costs that are in question.
The representative of the Ukrainian SSR spoke
as if this were a pretext for obtaining payment by
the United Nations of part of the cost of our
consula.r personnel. Well, of course, that is not
the case at all. All these observers are entirely
outside what would normally be the· staffs of our
~onsUlar establishments, and we supplied them
1Iit6~~e~ire a~¥:~,,,~e~:pe th~t they might

. D'itutre part, j'attire l'attention du Conseil sur
un fait qui a deja. ete mentionne, a savoir qu'il
ne s'agit que de depenses a supporter dans l'ave'"
nir. Le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine .a laisse
entendre que nouscherchions un pretexte pour
faire payer par l'Organisation des Nations Unies
une partie des frais afferents a notre personnel
consulaire. Ce n'est naturellement pas le cas. Tous
ces observateurs ne font a:bsolument pas partie
de notre personnel •consulaire .regulier; oous ne
les avons designes que dans le desir et l'espoir

J'espere qu'aucun des membres du Conseil ne
succombera a la tentation de saisir l'occasion de
l'examende ce point de l'ordre du jour pour se
lancer dans un discours politique de grande envergure sur la situation en Indonesie en general.
Parlant du point a l'etude, le repr~sentant de
la RSS d'Ukraine a declare que 1'0rganisme dont
il est question n'avait qu'une existence artificielle.
J e ne crois pas qu'il soit necessaire de faire l'historique de sa creation. J e ferai seulement remarquer
que les observateurs dont nous parlons ont ete
transferes a la Commission des Nations Unies et
servent I'Organisation des Nations Unies. Toutefois, je sais que le representant de la RSS
d'Ukraine est d'avis que l'Organisation des
Nations Unies aurait tort d'assumer des frais
cle cette sorte. Lors de l'examen d'un point precedent de 1'0rdre clu jour de la presente seance,
it a qualifie les fonctions d'observateurs de fonctions "honorifiques" - du moins je crois ne pas
me tromper en attribuant ces paroles au representant de laRSS cl'Ukraine. Les fonctions des
observateurs sont des fonctions qui font honneur,
certes, a ceux qui ·les exercent, mais elles sont
egalement tres· penibles· et tres importantes, elles
comportent des responsabilites et parfois meme
presentent des dangers. En tous cas, les depenses
des observateurs qui, comme ceux-ci, sont mis a
la disposition cl'un organisme des Nations Unies
et obeissent a ses instructions, ne doivent pasetre
payees, il me semble, par leur propre gouvernement; les frais. devraient ~re assumes ,par
Irganisation des Nations Unies.

serve the United Nations in this task of watching
over the implementation of ..he truce, withdrawal
of troops, and so on. I think it will be agreed that,
while negotiations are proceeding in The Hague,
it is desirable that incidents of all kinds should
be avoided in Indonesia. I think that a body of
this ~nd can contribute largely to that objective.

.

qu'ils aideraient 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies
a. mener a. bien sa tache de surveillance en ce qui
concernait l'observation de la treve, le retrait des
troupes, etc. J'estime que le Conseil conviP.11dra
qu'it faut eviter en lndonesie des incidents de
toute nature pendant que les negociations se
poursuivent a. La Haye. Je pense qu'un aroUpe
d'observateurs peut etre extrememe.nt utilel:> a cet
egard.
Le representant ?e l'Argentine a, je crois, pose
la question de savotr queUes seraient les fonctions
de ces observateurs a. l'avenir, s'ils aUaient etre
rappeles et si, par consequent, l'on aurait a faire
face a. des depenses a. ce titre. Or, comme je viens
de l'expliquer, les fonctions des observatettrs ont
un caractere permanent et ils doivent rester sur
plac~ pendant un certain temps.
Vu les fonctions que les observateurs exercent
j'estime personneUement - et je parle maintenant
en qualite de representant du ROYAUME-UNI _
qu'it conviendrait que les Nations Unies en assument les frais.
A

The represent&tive of Argentina asked, I think,
what these observers were going to do, wheth~r
they could not be removed and whether, therefore,
there would be any expenses in the future. As I
have just explained, I think there are continuing
duties and that the observers will have to stay
there for some time.
In view of the capacity in which the observers
serve, it seems to me personally-and I am speaking now as representative of the UNITED KINGDOM delegation-suitable that those expenses
should be borne by the United Nations.

A

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovieRepublic) (translated from Russian): I have' tique d'Ukraine) (trad1tit dzt russe): J'ai ecoute
listened attentively to the President's remarks, attentivement les observations que vient de faire
but they have raised some doubts in my mind.
le President, j'ai certains doutes a. cet egard.
The fact is that military operations did take
place in Indonesia, and there were apparently
military observers there. Who bore the expense
of those military observers? I presume, as we
have no documents €In this matter, that, up to
now the expenses have been borne by the States
which sent these observers. That seems to be' ho".'r
matters stand. States which sent their observers
bore the expenses.
However, now that military activities are coming to an end and a round table conference is
being held, it is proposed to setup a fresh group
of military observers.
I shall suggest· another possibility since, I
repeat, we have no documents on this matter.
While military operations were in progress, there
were no military observers. This may all have
been for the best, as military observers often
make matters worse. We know this from experience. But there are now even less grounds for
raising the question of the creation of a corps of
military observers, since it is -affirmed that a
round table conference is being held, and that
the Indonesian question is on the way to a satisfactory settlement.
For these reas~ns it seems to me to be quite
illogical to decide now on the question of· the
future payment of Iililitary observers.
The PRESIDENT : In brief reply to the representative of the Ukrainian SSR, I wish to say only
that the observers up to the present have been
paid by their respective Governments. That is
what T think is perhaps not quite right.

the

There is no question before
Security
Council this afternoon, of creating military
observers, as the representative of the Ukrainian
SSR put it. These military observers are required
iUld. employed by the United Nations Commission,
which still requires their presence for certain

Des operations militaires ont eu lieu en lndonesie, et des observateurs militaires y ont appa-remment assiste. Qui a subvenu a. leurs frais?
Je presume, car nous n'avons aucun document a
ce sujet, que jusqu'a. present ces depenses ont ete
couvertes par ceux qui avaient envoye ces observateurs.C'est ainsi" me semble-toil, que se presente la question. Les Etats qui avaient envoye
des observateurs militaires en lndonesie ont pris a
leur charge les depenses qui en resultaient.
Or, maintenant que les operations militaires
promettent de prendre fin et qu'une conference
de la table ronde a ete convoqu'6e, on propose au
Conseil de designer, a. nouveau, des observateurs
militaires.
Envisageons maintenant une autre hypothese,
une autre 'eventualite, car, je le repete, n011S
n'avons aucun document a. ce sujet. Des operations militaires ont eu lieu, mais aucun observateur miIitaire· n'y a assiste. C'etait peut-etre ttne
bonne chose, car l'experience montre que les
observateurs ne font souvent qu'aggraver la situation. Mais alors, il est encore moins justifie de
demander la nomination d'observateurs militaires,
puisqu'on vient d'affirmer ici qu'une conference
de la table ronde est en train de deliberer et que
l'ensemble de la question indonesienne va bientot
.recevoir une solution satisfaisante.
Pour toutes ces raisons, il me semble parfaitement i110gique de vouloir regler des maintenant
la question de la retribution des observateursmiIitaires qui pourraient etre designes a l'avenir.
Le PRESIDENT (tradwit de l'anglais): Pour
repondre brU~vement au representant de la RSS
d'Ukraine, je decIarerai simplement que les observateurs ont ete retribues jusqu'a. present par leurs
gouvernements respectifs. C'est ce1a qui, a mon
avis, n'est pas tout a fait juste.
I1 n'est pas question id, cet ap~es-midi, comme
le. representant de la RSS d'Ukraine semble vou10ir le faire croire, de creer ungrotlpe d'obsetvateurs militaires. Les observateurs 'nilitaires en
question ont ete demandes et sont emp10yes par
la Commission des Nations Unies qui a encore

.t4

ps
nurooses. All that is proposed is that in those

~in-:Umstances the payment of these observers

shottld be borne in the future by the budget of the
United Nations, as they are serving the United
Nations as a whole.

15
besoin de leurs services pour assurer certaines
fonctions. Ce que nous proposons est qu'a,l'avenir
la retribution de ces observateurs soit a la charge
du budget de l'Organisation des Nations Unies,
etant donne qu'ils sont au service de cette
Organisation.

Mr. TSARAPKIN (Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (translated from Russian) : Since we
are dealing with future expenses to be assumed
by the United Nations, I would ask-leaving
aside for the moment the substance of the question
-that we be given some preliminary information
regarding the number of observers who are in
that country, regarding which Governments sent
them, and regarding the expenditures involved,
although the amount is of no very great consequence for the moment.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des RepubIiques socialistes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Puisqu'il
s'agit de depenses que l'Organisation des Nations
Unies devra couvrir it l'avenir, je vou$irais tout en m'abstenant de me prononcer sur la
question quant au fond - qu'on nous foumisse
tout d'abord des renseignements sur le nombre
des observateurs qui se trouvent dans ce pays,
sur les Etats qui les ont envoyes et sur le
montant de ces depenses, bien que ce montant
n'ait pas une grande importance pour le moment.

The PRESIDENT: In reply to the representative
of the USSR, I wish to say that I have inquired
of the Secretariat, and have been informed that
the information can be provided within about five
minutes. While that information is being obtained,
perhaps ot.'J.er members of the Council would
wish to speak further on this question.

Le PRESIDENT (trad~tit de l'anglais): En
reponse an representant de l'URSS, je desire
signaler que j'ai demande ces renseignements au
Secretariat qui nous les procurera dans quelque
cinq minutes. Pendant que nous les attendons,
l'un des merilbres du ConseiI desire-t-il prendre la
parole sur cette question?

Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from R~tssian): I can give
some information on this point. However, I can
only express surprise at the fact that, although
we are discussing the expenditure of funds, we
have not been supplied with any information on
the number of observers, and so forth. This
makes it possible to engage any number of staff,
whether they are needed or not. This is why I
speak .advisedly of the sinecure system which is
at present unfortunately taking root in the United
Nations.
.
The States which have observers are the United
States, the United Kingdom, France, Belgium
and Australia. The position up to the present has
been that these military observers were sent by
their Governments, and now ,it is being suggested
that other countries should 'pay for them.
I do not know Mr. Austin's views on this
matter, but I feel that it would be most unfair to
ask the smaller and medium-sized countries to
pay for United States observers. The United
States is a wealthy country and has sufficient
~eans at its disposal. It would be strange indeed
If countries such as the Ukrainian SSR, the Byelorussi~ SSR, Lebanon, Egypt, Syria, Cuba,
Costa Rica and other small States were to pay the
expenses of the United States, the United Kingdom and France. I think Mr. Austin will, ~gree
that. such a s.ugg~stiQn would not be very well
receIved even m hIS country. I assume that public
opinion in the United States must understand
that where observers a"e concerned, the expense
should be borne by the States which send them.
I feel, therefore, that the President's assertion
that that was an abnormal practice, and that
o~ers should now· pay for the observers, cannot
wI~hstand criticism. If this question is now being
raIsed, we must consider it anew. I am convinced that the representative of Argentina-who,
of course, does not agree with the political arguments I have advanced-as well as the representatives of several other smaller States, agree at
heart with my view that the. question should be
reconsidered. Since there is insistence on the
point, the number of' observers and. the total
costs involved should· be determined. Then the

M. MANUILSKY (Republique socialiste sovie-'
tique d'Ukraine) (traduit du russe): Je peux
fournir certains renseigriements sur ce point.
Mais je suis fort etonne de voir qU'OTI laisse le
Conseil sans informations sur le nombre des
observateurs, etc., alors qu'il s'agit d'autoriser
des depenses. Cette maniere de proceder permet
d'engager tout le personnel qu'on veut, qu'il soit
utile ou non. Voila pourquoi je suis parfaitement
fonde a parIer du systeme des sinecures qui,.
malheureusement, devient de plus en plus frequent a l'Organisation des Nations Unies.
Void la liste des Etats qui ont des observateurs :
Etats-Unis, Royaume-Uni, France, Be1gique et
Australie. Comment les choses se sont-eIIes passees
jusqu'a present? Ces observateurs ont ete envoyes
par leurs gouvernements respectifs.Maintenant, .
on veut qu'ils 'soient retribues par d'autres Etats.
Je ne sais pas ce qu'en pense M. Austin, mais
il me semble parfaitement injuste que de petits
Etats et des Etats moyens soient charges de retribuer des observateurs americains. Les Etats-Unis
sont un pays riche et ils disposent des moyens
necessaires. Je ne comprends pas qu'on puisse
demander aux pays te1s que la RSS d'Ukraine, la
RSS de Bielorussie, le Liban, l'El;jPte, Cuba,.
Costa-Rica et d'autres petits Etats, qu'ils couvrent les depenses des Etats-Unis, du RoyaumeUni et de la France. M. Austin reconnaitra ceitainement que, meme dans son propre pays, cette
fa<;;on de proceder ne serait pas tres bien accueiIlie. L'opinion pubIique des Etats-Unis doit comprendre que c'esta l'Etat meme qui a envoye des
observateurs qu'incombe le soin de les retribuer.
Aussi, me semble-t-il que l'assertion du
President, qui a dit quecette methode etait anormale et 'que dorenavant ces frais devraient etre
couverts par d'autres pays, ne resiste pas a la
critique. Puisque cette question a ete soulevee,
il faut prendre la peine de.l'examiner anotiveau.
Je suis convaincu que le representant de l'Argen.:.
tine - qui n'approuve pas, bien entendu, les
arguments politiques que j'ai fait valoir - et leg
representants des autres pe~ts pays, dans leut
fort interieur, sont de mon avis etpensent comme
moi qu'il faut reconsiderer cette question. Puisqu'on insiste sur ce point, il faut fixer le nombre

16
Security Council will be in a position to settle
this question with some data at its disposal, and
will not merely write out a blank cheque and
say "You shall have whatever you ask." No
banking firm, no representative of an industry
would conduct business that way, and yet that
is what the Council is being asked to do.

des observateurs et le montant des depenses a
encourir. Ce n'est qu'alors que le Conseil pourra
prendre une decision, apres avoir obtenu les renseignements necessaires. Il ne peut en effet signer
un <;heque en blanc et dire: "Vous aurez tout ce
que vous de~dez". Aucune banque,r aucun
industriel ne consentirait a diriger ainsi ses
affaires. Et pourtant, c'est bien ce qu'on demande
auConseil de securite de faire.

I would therefore ask the President to have
this question reconsidered, bearing in mind the
remarks which have been made here.

Je demande donc au President de remettre
cette question en discussion et de prendre en
consideration les observations qui ont ete formulees ici.

The PRESIDENT: In reply to questions 'that
have been put, I can confirm the information
which the representative of the Ukrainian SSR
has already given us, and I can supple.tnent it. As
he said quite correctly, the observers are drawn
from France, the United Kingdom, the United
States, Belgium and Australia. I am informed
that their total number varies between thirty··
eight and fifty-five. They are paid their travelling
expenses incurred in going to. Indonesia and will
receive travelling expenses when their duties are
finished 'and they leave Indonesia. While they are
there, they receive a daily allowance. Basing an
estimate on those numbers and on that arrange-,
ment about allowances, it is estimated that the
cost until the end of this year would amount to
90,000 dollars. I hope that that information may
perhaps enable us to reach a decision on this point
at our meeting this afternoon.

. Le PRESIDENT (tradttit de l'anglais): En
reponse aux questions posees, je confirme les
renseignements que le representant de la RSS
d'Ukraine nous a donnes et je peux les completer.
Comme ill'a dit fort exactement, les observc:teurs
sont detaches par les Gouvernements de la
France, du Royaume-Uni, des Etats-Unis, de la
Belgique et de l'Australie. L'on m'a informe que
leur nombre total variait entre trente-huit et
dnquante-cinq. Le voyage en Indonesie leur est
paye et leurs frais de deplacement leur seront
egalement rembourses lorsque leurs fonctions
seront terminees et qu'ils quitteront l'Indonesie.
Pendant leur sejour dans ce pays, ils re<;oivent
une indemnite journaliere. On estime, en se basant
sur leur nombre et les dispositions prises en
matiere d'indemnite, que les depenses s'eleveront
a 90.000 dollars jusqu'a la fin de l'annee. J'espere
que ces renseignements permettront aux mel1lbres
du Conseil de prendre cet apres-midi une decision.

Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America) : The
introduction of class prejudice here reminds me
of something that happened in my dear little
State of Vermont in the old days when we used
to have political candidates chosen by great con:velJ.tions. They would all get'together in a convention and pick their candidate for public office
after a debate. My home city of Burlington, the
largest in the State, has a population of around
30,000 people: some of the buildings in New York
City contain more population than my city. But
then you drop to cities of less population, and
finally to beautiful little hamlets and villages
scattered around the mountains and valleys and
along the shining rivers of Vermont. Hyde Park,
Vermont, a small town, once had a candidate
against the candidate from the city of Burlingtori,
and he was a brilliant lawyer like my friend, Mr.
Manuilsky. He got up in this' corivention and
said: "If you stand a silver dollar up on its edge
on top of Mount Mansfield, where will it r.oIrto?
Why, it will roll right down into the city of
Burlington."

That prejudice of the small against the great
and of the poor against the rich is often used to
confuse, to divert and to smother discussion when
the claimant in an issue does not have anything
else on which to stand.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais) : En introduisant dans la discussion
la question de prejuge de classe, on me rappelle
un incident survenu jadis dans mon petit Etat
du Vermont, alors qu'il etait d'usage de choisir
nos candidats politiques au cours deces reunions
que nous appelons conventions. On se reunissait
done pour choisir, apres de .longs debats, les
divers candidats aux fonctions publiques.
Burlington, ma ville natale, est la plus grande de
cet Etat, bien qu'elle ne compte guere que 30.000
habitants (moinsque certains des grands iml1leubles de New-York). Apres Burlington, il n'ya
plus, d::l.DS le Vermont, que de petites villes moins
peuplees, de ravissants petits hameaux et villages
epars da-ns les montagnes, dans les vallees et le
long des rivieres aux eaux limpides. Or, le petit
village de Hyde Park, dans le Ver~ont, avait un
jour presente un candidat contre le candidat de la
ville de Burlington. Ce candidatetait un brillant
avocat comme mon ami M. Manuilsky, et, au
cours de la reunion, il se leva pour faire cette
seule remarque: "Si l'on posait une piece d'un
dollar en argent au sommet du'mont Mansfield,
dans quelle direction roulerait ce dollar? Eh bien,
il roulerait naturellement vel'S la ville de Burlington".
Tres souvent, on invoque ainsi les differences
o,ui separ~nt les petits des grands, les pauvres des
riches, pour confondre ses adversaires, arreter et
detourner la discussion lorsqu'on ne peut de£endre
sa these par aucun argument.

There are two premises here that the representative of the Ukrainian SSR has used, and
these two premises are entirely false.

Le represfmtant de la RSS d'Ukraine a tire ses
conclusions de deux premisses qui sont' fausses,
entierel1lent fausses. '

One premise is that this proposal affects the
question of the budget. Well, it does not. That

L'une d'entre elles est que la proposition faite
souleverait une question' budgetaire. Il n'en est

p

;;a

17
matter was taken care of in General Assembly
resolution 252 (lII), part C of which begins as
follows:
"The General Assembly
feResolves that for the financial year 1949:
"The Secretary-General, with the prior concurrence of the Advisory Committee on Administrative and Budgetary Questions,. and subject
to the financial regulations of the United Nations,
is authorized to enter into commitments to meet
unforeseen and extraordinary expenses; provided
that the concurrence of the Advisory Committee
shall not be necessary for:
" (a) Such commitments not exceeding a total
of 2 million dollars, if the Secretary-General
certifies that they relate to the maintenance of
peace and security or to urgent economic rehabilitation ..."
This matter falls within the financial limit and
within the stated purpose-that is, the maintenance of peace and security.
These officials are employed by; the United
Nations. These military observers are United
Nations military observers while they are in the
service of the United Nations. They are not the
military observers of these countries that have
been good enough to furnish what the United
Nations itself did not furnish. The United
Nations has adopted that service and, so far, it
has had it without compensation, without even
paying expenses.
Now then, what about this prejudice which we
hear voiced occasionally? The fact is that the
United States pays 39.89 per cent of whatever
expenditures the United Nations votes to be paid.
If this proposal contained in the President's letter
were accepted, and if by 30 September no written
objection were made, this item would be referred
to the Secretary-General, who would act under
the authorization I have just quoted, It would
not go to the Advisory Committee, and the largest
share of the burden would fall on the United
States.

Therefore, taking this matter in its true light,
which reveals that the United States has been
p~y:ing the whole of the expenses of whatever
mIlitary observers it has contributed to this service
for the United Nations, and that the United
Nations itself -would pay suth expenses in the
future, it is a false premise to assume that the
smaller Members of the United Nations would
be bearing anywhere near the burden that the
United States is bearing. That applies, in a lesser
degree, to every other one of the five permanent
members of the Security Council. Therefore,
a~suming that we are willing ,to entertain prejudl~e in this matter, it does not really apply to
~his situation. There is no complaint, and there
IS no reason for complaint on the part of the
so-called smaller countries.
Representing the United States, I favour the
President's proposal, and if the question is to be
settled on the basis of his letter, I support it.

bllll'.lIIiIIIlR.o__.""""","~"

.=__
.

rien. La question est deja reglee par la resolution
252 (lII) de PAssemblee generale dont la partie
C commence comme suit:
feDAssemblee generale
feDecide que, pour l'exercice financier 1949:
"Le Secretaire general, avec l'assentiment
prealabie du Comite consultatif pour les questions
administratives et budgetaires et sous reserve des
dispositions du reglementnnancier de 1'0rganisation des Nations Unies, est autorise a engager
desdepenses au titre des depenses imprevues et
extraordinaires; il est entendu que l'assentiment
du Comite consultatif ne sera pas necessaire pour:
era) Les engagements ne depassant pas au total
deux millions de dollars, si le Secretaire general
certme qu'ils ont trait au maintien de la paix et
de la securite ou a des mesures utgentes de
relevement economique ..."
La question entre dans le cadre de la resolution,
tant era point de vue financier qu'au point de vue
du but qu'elle doit fttteindre, a savoir le maintien
de la paix et de la securite.
Les fonctionnaires en question sont employes
par l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Ils sont
des observateurs militaires de 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies_tant qu'ils sont au service de
l'Organisation. lIs ne sont nullement au service
des pays qui ont bien voulu les detacher aupres
de-l'Organisation parce que cette Organisation ne
pouvait les recruter elle-meme. L'Organisation
des Nations Unies a accepte les services de ces
observateurs-er· jusqu'a maintenant elle en a
beneficie sans fournir aucune compensation et
sans meme payer les frais afferents a ces services.
Qu'en est-il maintenant du prejuge que nous
entendons de temps en temps s'exprimer?·· La
realite est que les Etats-Unis payent 39,89 pour
180 de tout credit vote par 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies. Si la proposition contenue dans
la lettre adressee aux membres du· Conseil de
securite par son President ne souleve aucune
objection ecrite d'ici le 30 septembre, le President
la renverra au Secretaire general qui agira conformement aupouvoir dont il a ete investi par l'autorisation contenue dans la resolution que je viens
de citeI'. La question ne sera pas soumise au
Comite consultatif et la plus lourde charge incombera aux Etats-Unis.
. Examinons la question sous son vrai jour: les
Etats-Unis ont couvert presque toutes les depenses encourues du fait des observateurs militaires
qu'ils ont detaches aupres de 1'0rganisation des
Nations Unies et ces depenses seront couvertes
dans l'avenir par 1'0rganisation elle-meme. Dans
ces conditions, i1 est errone de pret~ndre que les
petits Etats Membres des Nations Unies auront
a supporter des charges se rapprochant, meme de
tres loin, de celles que les Etats-Unis supportent.
Ceci s'applique, a un moindre degre, a ch~cune
des quatre autres Puissances qui sont membres
permanents du Omseil de securite. C'estpourquoi.
a supposeI' que nous voulions obeira un prejuge
quelconque, ceprejuge n'a riena voir avec la
situation en cause. On n'a d'ailleurs enregistre
aucune plainte de la part de ceux qu'on nomme
les petits Etats et iln'y a pas 'CIe raison pour qu'on
en enregistre.
Comme representant des Etats-Unis, je suis
en faveur de la proposition du President et si
on regIe la question dans le sens indique par sa
lettre, je lui donnerai monappui.

=~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

18
Mr. TSARAPKIN (U11ion of Soviet Socialist
Republics) (tra1~slated from Russian) : I should
like to ask that the Security Council be given
some information which would lead it to a better
understanding of the subject under consideration.
We have just beer. informed verbally that there
were· between thirty-eight and fifty-five military
observers. However, as individual human beings
are concerned, it seems to me there must be a
specific number of observers. I should ·like to
have definite information as to how many
observers there were on, let us say, 15 or 20 Sept~ber, and from which countries they came.
How many observers were sent from France,
from the United Kingdom, from the United
States, from Belgium,' from· Australia? This is
all the more important because I stated at the
beginning that the cost might be small, and that
it was therefore of little consequence. It appears,
however, that it is not one hundred thousand
dollars that we .are to pay to military observers
who have not been paid for two years. The
war in Indonesia has lasted two years and the
United Nations has 'not paid the observers. But
. npw that an armistice has been concluded and
that we hear rumours from. Th~ Hague that
matters are proceeding smoothly, that everything
will be settled. and calmed, and that a stlccessfu.l
solution will be reached,the question of the pay"
ment of observers is brought up.

M. TSARAPKINE (Union des ]lepubllques socia~
listes sovietiques) (traduit du russe): Je voudrais
qu'on fournisse au Conseil de securite des'ren$eignements qui lui permettent de voir plus clair
dans la situation. Tout a l'heure, on a annonce,
verbalement, que le nombre de ces observateurs
variait' entre trente-huit et cinquante-cinq. PourtaIft, il s'agit la d'etres humains, et it me semble
que l'ont doit savoir exactement combien 11s sont.
Il serait done souhaitable d'obtenir des renseignements precis sur le nombre de ces observateurs
au 15 ou 20 septembre, par exemple, aussi bien
que sur leur nationalite. Il faut savoir combien
d'observateur& bnt ete envoyes par la France, par
le Royaume-Uni, par les Etats-Unis, par la Belgique et par l'Australie. Il serait d'autant plus
interessant d'obtenir tous ces renseignements que
j'ai dit au debut que la somme a debourser
pourrait etre relativement peu elevee et ne presenterait done pas une grande importance. Or, i1
apparait qu'il ne s'agit pas d'une centaine de
milliers de dollars que nous devrons affecter au
paiement d'observateurs militaires qui n'ontpas
ete retribues depuis deux ans. La guerre en
Indonesie a dure deux ans, et l'Organisation des
Nations Unies ne les a pas payes. Maintenant
qu'un armistice a ete conclu et que, selon les
rumeurs qui parviennent de La Haye, tout irait
pour le mieux, tout serait en train de s'arranger
et de se calmer, on soumet au Conseilla question
de la retribution des observateurs militaires.

Are the military operations in question, then,
related to a plan already established? One cannot
avoid the impressiol" that the Consular Commission in Batavia-consisting of the consuls of
France, the United Kingdom, the United States,
Belgium and Australia-are expecting or plan:"
ning military operations in Indonesia... If not,
why is the· question of the payment of military
ogservers in Indonesia by the United Nations in
the future-please note: in the future-being
raised? That is not a simple, technical question,
but a question of substance. I should like to warn
the President that when the question is· discussed
we shall have to go into its substance in some
detail, as future payments to military observers
are involved. Either the information we have
received as to the cessation of military activities,
the approach of peace and the settlement of the
question, is incorrect, or the information ,is
correct,but someone is preparing to launch new
military activity in Indonesia. That side of the
picture needs to be clarified.

Les operations militaires en question feraientelles done l'objet d'un plan etabli d'avance? L'on
ne peut s'empecher de penser que la Commission
consulaire de Batavia - qui se compose des
consuls de France, du Royaume-Uni, des EtatsUnis, de Belgique et d'Australie - prevoit 011
prepare meme les operations militaires en Indonesie. Il est impossible de s'expliqtter autrement
cette demande, selon laquelle les observateurs
militaires envoyes dans ce pays devraient etre
retribues a l'avenir -notez-le bien: a l'avenir
- par l'Organisation des Nations Unies. Cen'est
pas d'une simple question technique, mais bien
d'une question de fond qu'il· s'agit la. Je dais
prevenir lePtesident qu'en examinant ce probleme, le Conseit de securite devra proceder a .une
discussion de fond assez detaillee. Il s'agit en
effet de la retribution des observateurs militaires
a l'avenjr. Ou bien les informations qui ont ete
fournies au Conseil au sujet .de la cessation des
hostilites, du tetablissement imminent de la paix
et du reglement de cette question,' sont inexactes;
ou bien eUes sont exactes, mais quelqu'un est en
train de preparer de nouvelles operations mili
taires en Indonesie. It faut eclaircir cette question.
D'autre part, il serait interessant, d'obtenir de
renseignements precis au sujet des observateur
qui se trouvent acttiellement sur les lieux. Qu
font-its en ce moment? QueUes sont leur
fonctions? Il faudrait savoir ou its se trouven
exactement et quels sont les pays qui les on
envoyes, en d'autres termes, it faut etabli
combien d'observateurs viennent de France
combien d'entre eux ont ete designes par I
Royaume-Uni; combien; par les Etats-Unis
combien,par la Belgique; et combien, par I'Aus
tralie. 11 est indispensable d'avoir tous ces rensei
gnements pour poursuivre l'examen de cett
question.

We should further like to obtain specific information as to the military observers who are now
there. What are they doing at present ? What are
their duties? I should like to know where they
are operating and from what countries they come:
in other words, how many are from France, the
United Kingdom, the United States, Belgium and
Australia. That information is necessary before
we can proceed with the discussion of the question.

The PRESIDENT: I can supply sorne further
information.· In an· earlier statement, I said that

Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): J
peux fournir que1ques renseignements comple

.--.......II1II

pt

19
the number of observers varied between thirtyeight and fifty,..five and that the estimate of the
cost from :now to the end of the year was 90,000
dollars. I can add that the estimated cost has
been drawn up on the basis of there being fiftyfive observers, which I am told is the largest
number that has ever served at one time. The
smallest number' was thirty-eight. Consequently,
to be on the safe side, the estimate of the cost
was made on the basis of fifty-five observers.

mentaires. J'ai dit precedemment que le nombre
des observateurs varie entre trente-huit et
cinquante-cinq et que les previsions de depenses
a partir de maintenant jusqu'a. la fin de l'annee
s'6!event a 90<000 dollars. J'ajoute que ces previsions ant ete etablies sur la base de cinquantecinq observateurs, c'est-a-dire l'effectif maximum
dont les services aient jamais ete utilises. Le
minimum est de trente-huit. En consequence,
pour plus de surete, les previsions de depenses
ant ete faites sur la base de cinquante-cinq
observateurs.

Actually, in the month of July-I a.m afraid
that we do not yet have the August figuresthe observers were distributed by nationality as
follows: fourteen from Australia, four from
Belgium, fifteen from the United States, three
from France,andfour from the United Kingdom, making a total of forty. That is the distribution of observers by nationality, although what
that really has to do with the question I cannot
imagine. Those forty officers are all serving the
United Nations; I do not think we need take
much regard of the difference in nationality.

En realite, pendant le mois de juillet -.,- nous
n'avons malheureusement pas encore les chiffres
pour le mois cl'aout - les observateurs etaient
repartis par nationalite de la maniere _suivante:
quatorze ressortissants de l'Australie, quatre de
la Belgique, quinze des Etats-Unis, trois de la
France et quatre du Royaume-Uni, ce qui fait en
tout quarante. Je ne comprends d'ailleurs pas ce
que la repartition par nationalite a a voir avec
la question. Oes quarante officiers servent taus
l'Organisation des Nations Unies; je ne crois pas
que nous devions attacher grande importance a
la difference de nationalite.
I do hope that in the light of the discussion that
J'espere qu'a la suite des debats qui ant eu
has taken place, and with this further information lieu et avec les renseignements complementaires
before us, .we may be able to reach a -decision dont nous disposons maintenant, nous. pourrons
- prendre une decision au CaUl's de la presente
at this meeting.
seance.
Mr. MANUILSKY (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist
Republic) (translated from Russian): I must
apologize for having to speak again on this question. I must state frankly that I myself am tired
of speaking about it. But a matter of principle
is at stake, and' it cannot be dealt with artistically
as did Mr. Austin when he spoke of conventions
and of a hill from which a dollar rolled down.
In reply, I should like to point out to Mr. Austin
that the fact of the matter is that the dollar he
referred to comes out of the pocket of the United
Nations and goes into that of the United States.
All these p!cturesque images are therefore completely beside the point. Since the people of the
Unit.ed States are business-minded, they will
readtly understand this argument and understand
its validity.
Let us examine Mr. Austin's arithmetic. He
said that the United States bore 39 per cent of
the total expense, while the Costa Ricans and
others shared only an insignificant part of the
expense. We remember the 39 per cent. But
when we asked what countries were represented
on the Commission, our President could not see
what that really had to .do with the question.
The answer is that the question has to do with
. arithmetic. For instance, there are - fourteen
~ustralian and fourteen United States observers;
1U other words, two-thirds or even 75 per cent
o£the observers are made up of representatives
of the United States and Australia, and only 25
per cent come from other States.

Why then, the distribution being what it is,
should other States which are not represented
have to defray those costs? Mr. Austin, I am
sure, will understand what I mean. There are
eleven members of' the Security Council. Why
. . have the United States .and the United Kingdom
.",,-_-...~-

M. M..o\NUIL~KY (Republique socialiste sovietique d'Ukraine) (trad1dt du russe): Je m'excuse
d'avoir a prendre la parole encore une fois sur
la meme question. J'avoue que je suis moi-meme
fatigue d'en parler. Mais il s'agit la d'une question
de principe,' et .on ne saurait la traiter d'une'
maniere aussi artistique que l'a fait M. Austi:n
qui a parle' de conventions et d'une montagne du sommet de laquelle roulait un dollar. Je dais
repondre a M. Austin qu'ici, il s'agit en realite
du dollar quisort de la bourse de l'Organisation
des Nations Unies et Qui roule dans celle des
Etats-Unis. Toutes ces images pittoresques sont _
done parfaitement deplacees. Les Americains sont
des hommes d'affaires, ils comprendront cet argument et en reconnaitront certa.inement la validite.
Voyons maintenant les exercicesd'arithmetique
auxquels s'est livre ici M. Austin. I1 a dit a peu
jires que les Etats-Uniscouvraient 39 pour 100
de ~{)utes les depenses, alors que des pays comme
Costa-Rica, par exemple, ne subvenaient qu'a une
partie insignifiante des frais. Notons bien ces 39
pour 100, car lorsque nous avans demande que1s
etaient les Etats representes a la commission, le
President du Conseil a dit que cela n'avait aucun
rapport avec la question. Quant a moi, je pense
que cette question peut avoir une certaine
influence sur les calculs qu'on fait. C'est ai:nsi
qu'il y a quatorze observateurs australiens et
quatorze americains; en d'autres termes, deux
tiers, ou meme 75 pour 100, de ces observateurs
viennentdes Etats-Unis ou d'.L\ustralie, alors
que les autres Etats n'en ant envoye que 25 pour
100.
Pourquoi done, etant donne cette proportion,
demande-t-on aux Etats qui ne sont pas repre':'
sentes de participer aux frais? J e suis sur que
M. Austin comprend ce que je veux dire. Le
Conseil de securite comprend onze membres.
Comment se fait-il que les Etats-Unis et le

~

20
always been represented on all the commissions?
Not a single commission has a "representative
from the Soviet Union; yet we are being asked
to pay.
I must say to Mr. Austin that this is unfair.
It is no longer a question of adthmetic; it is
arithmetic plus politics, and what it comes to is
that the dollar goes from my pocket into his, and
I do not like it at all. If any appropriate compensation were offer~d me, it might be possible
to think further about it.
.
That is why I wl;uld suggest that there be no
undue haste in this matter. If a decision is taken,
I shall vote against it. Must the representative
of the Ukrainian SSR in the Fifth Committee
take up all these figures, and raise all the questions which we have just discussed, and say that
up to the present the costs had been paid by the
United States, but now the United States and
the United Kingdom wanted the small nations
to pay? The disagreemp.uts and discussions which
would start up in the Committee would certainly
hold up its work.
Let us rather defer the matter until the composition of the Security Council has been changed;
once the new members are in office, it might be
easier for the Council to settle this question and
to find a solution.

Royaume-Uni soient membres de toutes les commissions, alors que l'Union sovietique ne fait
partie d'aucune d'entre elles? Et pourtant, on nous
demande de participer aux frais.
Je ferais remarquer a. M. Austin que cela n'est
pas juste. Ce n'est plus la de l'arithmetique. C'est
de la poIitique melee a un calcul qui fait somr
des dollars de ma poche pour les faire passer dans
la sienne, ce qui ne me plait pas du tout. Si
~ncore on m'offrait une compensation, j'y reflechirais peut-etre.
Voila pourquoi il me semble qu'il n'y a pas lieu
de se hater pour regler cette question. S'il y a
decision, je voterai contre. Mais est-il desirable
que la delegation de la RSS d'Ukraine pose cl la
Cinquieme Commission toutes les questions qui
viennent d't:tre debattues, lui soumette tous ces
chiffres et dise que, jusqu'a present, ce sont les
Etats-Unis qui ont subvenu aux frais mais que
maintenant, les Etats-Unis et le Royaume-UnI
desirent que ce soient les petites nations qui les
prennent a leur charge? On verra se produire
alors a ce sujet a la Cinquieme Commission de
te1les frictions, de tels debats que le travail de
cette commission s'en trouvera retarde.
Je propose done d'ajourner la discussion de
cette question jusqu'a ce que les nouveaux
membres du Conseil de securite soient entres en
fonction. Il se peut qu'apres ce remaniement, it
soit plus facile au Conseil de trancher cette
question et de trouver une solution.

The PRESIDENT: I should not be quite in favour
Le PRESIDENT (tradu£t de l'anglai.s): Je
of adjourning this question until January next, ne suis pas tres partisan de remettre l'examen de
as proposed by the representative of the cette question jusqu'en janvier prochain, comme
Ukrainian SSR. However, I do think that we le propose le representant de la RSS d'Ukraine.
are not in a mood to take a decision this after- D'autre part, i1 ne me semble pas que noc soyons
noon. We might perhaps adjourn the meeting, disposes a prendre une decision cet apres-midi, et,
in view of the fact that the hour is rather en raison de l'heure tardive, nous pourrions peutadvanced. I had hoped that we might have been etre lever la seance. J'esperais que nous amions
able to take a decision today, as I had addressed pu prendre une decision aujourd'hui, etant donne
a letter to the members of the Security Council que j'avais adresse ma lettre aux membres du
on 22 September, arid I thought that, had any Conseil de securite le 22 septembre. Je peusais
difficulties presented themselves, the members que, si des difficultes quelconqnes se presentaient,
might have let us know before this meeting and les membres en auraient informe le Conseil avant
we might have been able to obtain all the infor- la seance' et nous aurions pu obtenir taus Ies
mation they required and have had it ready for renseignements qu'ils demandaient et les mettre
a leur disposition.
them.
If the Security Council agrees to adjourn. now,
Si le Conseil de securite desire s'ajourner
I think it will probably not be able to meet again mainteriant, iI ne lui sera vraisemblablement pas
for several days. However that will be for my possible de se reunir avant plusieurs jours. C'est
toutefois a mon successeur qu'il appartient de
successor to decide.
prendre une d~cision.
Mr. AUSTIN (United States of America): If
the President will permit an interruption at this
point, 1 should like to say that I am informed by
the Secretariat that a meeting of the Security
Council could be held on Tuesday next, 4 October. If that is so, I should be hc1ined to call
such a meeting.

M. AUSTIN (Etats-Unis d'Amerique) (traduit
de l'anglais): Je me permets d'interrompre .le
President pour signaler que le SecretarIat
m'informe que le Conseil pourra se reunir mara!
prochain 4 octobre. Dans ce cas, je serais dispose
a convoquer une seance pour ce jour-la.

.Le PRESIDENT (traduit de l'anglais): Les
The PRESIDENT: That gives the members of the
SecuriPJ Council until next Tuesday to think up membres du Conseil de securite auront done·'
further objections or to call for such further jusqu'a mardi prochain pour reflechir a d'autres
information as they require. I
sure that the objections et pour demander des renseigneme~ts
Secretariat, or anyone else concerned, would. do complementaires. Je suis certain que le Secreta~1at
everything possible to meet such requirements so 'et tous les interesses feront tout leur poss1ble
that we may come to the next meeting prepared po~r que nousl'lUissions,· a la prochaine seance,
to take. an early decision on. this question, and prendre rapidement une decisio ll SUI .. cette,
thus be ableto move forward to the more import- question et passer. ensuite .aux Pfublemes plUS
iinportants dont nous sommes saisis.
ant work which lies before us.

am.

The meeting rose at 5.55 p.m.

La seance est levee a 17 h. 55.

SALES AGENTS OF THE UNITED NATIONS PUB..."'.....
DEPOS'TAIRES DES PUBLICATIONS DES NATIONS UNIES
ARGENTINA-ARGENTINE
Editorial Sudamericana S.A.
Alsina 500
BtlliNOS AmEs
AUSTRALlA-AUSTRALlE
H. A. Goddard Pty. Ltd.
255a George Street
SYDNEY, N. S. W.
BELGIUM-BELGiQUE
Agence et Messageries de la
Presse, S. A.
14-22 rue du Perm
BRUXELLES
BOLlVIA-BOLlVIE
Libreria Cientffica y Literaria
Avenida 16 de Julio, 216
Casilla 972
LA PAZ
CANADA
The Ryerson Press
299 Queen Street West
TORONTO
CHILE-CHill
EdmundoPizarro
Merced 846
SANTIAGO
CHINA-CHINE
The Commercial Press Ltd.
211 Honan Road
SHANGHAI
COLOMBIA-COLOMBIE
I.ibreria Latina Ltda.
Apartado AeIeo 4011
BOGOTA
COSTA RICA-COSTA-RICA
Trejos Hermanos
Apartado 1313
SAN JosE
CUBA
La Casa Belga
Rene de Smedt
O'Reilly 455
LA HABANA
CZECHOSLOVAKIATCHECOSLOVAQUIE
F. Topic .
Narodni Trida 9
PRAHA 1

DENMARK-DANEMARK
Einar Munksgaard
N9irregade 6 .
KpJBENHAVN
DOMINICAN REPUBLICREPUBLlQUlE DOMaNICAINE
Libreria Dominicana
Calle Mercedes No. 49
ApartaQo 656 .
CIUDAD' TRUJILLO
ECUADOR-EQUATEUR
Mufioz Hermanos y Cia.
Nueve de Octubre703
Casilla 10-24
GUAYAQUIL
IiGYPf.-'EGYPTE
Librairie"La Renaissance d'Egypte"
9 Sh. Adly Pasha
CAmo
ETHIOPIA-ETHIOPIE
Agence ethiopienne de publicite
P.O.Box8
ADDIS-ABEBA
Printed in the U.S.A.

FINLAND-FINLANDE
Akateeminen Kirjakauppa
2, Keskuskatu
HELSINKI
FRANCe
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Souffi.ot
PAlUS. Ve
GREECE-GRECE
"Eleftheroudakis"
Librairie intemationale
Place de la Constitution
ATHENES
GUATEMALA
Jose Goubaud
Goubaud & Cia. Ltda.
Sucesor
Sa Av. Sur No. 6 y 9a C. P.
GUATEMALA
HAITI
Max Bouchereau
Librairie "A la Caravelle"
Boite postale 111·B
PORT-AU-PRINCE
ICELAND-ISLANDE
Bokaverzlun Sigfusar Eymundsonnar
Austurstreti 18
REYKJAVIIC

INDIA-INDE
Oxford Book & Stationery Company
Scindia House
NEWDELID
IRAN
Bongahe Piaderow
731 She Avenue
TEHERAN
IRAQ-IRAK
Mackenzie & Mackenzie
The Bookshop
BAGHDAD
LEBANON-LlBAN
Librairie univeIselle
BEYROUTH
LUXEMBOURG
Librairie J. Schummer
Place Guillaume
LUXEMBOURG
NETHERLAND5-PAYS-BhS
N. V. M'lItinus Nijhoff
Lange Voorhout 9
'S·GRAVENHAGE
NEW ZEALAND..;...
NOUVElLE-ZELANDE
Gordon & Gotch, Ltd.
Waring Taylor Street
WELLINGTON
United Nations Association of
New Zealand
P. O. 1011, G.P.O.
WELLINGTON
NICARAGUA
Ramiro Ramirez V.
Agencia de Publicaciones
MANAGUA, D. N.
NORWAY~N()RVEGE
Johan Grundt Tanum Forlag
Kr. Augustgt. 7A
OSLO

Price in the United States: 20 cents

PERU-PEROU
Libreria intemacional del Peru

S.A.

J

Casilla 1417

LIMA

PHILIPPINE..,
D. P. Perez Co.
132 Riverside
SAN JUAN, RIZAL
POLAND-POLOGNE
Spotdzielna Wydawnicza
"Czytelnik"
38 Poznanska
WARSZAWA
SWEDEN-SUEDE
A.-B. C. E. Fritzes Kungl.
Hofbokhande1
Fredsgatan 2
STOCKHOLM
SWITZERLAND-SUISSE
Lihrairie Payot S. A.
LAusANNE, GENEVE, VEVEY,
MONTREUX, NEUCHATELo
BERNE, BASEL
Hans Raunhardt
Kirchgasse 17
ZURICH I
SYRIA-SYRIE
Librairie universelle
DAMAS
TURKEY-iURQUIE
Librairie Hachette
469 Istiklal Caddesi
BEYOGLU·!STANBUL
UNION OF SOUTH AFRICAUNION SUD-AFRICAINE
Central News Agency
Commissioner & Rissik Sts.
JOHANNESBURG and at C!PETO
and DURBAN
UNITED KINGDOMROYAUME-UNI
H. M. Stationery Office
P. O. Box 569
LONDON, S.E. 1
and at H.M.S.O. Shops in
LONDON, EDINBURGH, MANCHES
CARDIFF, BELFAST, BIRMiNGHAM
and BRISTOL
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
ETATS-UNIS D'AMERIQUE
Intemational Documents Servic
Columbia University Press
2960 Broadway
NEW YORK 27, N. Y•.
URUGUAY
Oficina d.e Representaci6n de
Editoriales
Av. 18 de Julio 1333 Esc.l
MON'I:EVIDEO
VENEZUELA
Escritoria Perez Machado
Conde a Piiiango 11
CARACAS
YUGOSLAVIA_YOUGOSLAVIE
Drzavuo Preduzece
Jugoslovenska Knjiga
Moskovska Ul. 36
BEOGJW)
3280D-November 194
