S/2007/279

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
16 May 2007
Original: English

Letter dated 7 May 2007 from the Secretary-General to the
President of the Security Council
The five Governments of Central Asia have reached a consensus on the
establishment of a United Nations Regional Centre for Preventive Diplomacy in
Ashgabat. While initiating this proposal, the Governments of the region took into
consideration the multiple threats that face Central Asia, including international
terrorism and extremism, drug trafficking, organized crime and environmental
degradation.
In accordance with the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy and
the recommendations of the High-level Panel on Threats, Challenges and Change on
the need to strengthen the United Nations capacity for conflict prevention, I wish to
inform the members of the Security Council about my intention to establish this
Centre. The Centre would be established in parallel with the phasing down and
closure of the United Nations Tajikistan Office of Peacebuilding.
The Centre would have, inter alia, the following functions:
• To liaise with the Governments of the region and, with their concurrence, with
other parties concerned on issues relevant to preventive diplomacy.
• To monitor and analyse the situation on the ground and to provide the
Secretary-General of the United Nations with up-to-date information related to
conflict prevention efforts.
• To maintain contact with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States, the Shanghai Cooperation
Organization and other regional organizations, encourage their peacemaking
efforts and initiatives, and facilitate coordination and information exchange
with due regard to their specific mandates.
• To provide a political framework and leadership for the preventive activities of
the United Nations country teams in the region; and to support the efforts of
the Resident Coordinators and those of the United Nations system, including
the Bretton Woods institutions, in promoting an integrated approach to
preventive development and humanitarian assistance.
• To maintain close contact with the United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan to ensure a comprehensive and integrated analysis of the situation
in the region.

07-34453 (E) 160507

*0734453*

S/2007/279

I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Ban Ki-moon

2

07-34453
