UNITED NATIONS

THIRTY-S1XTf-I

YEAR

th
MEETING:

22 APRIL

1981

CONTENTS
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2268) , . , , . , . . , , , . . , . . . . , . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . .

1

The situation in Namibia:
Lelter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent Kepresentative of Uganda
to lhe United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council
(S/14434) , , , . , . . , . . , . , . , , , * , . . . . . . . . , , , , . . , *. . . . . . . . , , , . . . . , . . . . . *

1

SjPV.2268

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to 21 Uniled
Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally publishcd in
quarterly Strpplements of the Qf/icid RI~~LI,P of the Srrlrritv Corlnc-ils The date
of the document indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a
system adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Rc~,sol/rlin/rs d
DecYsiom qf tl7c Sccurity Col~~zcil. The new system, which has been applied
retroactively to resolutions adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operativc
on that date.

2268th MEETING
Held in New York on Wednesday, 22 April 1981, at 11 a.m.
President:

Mr. Noel DORR (Ireland).

places reserved for them at the side of the Council
chamber.

present: The representatives of the following States:
China, France, German Democratic Republic, Ireland,
Japan, Mexico, Niger, Panama, Philippines, Spain,
Tunisia, Uganda, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United States of America.
Provisional

2. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to inform members of the Council that 1 have received letters from
the representatives of Canada, the Federal Republic
of Germany and Kenya, in which they request to be
invited to participate in the discussion of the item on
the Council’s agenda. In accordance with the usual
practice, 1 propose, with the consent of the Council,
to invite those representatives to participate in the
discussion without the right to vote, in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Charter and rule 37
of the provisional rules of procedure.

agenda (SIAgenda12268)

1. Adoption of the agenda
2. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 April 1981 from the Permanent
Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)

Ai the invitation of the President, Mr. Morden
(Canada), Mr. Jelonek (Federal Republic of Germany)
and Mr. Kasina (Kenya) took the places reserved for
them at the side of the Council chamber.

The meeting n)nScalled to order ut Il.55 a.rn.
Adoption

3. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision taken at the 2267th meeting, 1invite the President
of the United Nations Council for Namibia and the
delegatign of the Council to take places at the Security
Council table.

of the agenda

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 10 Aprill981 from the Permanent Representative of Uganda to the United Nations addressed
to the President of the Security Council (S/14434)

At the invitation of the President, Mr. Lusaka (President of the United Nations Council for Namibia) and
the other members of the delegation took places at the
Council table.

1. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decisionstaken at the 2267th meeting, 1 invite the representativesof Algeria, Angola, Benin, Cuba, Ethiopia,
Guinea, India, Indonesia, Jamaica, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Togo, the United Republic of Tanzania,
Yugoslavia, Zaire, Zambia and Zimbabwe to participate in the discussion without the right to vote.

4. The PRESIDENT: In accordance with the decision also taken at the 2267thmeeting,1invite Mr. Peter
Mueshihange to take a place at the Council table.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Peter Mueshihange took a place at the Council table.

5. The PRESIDENT: 1 should like to inform members of the Council that 1 have received a letter dated
21 April 1981 [S/I44531 from the representative of
Tunisia, which reads as follows:

At ihe invitation of the President, Mr. Benyahia
(Algeria), Mr. de Figueiredo (Angola), Mr. Houngavou
(Benin), Mr. Malmierca
(Cuba), Mr. Gedle-Giorgis
(Ethiopia), Mr. Coumbassa (Guinea), Mr. Rao (India),
Mr. Kusumaatmadja
(Indonesia),
Mr. Shearer (Jamuica), Mr. Lobo (Mozambique),
Mr. Baba (Nigeria),
Mr. Niasse (Senegal), Mr. Conteh (Sierra Leone),
Mr. Fourie, (South Africa), Mr. Hameed (Sri Lanka),
Mr. Akakpo-Ahianyo
(Togo), Mr. Salim (United Republic of Tanzania),
Mr. Vrhovec (Yugoslavia),
Mr. Kamanda wa Kamanda
(Zaire), Mr. Lusaka
(Zambia) and vr. Mashingaidze (Zimbabwe) took the

“1 have the honour to request the Security Council to invite Mr. Clovis Maksoud, Permanent Observer for the League of Arab States to the United
Nations, to participate in the Council’s consideration of the item entitled ‘The situation in Namibia’,
in accordance with the provisions of rule 39 of the
provisional rules of procedure.”

1

region is the emerging South African nuclear capability, which is being developed clandestinely
with the
co-operation
of its friends, in contravention
of the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear WeaPol~s
~G~UCJ~CI~Assetnbly
wsolrrtiorr
2373 (XXII)I.
In SO
doing, South Africa has ruthlessly exploited Namibia’s
major minera1 and other resources, thus swiftly depleting its natural wealth and endangering its future
economic viability.

6. Unless 1 hear any objection, 1 shall take it that
the Council agrees to this request.

7. The PRESIDENT:
The first speaker is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Indonesia, Mr. Mochtar
Kusumaatmadja.
1 welcome him here and invite him to
take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

12. In view of those circumstances,
the Namibian
people are now on the verge of losing their faith completely in the United Nations, and inevitably see the
intensification
of armed struggle as the remaining
alternative for achieving their independence.

8. Mr. KUSUMAATMADJA
(Indonesia): Mr. President, fïrst of all, 1 should like to express my appreciation to you and the members of the Security Council
for granting me the opportunity
to take part in the
present deliberations on the situation in Namibia. In
congratulating
you on your assumption of the office
of President for the month of April, 1 should also like
to express my confidence that under your wise leadership this series of meetings of the Council Will live up
to the expectations of the international
community,
which sees in the situation in Namibia a grave threat
to international
peace and security.

13. One cari readily understand that attitude on the
part of the Namibian
people, since, in adopting its
resolutions and decisions, the United Nations has
raised the hopes for a settlement. These hopes have,
in turn, been consistently dashed by South Africa’s
persistent intransigence and by the inability of the
United Nations to impose them. This attitude of the
Pretoria régime demonstrates not only its arrogance
but also an intolerable challenge to the international
community’s
legal responsibility
over the Territory.

9. The United Nations has been seized of the question
of Namibia for more than three decades and, as early
as 1946, the General Assembly adopted resolution
65 (1) rejecting the annexation of the Territory by South
Africa. In 1966 the Assembly adopted resolution
2145 (XXI), placing Namibia under the direct responsibility of the United Nations until independence,
and in 1967 it established acouncil as the legal Administering Authority
for that purpose [resolution
2248
(S-V)]. In 1971 the International
Court of Justice
adopted an advisory opinion’ which declared the
illegality of South Africa’s presence in Namibia and the
invalidity of its acts on behalf of or concerning Namibia
and the obligation of South Africa to withdraw from
Namibia immediately
and thus terminate its occupation of the Territory. In discharging its responsibility
the United Nations throughout the years has adopted
numerous other resolutions and decisions. However,
instead of complying with the United Nations resolutions and withdrawing from Namibia,
South Africa
has strengthened its colonial grip over Namibia and
instituted a brutal reign of terror.

14. That intransigence became even more provocative after the adoption of Security Council resolution
435 (1978), which was co-sponsored and initiated by thc
contact group of five Western States and raised the
hope that a solution was imminent.
Once again the
expectations of the international community have been
frustrated, as some three years have elapsed without
any progress towards the implementation
of t-bis
resolution.
15. The most recent defiance of the United Nations
by South Africa was its continuous obstructive attitude
at the pre-implementation
meeting at Geneva last
January, which led to the collapse of that meeting.
Furthermore,
the failure of certain States to exert the
necessary pressure on South Africa contributed
as
much to the collapse of the talks as did South Africa’s
own intransigence. In contrast, we witness good Will
from the side of the South West Africa People’s Organization (SWAPO), which has consistently exhibited a.
positive approach to the issue and showed a high
degree of flexibility towards arriving at an acceptable:
agreement. Not only was SWAPO’s willingness ta1
co-operate spurned by South Africa but the Pretoria.
régime also had the effrontery to state that movement.
towards a settlement was premature.

10. In blatant violation of United Nations resolutions, the racist Pretoria régime imposed a puppet
régime in Namibia and stationed 100,000 troops to
sustain the régime and terrorize the people of Namibia.
Furthermore,
it has been employing these occupation
troops for indiscriminate
attacks on neighbouring
countries, for which the Security Council has time and
again condemned South Africa. Tt has also persistently
thwarted the implementation
of the IJnited Nations
settlement plan for Namibian independence,
as contained in Council resolutions 385 (1976), 435 (1978)
and 439 (1978).
11. Looming
transgressions

16. In view of the failure of a11United Nations peaceful efforts to achieve Namibian
independence
and.
overcome South Africa’s defiance, we seem now to
have arrived at a dead-end situation in which diplomatic approaches have become increasingly unproductive. This state of affairs Will, if it remains unchecked, bring us to the brink of a really uncontrollable
situation further endangering international
peace and
security ,

behind a11 these highly threatening
that have destroyed stability in the
2

17, It is necessary that the United Nations should
,.evivethe momentum of the process for the liberation
ofNamibia, and we believe that Council resolution 435
(1978),having been universally accepted, provides
the basis for a negotiated
UndjUSt
SOh.ItiOn.
An y attempt
t. ameadthis resolution Will only prolong the suffering
oftlle people and delay the independence of Namibia,
It is therefore incumbent upon the Council to ensure
the implementation of the resolution without any
further delay or modification and to display its full
commitmentt0 it.

ministerial meeting of its Co-ordinating Bureau for
special consideration of the question of Namibia. More
thon 90 delegations, of which about 40 were headed by
a Minister, attended the session, held at Algiers Iast
week, from 16to 18April. This high-level participation
reflected the importance that the non-aligned movement, which supports Africa unanimously, attaches
to the search for an urgent solution of the question of
Namibia and at the same time reflects the profound
concern elicited by the many consequences that the
crisis has on international peace and security.

18, In view of South Africa’s persistent defiance of
a11United Nations resolutions and the mounting threat
to international peace and security caused by South
Africa’sactions, the time has corne for the Council to
takeresolute action and impose the necessary mandatorysanctions against South Africa under Chapter
VII of the Charter. That this action is demanded by the
overwhelmingmajority of the international community
isevidentin General Assembly resolution 35/227 J, the
relevant resolutions of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU), the Dcclaration of the Conference of
Min&ets for Foreign Affairs of Non-Aligned Countries issued on 13 February at New Delhi’ and the
Declaration and Programme of Action of the Coordinating Bureau of t he Non-Aligned Countries
issuedlast week ut Algiers [S/I&%, anrrcx].

24. Faced with the intransigent opposition of South
Africa to any settlement plan which would involve
truc independence for Namibia, the Co-ordinating
Bureau of the Non-Aligned Countries repeated its firm
support for the struggle waged by the Namibian people
and expressed in a most responsible mariner its desire
to see a truc political solution and its confidence that
the Security Council would take a11 the measures
required by the extreme gravity of the situation.
25. In accordance with the spirit and letter of the
Charter of the United Nations and under Chapter VII,
the Co-ordinating Bureau thus launched an urgent
appeal to the international community ta impose
comprehensive mandatory sanctions on South Africa
[ihid., pcrr’a. 21 (j)].

19, My Government strongly urges the Council, in
dischargingits primary responsibility for maintaining
internationalpeace and security, to respond positively
n
to theseexpectations.

26. It was with the aim of transmitting to the Council
this appeal-which has no other purpose than the lofty
desire to preserve international peace and security
wherever it may be threatened and of responding to
the right of a people to freedom-that the Ministers fol
Foreign Affairs of the Co-ordinating Bureau, gave a
mandate to the members of the movement, including
my own country, to corne here to express their legitimate concern [ibid., pnrn. 22 (g)].

20. The PRESIDENT: The next speaker is the
Ministerfor Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Mr. Mohamed
SeddikBenyahia. 1 welcome him here and 1 invite him,
to take a place at the Council table and to make his
statement.

27. 1am happy to be able to do SOwhile you, Sir, are
President of the Security Council. For you represent
a country, Ireland, which has solid anti-colonial traditions and is a staunch supporter of freedom, and you
are very naturally’able to understand the tragedy of
Namibia and the anguish of Africa.

21, Mr. BENYAHIA (Algeria) (intcr/)rctatio/? fro/~
FWch): In the proccss of the decolonization of Namibia,which is at present characterized by the impasse
in which South Africa has been trying to place the
effortsof the United Nations, this series of Security
Couacilmeetingsis of paramount importance, not only
for the @ht of a people under colonial domination to
freedomand independence, but also for peace and
securitythroughout southern Africa.

28. The Geneva meeting having showed quite clearly
South Africa’s rejection of dialogue and negotiation
within the context of the United Nations and having
abundantly revealed ils determination to keep Namibia
within its colonial arena, it has become even more
imperative for the United Nations to organize the
appropriate collective reaction to such defiance.

22. Drawing political lessons from the failure of the
Genevameeting in January, which was organized on
theinitiative of the United Nations in order to ensure
theimplementation of the plan for a negotiated settlementof the Namibian question, the African countries,
withinthe context of the OAU, requestcd the urgent
conveningof the Council with a view to imposing comprehensivemandatory sanctions against the party
responsiblefor the tragic situation in Namibia: South
Africa.

Faced with the continuing illegal occupation of
Namibia, accompanied and protracted by South
Africa’s policy of aggression, the international community cannot stand by doing nothing. In this situation,
which is SOextremely dangerous ta world peace itself,
~P;CCouncil, the organ invested with the paramount
responsibility for the maintenance of international
peace and security, cannot disregard the urgent appeal
29.

23, ‘l%enon-aligned movement in turn endorsed that
initiatiVeand decided to convene an extraordinary
3

and true concern of this great group of people organized in the non-aligned movement.

with the United Nations, was a deliberate determination to distort the question and to divert the normal1
course of the decolonization of the Territory.

30. Faced with the challenges and provocations of the
racist régime of Pretoria, the international community
-and, in particular, Africa, whose dignity and very
being are affected by the tragedy in its southern partexpects today that the Council Will show increased
determination and take decisions that measure up to
the requirements.

38. South Africa’s delaying tactics and its sham
support for United Nations initiatives hardly hid at a11
the procrastination which it was trying to use-in
vain-to weaken the vigilance of the international
community and to inure the latter to South Africa’s
fiiits accomplis.

31. For in this crucial stage of the process of the
decolonization of Namibia, any hesitation, any inaction
or any shirking of its duty by the international community would simply be a bonus for illegality, an
encouragement to arrogant and aggressive force and,
ultimately, would help to consolidate the racist and
totalitarian systemin southern Africa.

39. These delaying tactics and manoeuvres are illus.
trated quite clearly and signitïcantly by the establishment of a so-called Council of Ministers at Windhoek:
on the basis of sham elections which the international
community as a whole and the Council in particular,,
in its resolution 439 (1978), condemned and formally
declared nul1 and void.

32. It is clear that the question of Namibia as a
problem of decolonization is uncontestable, since the
basic data involved are perfectly unambiguous.

40. Accompanying and protracting this illegal OCcupation of Namibia is an attempt to extend an aggressive policy throughout southern Africa. The colonial
policy of Pretoria, the system of upnrtlzeiti which
it imposes on the South Africa people, and its policy
of aggression against the front-line States derive from
the very nature of the racist régime which has been
established in southern Africa. Thus, consideration
of the tragic situation that has developed in that
part of Africa cari be complete and understandable
only if we take account of everything that is involved
and a11the facts of the situation. Today it is clear that
the repeated acts of aggression against the sovereign
States of the region are directed not only at breaking
the natural solidarity of their peoples with the Namibian people, but also and above a11 at imposing
through intimidation a racist order in South Africa
and a neo-colonial solution in Namibia.

33. The United Nations, holding legal authority over
Namibia until its accession to full independence,
assumed full responsibility for the Territory in 1966
[Generul Assembly resolution 2145 (XXZ)] and undertook to liberate it completely. Thus an international
consensus was established contïrming, inter dia,
the illegality of the occupation of Namibia, the inalienable right of the peopleof the Territory to independence
and the legitimacy of its anti-colonial struggle, as well
as the fact that its sole representative was its national
liberation organization, SWAPO.
34. However, by its very nature-that is, racial
oppression, colonial domination and a policy of aggression-South Africa could not accept such a consensus
and comply with the repeated injunctions of the international community. Basically, it is that very attitude
of rejection and intransigence on the part of the racist
régime of Pretoria that is feeding the crisis and paralysing the process of negotiation towards a settlement
which the United Nations is pursuing with patience and
perseverance.

41. In the light of a11that information, is it necessary
to underline that the continued illegal occupation of
Namibia and the acts of aggression perpetrated with
complete impunity against the front-line States are, for
Africa and the non-aligned movement, a cause of
serious concern?
42. The three aspects of the situation in southern
Africa are quite clear now to the Council: first, the
unacceptable continuation of a situation of illegality;
secondly, aggression against a people struggling to
exercise its right to independence; and, lastly, aggression against the African States of the region. Because
of those three aspects, we must consider the situation
in southern Africa as a serious threat to international
peace and security.

35. The failure of the Geneva meeting, which revealed
the nature and scopeof the true intentions of the racist
régime, requires that we draw up a very honest balance
sheet and that we learn a11the lessonsnecessaryto shed
some light on what should be the future action of the
international community.
36. The Geneva meeting showed Brst of a11that
South Africa was unwilling to work for the independence of the Territory and was indeed hostile to it,
trying to impose the ridiculous argument that the
question of the decolonization of the Territory had
been overtaken by events, if indeed it had not been
achieved.

43. The situation in southern Africa, marked by
continuing illegality , has been analysed in this way
since the adoption on 27 October 1966of General Assembly resolution 2145 (XXI) whereby the Assembly
decided to end South Africa’s Mandate over Namibia
and proclaimed the direct responsibility of the United
Nations for the administration and decolonization of

37. What the South African régime revealed at
Geneva, more than an unwillingness to co-operate
4

the Territory. Since then South Africa has been an
illegaloccupier of a Territory under the authority of the
United Nations and has constantly refused to heed
the injunctions of the entire international community.
..“^C
44. The Namibian people has been denied its right
to independence, and the situation in Namibia must
be characterized as a state of permanent aggression
againsta people deprived of its national rights. Taking
over indeed from the General Assembly, the Security
Council has recognized in 1969 [resolrrtion 269 (1969)]
the legitimacy of the armed struggle of the Namibian
people, According to General Assembly resolution
3314 (XXIX) of 14 December 1974 containing the
Definition of Aggression, any attempt to deprive
peoples of their right to self-determination, freedom
and independence is in itself flagrant aggression
justifying recourse to armed struggle.
45. It is thus perfectly clear that the situation now
prevailing in Namibia has been recognized as aggressionunder contemporary international law. It is therefore the duty of the Security Council to ensure that an
end is put not only to an occupation that has been
declared illegal but also to the state of aggression, recognized as such, against the Namibian people.
46, Such a situation, described as illegal occupation
andaggression, logically has a third dimension, namely, aggression against the African States of the region.
There is no doubt that the Council would be failing
seriouslyin its lofty mission if it did not condemn those
repeated attacks on the sover.eignty, integrity and
independence of Members of the Organization and
also on international peace and security.

49. In this connexion, the Council, in its resolution ’
283 (1970), requested Member States to refrain from
maintaining certain kinds of relations with South Africa
touching upon the latter’s presence in Namibia. Thus,
in that decision which we cari certainly cal1 the beginning of selective and isolated sanctions, the international community, and in particular the Security
Council, clearly realized in 1970 that South Africa
could not be made to heed the United Nations except
through organized, collective action.
50. Today, 10 years later, it has been proved that
those selective measures as well as the embargo on
arms and military supplies adopted in 1977 [Cuuncii
rcsolrrtiot~ 418 (1977)], because they were isolated
actions, had limits. In the same way, the Council, in
its resolution 269(1969),declared that it had the responsibility “to take necessaryaction to secure strict compliante with the obligations entered into by States
Members of the United Nations under , . . the Charter
of the United Nations.” That “necessary action”
which the Council undertook to take is still awaited.
Accordingly, we must state that, since the Council
has noted that for almost 15 years now South Africa
has not changed its attitude of defiance of international
legality, the Council must now, in accordance with its
own special responsibilities, adopt comprehensive
mandatory sanctions.
51. In the samevein, in its opinion of 21 June 1971,’
the International Court of Justice considered in paragraph TII that “the qualification of a situation as illegal
does not by itself put an end to it. It cari only be the
first, necessarystep in an endeavour to bring the illegal
situation to an end.” That is certainly a clear statement
addressed to the Security Council. The world court
quite clearly told the Council that, in order to put an
end to asituation that had beendeclared internationally
illegal, it was not enough to cal1 the situation illegal.
Once it had been declared illegal, it would be necessary
to work to eradicate the situation by organizing collective reaction on the part of the international community. The additional measures to be taken were
thus to be found, on the one hand, in each State’s
exercising its special responsibilities in order to help
put an end to a situation that had bindingly been declared to be illegal by the competent bodies of the
United Nations and, on the other, in collective action
by the Council.

47. It is thus evident that a11these elements of the
situation mean that we have estabfished the actual
existenceof a threat to international peace and security, for which South Africa is responsible, throughout
the southern region of Africa. For almost two decades,
the Council has been describing-it did SOin 1963for
the brst time [r.esoh~ion 181 (/9(i3)+the situation in
the southern African region as “seriously disturbing
international peace and security” because of South
Africa’s actions and manoeuvres. These facts demand
an appropriate reaction on the part of the Council.
48. The Council has already outlined the legal framework for such a reaction, as has the International
Court of Justice. Indeed, in its resolution 276 (1970)
the Council declared illegal “the continued presence of
the South African authorities in Namibia” and noted
that “the defiant attitude of the Government of South
Africa towards the Council’s decisions undermines
the authority of the United Nations,” Accordingly, it
called upon

52. In 1971 the International Court of Justice had
already outlined-broadly, it is true, but rather significantly-some of the measuresthat should be taken, At
the sametime, the Court had recognized that the Security Council had specific powers and general powers
that enabled it to discharge its special responsibilities
with regard to the restoration of international legality
in Namibia. And yet for almost 10 years now the international community, and in particular the non-aligned
movement and Africa, has been waiting for the Council to follow up on the opinion of the International Court
of Justice. Had it done SO,the Council not only would

“a11 States, particularly those which have economic and otherinterests in Namibia, to refrain from
any dealings with the Government of South Africa
which are inconsistent with [the provisions of resolution 276 (197all”.
5

bave responded to the need to re-establish international
legality in Namibia but also could have worked to
satisfy the national rights of the people of that Territory.

which would clearly be in the interests of a11the States
of Africa and indeed the whole world.
60. I should not like to fail to thank Ambassador
Florin, who preceded you as President, and 1 should
like through him to bail his country.

53. Today there is paralysis in the process of the
decolonization
of Namibia, and South Africa alone is
responsible for it. Under the circumstances, it is clear
that the obligations of every Member State in regard
to the internationally
illegal situation in Namibia and
the measures needed to end that situation require that
we adopt and impose comprehensive
mandatory
sanctions.

61. Our debate on the Namibian question occurs at a
particularly crucial stage in the evolution of the world
and more specifically in the process of decolonization
in Africa in general and southern Africa in particular.
Several of my Minister for Foreign Affairs colleagues
have, yesterday and this morning, with great relevance
stressed the importance of the question and above a11
the need finally to find a just and lasting solution to
the issue.

54. If it is true that the present impasse arising from
South Africa’s intransigence infringes upon the fundamental principles of the Charter of the United Nations and weakens the very credibility of the Organization, and if it is true that the many condemnations
---SO far with no effect-are not enough to put an end
to this policy of defiance, then the Council must today
translate into mandatory concrete action the appeal for
comprehensive
sanctions that has been launched by
Africa and the non-aligned movement.

62. The question of Namibia is not of concern just to
Africa or Africans. The question of Namibia requires
constant attention and responsible consideration
on
the part of the whole world, and for that reason it is
fortunate that the Council is now devoting a special
series of meetings to it.
63. One might have thought that with the decolonization of Zimbabwe, which occurred exactly a year ago,
through a regular and legal transfer of power to the
majority by means of free elections, the international
community
might reasonably have expected South
Africa to learn a lesson from the past and agree to put
an end at last to its illegal occupation of Namibia.
The example of Zimbabwe in fact showed that a transfer of power to the majority, while putting an end to
an era of injustice based on racial discrimination
and
scorn, promoted the beginning of co-operation among
a11 the States in the region. One might have thought
that the example of Zimbabwe would affect the behaviour of South Africa.

5.5. The Council has the difficult privilege of dealing
with situations involving a threat to or a breach of
international
peace and security, and it must today
shoulder its responsibilities in respect of a colonial and
racial system that defies the international
community
and its essential foundations.
56. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the Minister of State for Foreign Affairs of Senegal, Mr. Moustapha Niasse. 1 welcome him, and 1 invite him to take a
place at the Council table and to make a statement.
57. MI-. NIASSE
(Senegal) (int~~rpretution
jkm
F/~nch): On behalf of my country 1 should like to thank
the members of the Security Council for inviting me
nnd my colleagues the other Ministers for Foreign
Affairs to take part in this important and historic debate on the important question of Namibia.

64. The question of Namibia, which is still before the
United Nations, is well known to a11 and it does not
appear to be necessary to go over its history, particularly sjnce some of my colleagues who preceded me
in speaking here have done that with clarity and relevance.

58. Indeed, Mr. President, your country, Ireland,
and mine, Senegal, have always believed profoundly
in the ideals of the United Nations. Both countries
have remained devoted to safeguarding international
peace and security. It is in that spirit that our two
countries have co-operated closely on a daily basis for
several years now within the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon,
which has been charged with
restoring peace in the Middle East.

6.5. What we should like to say is that, since the General Assembly decided to put an end to South Africa’s
Mandate over Namibia
[r’rsdhm
2145 (XXJ)], the
Organization has always corne up against a total lack
of co-operation from South Africa. There is no need to
recall that the latter has never ceased to oppose the
implementation
of the relevant resolutions and decisions adopted by the Organization
in its concern with
discharging the task conferred upon it in connexion
with Namibia by the international
community.

59. For a11 those reasons, to which must be added
your great experience in international affairs, 1 have the
privilege of extending to you my country’s sincerest
congratulations
on your assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council, convinced, as we are, that,
despite the difficult circumstances of the hour, you
Will be able to steer the Council to positive results in
connexion with this important question of Namibia,

66, For its part, during that time South Africa, rather
than performing the task given it by the United Nations, which consisted basically of establishing conditions leading to the international
sovereignty of the
Territory of Namibia,
instead raised obstacles-ob6

stacles to any negotiated settlement of the question.
By that attitude, South Africa aimed and continues to
aim at perpetuating
its presence in Namibia.
More
seriously, South Africa, month after month and week
after week, ceaselessly undertakes, under various
pretexts, frequent, blatant acts of aggression against
the African front-line
States-Angola,
Botswana,
Mozambique,
Zambia,
Zimbabwe-claiming
to be
acting in self-defence.

for under Security Council resolution 435 (1978). They
also stressed the responsibility of the fïve members of
the contact group of Western Powers in the implementation of the plan. They invited those Powers to continue to exert the necessary pressure on the South
African régime to comply at last with the relevant provisions of Security Council 435 (1978). My country,
Senegal, would like to reaffirm here its support for that
stand by the front-line States, a stand which a11 Africa
fully supports.

67. Of a11 the resolutions and decisions adopted by
the General Assembly and by the Security Council on
the question of Namibia,
the delegation of Senegal
would like to place particular stress on Council resolutions 385 (1976), 431 (1978), 435 (1978) and 439 (1978).
In the opinion of my delegation, those resolutions
constitute a valid and unchallengeable framework for
bringing Namibia to total independence, and it is for
a11 those reasons that the countries members of the
non-aligned movement
and of the OAU had confidently placed great hopes in the Geneva meeting in
January, to the extent that the meeting might have made
it possible to achieve a negotiated settlement of the
Namibian question. We know the outcome.

72. Inspired by that summit meeting, and given the
worsening of the situation in that part of southern
Africa, the Co-ordinating Bureau of the Non-Aligned
Countries, meeting in an extraordinary
ministerial
session at Algiers from 16 to 18 April, for its part
reafflrmed the validity of the settlement plan for
Namibia contained in Council resolutions 385 (1970).
435 (1978) and 439 (1978) [X/14458, a,~ne~]. That plan
is rightly considered to be the sole and most valid
framework for the independence of Namibia
and
the Bureau underscored the need for its immediate
implementation,
with the assistance of the contact
group, While condemning once again the tactics of
South Africa, the Co-ordinating
Bureau advocated
appropriate mandatory sanctions, which, if scrupulously observed, would make it possible to force South
Africa finally to co-operate with the United Nations in
the implementation
of the resolutions adopted by the
Organization.

68. Despite the failure of the Geneva talks, for which
South Africa bears fui1 responsibility-and
it is fortunate, once again, that the so-called Democratic
Turnhalle Alliance (DTA) is not present here-the nonaligned movement and the OAU have month after
month shown great restraint and responsible moderation. Our countries have preferred negotiated settlement to confrontation-in
other words, dialogue.

73. In conclusion, as members of the Council Will
have noted, the support given by the international community to the Namibian cause, support essentially
based on the purposes and principles of the Organization, of the non-aligned movement and of the OAU,
is legitimate support, realistic support, responsible
support.

69. The Ministers for Foreign Affairs of the nonaligned countries, at their conference held at New
Delhi last February, while regretting the failure of the
Geneva meeting, decided to slress the mandatory
implementation
of decisions adopted by the Organization. In that connexion, they a11decided to highlight
the role and the responsibility
of the members of the
contact group of Western countries in the settlement of
the Namibian question.”

74. The heroic struggle waged by the Namibian
people under the leadership of SWAPO, its sole and
authentic representative, and under the clear-sighted
leadership of SWAPO’s president, Mr. Sam Nujoma,
is a just struggle; it is a historic struggle, a struggle
which should lead to victory. The goal we are seeking
is not only the liberation of the Namibian people from
South African domination, but also the establishment
in Namibia of a régime which Will be a régime of the
majority, a régime of democracy, enabling Namibia,
its people and its leaders to play the role which is
legitimately
theirs on the international
scene, and
enabling Namibia to accede to independence without
any territorial usurpation of any kind.

70. Within that framework, while emphasizing the
somewhat limited progress that has been made, that
responsibility
must be reaffirmed. Indeed, the five
member countries of the contact group should be
invited once again to bring new pressure to bear on
South Africa. For its part, the OAU has for several
years taken a responsible approach to this question,
continually confïrming our solidarity with our brothers
of SWAPO. This attitude is a result of determination
based on a thorough and responsible analysis of the
question of Namibia and of the situation brought about
by South Africa in that country.

75. Faithful to the Princip]es of the Charter of the
United Nations, faithful to the principles of the Charter
of the Organization of African Unity, faithful to the
purposes of the non-aligned movement, my country,
Senegal, wishes solemly to reaffirm here its constant
commitment to SWAPO.

71. In the same spirit, in the final communiqué
released at the end of the summit meeting of the frontline States, held at Luanda on 15 April 1981 [S/14464,
I~II~ILJX], the heads of State of those countries reaffïrmed
their support for the United Nations plan, as provided

76. The Security Council, whose mission is precisely to see to it that international peace and secu7

rity are guaranteed, shodd support the initiative
of
the non-aligned countries, the initiative of the African
countries, the initiative of a11 peace-loving and freedom-loving peoples to assist Namibia in achieving
independence.

84. In the circumstances, it is of cardinal importance
that the Council, in a11its dealings, should ensure that
equal treatment be accorded to a11parties. This aPPlies
here and now also to their right to corne and state their
views in this chamber.

77. Senegal would like once again to express its confidence in and support for the United Nations and its
Secretary-General; we hail his great qualities and the
praiseworthy efforts he has ceaselessly made to lead
the Namibian people to total independence, despite
the extraordinary and unjust accusations made by
South Africa against the United Nations.

87. But what has happened? The decision of the
Council yesterday 12267th meeting] to dw
DTA an
opportunity to address it has stripped away the last
vestige of any claim which the United Nations might
have had to being an impartial arbiter of the future of
the Territory.
88. For the last three years, whenever apprehension
over Ehe blatant partiality of the General Assembly
and the Secretariat towards SWAPO was voiced,
assurances were given that there was nothing to be concerned about: this was a Security Council exercise and
the Council’s impartiality
was above reproach.

78. We think that the time has corne for action. By
stilling passion and prejudice, and by showing resolve,
realism and firmness, we cari a11 together lead the
valiant brotherly Namibian people to total independence, for peace and for justice. It is in that way, and
that way only, that peace and security cari be restored
in that region and, hence, throughout the world.

89. Now it is clear for all to see what had been suspected for some time: that the Council is no different
from any other United Nations organ in its bias in
favour of SWAPO. 1 say this in spite of the fact that
six members of the Council voted for the right of DTA
to speak; but 1 am talking about majority decisions.
Here you see living proof of that bias. The Council
has not hesitated to invite SWAPO to sit at this table,
but has denied DTA, a democratic party from inside the
Territory, the basic right to speak on a matter of the
most direct concern to it.

79. The PRESIDENT:
The next speaker is the representative of South Africa. 1 invite him to take a place
at the Council table and to make his statement.
80. Mr. FOURIE (South Africa): 1 too should like to
congratulate you, Sir, on your assumption of the
presidency of the Security Council.
81. South Africa has asked to participate
debate for the following reasons.
\

in this

90. The decision of the Council yesterday has once
and for a11exposed the intentions of the majority for
what they are: nothing but a device to install a SWAPO
government in Windhoek by any means, regardless
of the wishes of the people of the Territory and in
contravention of every precept of democratic practice.

82. First, it is directly concerned with the future of
South West AfricalNamibia.
83. Secondly, the people of the Territory urgently
wish to proceed to an early, internationally recognized
independence. They have waited for many years and
are growing impatient. South Africa supports their
wish and shares their anxieties about certain aspects of
the procedures followed in the past. South Africa therefore deems it its right and duty to state its views to the
Security Council.

91. South Africa has consistently maintained that it
is for the people of the Territory themselves to determine their own future. Accordingly,
South Africa’s
acceptance of the Western proposa1 on 25 April 1978
was based on our fundamental
approach, that the
inhabitants should be allowed to determine their own
future in a procedure which would be manifestly free
and fair.

84. Thirdly, South Africa regards it as its right and
duty to emphasize that the democratic parties of the
Territory bave never been afforded an opportunity to
present their views in the Council, while one particular
grour?, through one-sided action of this body, has been
given Preferential treatment, and to demand that this
be rectified.

92. In this connection, it Will be recalled that the
basic motivation for United Nations involvement in the
process leading to independence
was the wish to
provide a mechanism whereby elections could be
certified as having been free and fair and as therefore
having accorded with the aspirations of the inhabitants,
thus leading to international recognition.

85. A great deal has been said about the need to distinguish between the actions of the General Assembly
and those of the Security Council. While SOmany ofthe
decisions and actions of the General Assembly are comPletelY inconsistent with the role of referee envisaged
for the United Nations in the settlement proposa1
[S/I2636 of 10 April 19781, it has been argued that the
settlement proposa1 is to be implemented
in accordance with a Security Council resolution an& therefore, under the authority of the Council.

93. A free and fair expression of the Will ofthe people
must take place in conditions of peace and security.
The elimination of political opponents, the maiming of
civilians, the abduction of school children and the
destruction of property cari never from part of any
democratic process. Accordingly,
one of the basic
8

assumptions of the original Western proposa] was that
visible peace shauld prevail throughout the Territory,
The democratic political parties do net believe that the
United Nations cari and Will take effective steps to
bring this about. This ~ery important consideration
still remains to be resolved.

100. This crisis is being aggravated and fanned by
the proposa1 for sanctions against Soufh Africa,
Needless to say, those advocating this course would
net take responsibility for the crisis when it reaches
the boiling-point. The leaders of southern Africa should
rather decide whether they want co-operation or confrontation. The consequences of the latter Will be felt
by ail. Acceptance of the current proposai to institute
sanctions against South Africa would likewise be felt
by all the countries of southern Africa. But apparently
the question of sanctions against Soulh Africa has
become an obsession to the extent that it is propagated,
regardless of the consequences in human suffering.
The Unired Nations is supposed to bc deeply concerned with the well-being of South West Africa/
Namibia. Development
in that Territory
compares
most favourably with similarly placed developing countries. In co-operation with South Africa, the Territory
has an effîcient infrastructure ad it is one of only a
handful of countries on tire African continent exporting
f00d.
With the prospect of further development
and
progress, its stabilily could be secured in southern
Africa and foreign interference terminated.

94. In lhis process, the United Nations should be
seen to be impartial. It is nol good enough to hint at
undefined and conditional
assurances to the parties
thut impartiality
would begin once the plan was implemented while in practice continuing the partiality
towards SWAPO. The remarkable degree to which
the United Nations has assisted, nnd idenlified itself
with, SWAPO is a malter of record, as is the mariner
in which it has denigrated the status of the other
parties.
95. Authentic
self-determinaItion
implies the continuation ul: the democratic process and satisfactory
assurances lhat individual and minority rights would
conlinue lo be respected after the election, whatever
its outcome. This perception underlies every democratic process. Without it the proposed elections would
simply be a prelude either ta tyranny or to civil war.
96. The Geneva meeting failed to reassure the democratic parties in regard to their anxieties.
97. My Minister of Foreign Affairs, in bis letter of
28 January [S’/lJ%Q j, bas already dealt with the Secretary-General’s report on the Geneva meeting, and a11
the points rnised therein need no repetition here. The
foollowing exccrpt from paragraph 7 of that letter forms
the corncrsIone of South Africa’s approach to the
question of South West Africa/Namibia:
“At Geneva Ihe internai parlies were net satisfied
that: it would net bc a case ofone man, one vote, one
lime. In addition, their concerns for solid guarantees
regarding frcedom of speech, the freedom to form
political parties, a free and independent judiciary,
a fret economy and respect for property-concepts
basic to the democratic process envisaged in the
settlcment plan- were not addressed. It cari only be
hoped that due regard Will be had by ail concerned to
the legiiimate
anxieties of the democratic parties
of [ lhe Territory],”

101. 1s it one of the purposes and desires of those
propagating sanctions to destroy, inlcr’ (llili, what has
been accomplished in South West AfricalNamibia?
DO they want to deprive the inhabitants of that country
of the fruits of decades ofarduous effort, or is it rather
their purpose to create chaos and instabihty in the
Territory and in southern Africa as a whole?
102. My Government cannot observe with equanimity the thwarting of the legitimate aspirations of the
people of South West Africa/Namibia;
or allow their
country to be transformed into a landscape of devastatien, famine and poverty as has happened elsewhere.
103. The militant, punitive approach of the General
Assembly, reflected in the resolution it adopted on
6 March [rcsolutkw 35/227] is the wrong one, ifgenuine
independence for South West AfricalNamibia
is
sincerely held to be the real objective, Threats Will
accompli&
nothing other than to strengthen determination not to permit an unfair solution to be foisted
on the Territory-a
solution which would, by subterfuge, subject the people of Ihe Territory to an “independence” which would in reality be nothing but
tyranny.

98. We have reached a sad moment for the forces of
reason, understanding and moderation. A climate of
intolerance has been nurtured in the Organization by
unbridled invective.

104, South Africa would not take sanctions lying
clown but would exercise a11 its options and react
approprialely to safeguard its own interests. Sanctions
against South Africa would in effect amount t0 sanctions against the countries of southern Africa, whose
economies are so closely interlinked,
and it would
inevitabIy be the poor who would suffer most.

99. The developments
surrounding the question of
South West Africa/Namibia
are of the greatesl importance to the whole of southern Africa. The struggle
surrounding South West Africa/Nnmibia
is increasingly turning into a struggle between the advocates of
the free expression of the right of self-determination
and the advocates of power seizure by means of force
and intimidation.
This development
is bringing the
countries of southern Africa to a serious relationship
crisis.

105. This view was confirmed by the Economie Cor-nmission for Africa in a recent report on the effect which
sanctions imposed against South Africa would bave.
The Economie Commission for Africa concluded that
9

the cost of such sanctions. “would be incalculable
in human terms to some States, while others States,
inside and outside Africa, could fïnd the cost to be
economically
prohibitive”
.4
106. The ripple effect of sanctions if ever applied,
would therefore be ruinous. Tolerance and understanding are required in deliberations
on the future
of South West AfricalNamibia-not
threats by the
United Nations or any other quarter. A cool and clearheaded approach is needed now, more than ever. Confrontation
should be avoided. South Africa stands
ready to play a constructive role in securing a peaceful and just internationally
recognized solution in the
Territory in which equal opportunity would be afforded
to the democratic parties. With this objective in mind,
we shall continue to Iook for positive ways to go
forward together with those genuinely interested in a
fair soEution.
107. At this time more than ever, it is not sanctions
that are called for in Africa-a continent which United
Nations and OAU reports are unanimous in declaring
to be economically
ailing-but
increased economic
co-operation. Furthermore, sanctions Will make it more
difficult to find peaceful solutions to the problems of
our subcontinent. They Will in fact destroy the basis of
co-operation which exists.

109. This series of meetings has been convened at a
time when serious discussions are taking place in an
attempt to make real progress towards finding an equitable solution which Will accommodate the concerns of
a11the interested parties. South Africa has responded
positively to the approaches for further discussion
since it believes in continuing dialogue rather than
sterile confrontation.
It is our hope that these discussions Will centre on the problems which stand in the
way of peaceful settlement. 1 must emphasiz,e that a
settlement Will not be achieved unless equal treatment
of a11 parties is assured; unless the rights of Iminority
groups are protected and guaranteed: and unless
fundamental principles of democracy are ensured fol
the future.
110. For its part, the South African Government Will,
as in the past, be guided by the wishes of the democratic leaders of the Territory, who cannot be expected
to go along with a solution which is forced upon them.
It is also our belief that the basic motivation which led
to the settlement proposa1 cari be satisfïed without
some of the glaring symbols of United Nati#ons partiality.

108. Let us, rather than proceeding on this destructive course, recognize that if South West Africa/
Namibia is to be led peacefully to independence, cooperation between South Africa, on the one hand, and
the neighbouring States, on the other, is essential.
A prerequisite for this course is peace and tranquillity,
with a lack of violence and intimidation.
This cari be
brought about effectively only if there is a growing
realization of this fact by the countries directly concerned and, furthermore,
if there is a willingness on
the part of ail concerned to work towards this goal,

Litho in United Nations,

New York

00300

86-61103-June

1988-2,050
