United Nations

S/PV.6314

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-fifth year

6314th meeting
Monday, 17 May 2010, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Salam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Lebanon)

Members:

Austria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Bosnia and Herzegovina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Nigeria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Turkey . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Uganda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Ebner
Mr. Barbalić
Mrs. Viotti
Mr. Li Baodong
Mr. Araud
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet
Mr. Okuda
Mr. Puente
Mr. Amieyeofori
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Apakan
Mr. Rugunda
Sir Mark Lyall Grant
Ms. Anderson

Agenda
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998), 1203 (1998), 1239 (1999)
and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (S/2010/169)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

10-36420 (E)

*1036420*

S/PV.6314

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.

I invite Mr. Hyseni to take a seat at the Council
table.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council resolutions 1160 (1998), 1199 (1998),
1203 (1998), 1239 (1999) and 1244 (1999)
Report of the Secretary-General on the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (S/2010/169)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received a letter from
the representative of Serbia, in which he requests that
the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia to
participate in the consideration of the item, without the
right to vote, in accordance with the relevant
provisions of the Charter and rule 37 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Mr. Jeremić
(Serbia) took a seat at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): On behalf of
the Council, I extend a warm welcome to His
Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Serbia.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and head of the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Zannier to take a seat at the Council
table.
In accordance with the understanding reached in
the Council’s prior consultations, I shall take it that the
Security Council agrees to extend an invitation under
rule 39 of its provisional rules of procedure to
Mr. Skender Hyseni.
It is so decided.

2

The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them
document S/2010/169, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Lamberto Zannier, to whom I now give
the floor.
Mr. Zannier: The report before the Council
today (S/2010/169) details the activities of the United
Nations Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) from 16 December 2009 to 15 March 2010.
Today, I intend to highlight key issues and update the
Council on events that occurred after 15 March.
Overall, since my most recent address to the
Council in late January (see S/PV.6264) the situation in
Kosovo has remained stable, although the potential
remains for volatility and instability, especially in
northern Kosovo and a number of significant
developments have taken place. The absence of a
significant process of reconciliation between the
communities continues to be a challenge, and that,
coupled with economic difficulties, continues to pose a
risk of social unrest.
UNMIK is devoting close attention to issues
affecting relations between the communities to
facilitate regional cooperation, including through its
presence at meetings; to focus on northern Kosovo,
including by exercising administrative responsibilities
in northern Mitrovica; to engage with all interested
parties on issues relating to cultural and religious
heritage; and to offer its good offices for the resolution
of practical issues between Pristina and Belgrade in the
expectation that more direct channels of dialogue for
the resolution of such issues can be activated between
the parties.
While there has been some encouraging
movement in the cultural heritage sphere and in
UNMIK’s efforts to address practical inter-ethnic
issues in Mitrovica, progress in other areas is still
heavily conditioned by the prepositioning of the sides
in relation to the upcoming International Court of

10-36420

S/PV.6314

Justice advisory opinion on the legality of Kosovo’s
declaration of independence.
In particular, regional cooperation, which is key
to badly needed economic development, has suffered
notable setbacks due to status-related considerations.
However, while there are no standardized procedures
for the participation of the Kosovo institutions in
regional or other international forums, UNMIK’s
facilitation has in most cases allowed the seemingly
incompatible demands of the two sides to be
reconciled, thus providing a concrete contribution to
the development of regional cooperation initiatives.
Indeed, particularly at the technical level, we
have had considerable success in facilitating Kosovo’s
participation in regional and international encounters,
although the Kosovo authorities appear to believe that
UNMIK’s facilitation role is not in the interest of their
declared sovereign status. As long as it is needed and
helpful, UNMIK will continue to play its status-neutral
role with all stakeholders in order to foster regional
dialogue and cooperation. In this context, I have
continued to engage with both Belgrade and Pristina,
as well as with regional leaders, holding consultations
on the margins of international events, as well as
meetings in capitals both within and outside the region.
With UNMIK’s facilitation, Belgrade and Pristina
continue to have direct dealings on missing persons
issues through the Working Group on Missing Persons
chaired by the International Committee of the Red
Cross (ICRC), and on religious and cultural heritage
issues through the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission for Serbian Orthodox Religious Sites in
Kosovo, chaired by the Council of Europe. While we
have seen encouraging progress in the area of cultural
and religious heritage with the welcome appointment
of the head of Greece’s liaison office in Pristina as a
European Union (EU) facilitator, the problem of
missing persons remains a major challenge to the
process of reconciliation between the communities.
ICRC estimates that, as of 27 April this year,
1,862 individuals were still missing across Kosovo. On
8 April, when the Working Group on Missing Persons
met in Pristina with delegations from Pristina and
Belgrade, representatives of Kosovo-Albanian and
Kosovo-Serb families expressed dissatisfaction with
the progress made to date and demanded that the issue
be depoliticized. Their call should be heeded. In this
light, I warmly welcome the, announcement by

10-36420

Serbia’s war crimes prosecutor’s office on 10 May of
the discovery, in cooperation with the EU Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), of a mass grave near
Raska in Serbia. The site is believed to contain the
remains of some 250 Kosovo Albanians. The prompt
identification and return of the remains to surviving
family members will help the bereaved to achieve
closure and start the healing process.
Regrettably, direct practical cooperation between
Belgrade and Pristina has not extended to areas other
than those I have just mentioned. The efforts of
EULEX to re-establish a fully functioning multi-ethnic
court in the northern part of Mitrovica have produced
mixed results so far. Similarly, progress towards the
establishment of full-fledged customs facilities at gates
1 and 31 is also proving difficult.
I mentioned at the outset the particular potential
for volatility and instability in northern Kosovo. The
situation in northern Mitrovica remains politically
delicate, and the experience of past years shows that
the reconstruction and returns activities in the
inter-ethnic Kroi i Vitakut/Brdjani neighbourhood need
to be adequately shepherded. So far, 17 Kosovo
Albanian families and 40 Kosovo Serb families have
moved into reconstructed and newly constructed homes
in the neighbourhood, and UNMIK wishes to see this
process continue unhindered. We have made efforts to
assist the families in addressing the infrastructure
needs of the neighbourhood through UNMIKfacilitated technical working groups, and I am pleased
to report that both communities have been constructive
and cooperative and that the building season in Kroi i
Vitakut/Brdjani has recommenced peacefully this year.
The everyday problems facing the communities here,
as in so many other locations throughout Kosovo, do
not discriminate; they affect all ethnicities and are best
addressed through joint efforts.
Intent on opening new channels for direct
dialogue between the northern and southern parts of
Mitrovica, particularly on the pressing issue of
returns — which leaders on both sides have raised with
me — I have repeatedly visited Mitrovica over the past
few months to meet with the key players.
Unfortunately, obstacles to agreeing on the modalities,
including who should or should not participate in this
dialogue, have so far stymied my efforts to bring the
two sides together on the issue, politics once again
prevailing. My staff and I will continue our efforts but,
ultimately, the effort and good will must come from the

3

S/PV.6314

local leaders on both sides, as well as from Pristina and
Belgrade.
The issue of returns continues to be a source of
tension in other parts of Kosovo as well, with this
period having witnessed a serious display of local
resistance to returns in the village of Zallq/Žac in
north-western Kosovo. The spontaneous return of 23
Kosovo Serbs to the village in late March was met with
repeated protests by groups of Kosovo Albanian
residents of Zallq/Žac and neighbouring villages, who
alleged that the returnees included individuals who had
committed war crimes in the area — allegations which
have not been substantiated. Five people from
Zallq/Žac are still considered missing from the
conflict. There have also been allegations that the
protests may be motivated by property disputes.
Whatever the case, encouragingly, the Kosovo
authorities welcomed the returns and allocated
€100,000 to the accommodation of the returnees, and
Kosovo police and the Kosovo Force provided
protection. Regrettably, however, this did not stop
further repeated attacks by stone-throwing youths and,
most recently, the firing of bullets into the tent of a
returnee family, which fortunately did not result in any
injuries.
Ultimately, the situation in Zallq/Žac can be seen
as a microcosm of Kosovo’s humanitarian and
economic challenges: the unresolved missing persons
issues, the related lack of reconciliation, the difficult
economic circumstances, security and property issues,
and the cumulative effect of all these issues on the
returns process. The reaction of the Kosovo authorities
has been encouraging, but it is clear that more must be
done at the grass-roots level to overcome the legacy of
the past.
Since the submission of the report before the
Council,
measures
taken
by
the
Kosovo
Telecommunications Regulatory Authority to dismantle
and destroy transmitters and other equipment of
unlicensed telecommunications service providers in
Kosovo led to widespread disruption in the
communication infrastructure in minority areas,
including for emergency services. In response,
transmitters operated by licensed service providers in
northern Kosovo were attacked with explosives.
The issue is a complex one, with legal, political,
commercial, humanitarian, and security implications.
While the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority

4

viewed the situation as a rule of law and commercial
matter, the humanitarian impact of disconnections so
abruptly implemented is unquestionable. The Law on
Telecommunications was promulgated by UNMIK in
2003 and is still the only telecommunication sector
regulation in Kosovo. In the past, UNMIK has
repeatedly reminded unauthorized providers of the
licensing requirements foreseen in that Law.
Nevertheless, UNMIK remains concerned by the
humanitarian impact of the disconnections and is
monitoring the steps being taken by the Kosovo
authorities to lessen the impact of the disconnections
on the minority communities affected.
Since I last addressed the Council, there have
been some significant changes at both the local and
central governance levels in Kosovo. The newly
created Kosovo Serb-majority municipalities have now
set up their administrative structures and, while they
enjoy a certain degree of attention and goodwill from
the Kosovo authorities, it is nonetheless too early to
assess their performance with respect to catering to
their constituents’ needs and aspirations.
At the central level, the major event since the
submission of the report before the Council was a
cabinet reshuffle announced on 31 March. Six
ministers were replaced and a new Ministry of
European Integration was established. A reshuffle of
deputy ministers, which had been expected in late
April, has been delayed. In the meantime, a EULEX
investigation into allegations of corruption concerning
the Minister of Transport and Telecommunication has
strained relations between the Kosovo authorities and
elements of the international community in Kosovo.
Relations between UNMIK and the Kosovo
authorities are courteous, if at arm’s length, and the
UNMIK staff continue to maintain a variety of daily,
fruitful contacts at the working level with their Kosovo
counterparts.
Finally, I wish to highlight the progress we are
making in the integrated mission planning process
mandated by the Secretary-General. UNMIK and the
United Nations Kosovo team are in the process of
developing a United Nations strategic framework for
Kosovo that will allow us to better share the
overarching objective of ensuring lasting security and
stability in Kosovo. The United Nation’s strongest
comparative advantage in Kosovo is its acceptance
among all the communities. In this regard, UNMIK and

10-36420

S/PV.6314

the United Nations Kosovo team have identified a
number of common priorities and challenges that
would maximize the impact of the interventions of
United Nations bodies in Kosovo, especially with
respect to human rights and governance, inclusive
municipalities, the situation in the North and the issue
of returns. I am pleased with the progress we are
making.
In closing, on behalf of all UNMIK staff, I wish
to thank the Council for its support and assure it that
UNMIK will continue to perform its mandated
functions in order to ensure continued peace and
stability in Kosovo and in the region. We hope that the
two sides will continue to take advantage of UNMIK’s
facilitation and good offices. With encouragement from
this Council and cooperation from all sides, UNMIK is
confident that it can continue its work.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Zannier for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs for Serbia.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): In 1947, then-President of
the General Assembly Oswaldo Aranha of Brazil
eloquently defined what he termed the principal
mission of the United Nations — to unveil the truth
and to face reality in all its complexity, enabling our
actions to be properly guided in the maintenance of
peace and security of all peoples. As we gather here for
another meeting of the Security Council, in accordance
with resolution 1244 (1999), we should remind
ourselves of his words.
With all due respect to differing points of view,
when it comes to Serbia’s province of Kosovo and
Metohija, a manifest truth is that its status remains
bitterly disputed more than two years after its ethnic
Albanian authorities attempted secession through a
unilateral declaration of independence (UDI).
Pristina’s UDI has clearly divided the world and
brought into question the fundamental tenets of the
contemporary international system. It has neither
contributed to Balkan stability nor enhanced regional
cooperation. A substantial majority of United Nations
Member States and of those seated today on the
Security Council have stood firm against efforts to
impose the forcible partition of my country. They have
continued to respect our sovereignty and territorial
integrity. On behalf of my nation, I would like to

10-36420

reiterate our deep gratitude for their support as we seek
to resolve Kosovo’s future status through patient
diplomacy.
Before turning to the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/169), I want to emphasize that the principled
position of Serbia’s democracy remains set in stone.
We will never yield and recognize UDI. We will
continue to vigorously defend our position in a nonconfrontational manner, using all diplomatic means at
the disposal of a peaceful sovereign State.
I would like to extend a warm welcome to
Special Representative Lamberto Zannier and thank
him for his work. The United Nations remains an
indispensable actor in Kosovo. It is therefore critical
that the Council keep supporting the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
as a crucial pillar of peace and stability.
We deeply appreciate the constructive approach
of the United Nations and organizations that operate
under its overall authority, such as the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX). They have
set the stage for responsible stakeholders to work
together on improving the lives of ordinary people
irrespective of their ethnicity. Disagreements on status
must not impede our ability to act in concert on
resolving practical issues.
As a result of this approach, the unstable
equilibrium on the ground has been largely kept in
check. This has ensured that the overall situation in
Kosovo remains “relatively calm but fragile”, to quote
the report.
Kosovo’s ethnic Albanian authorities have on
numerous occasions failed to embrace pragmatic,
status-neutral engagement, notably in the rule of law
area. For instance, the 2 March visit by the head of
EULEX, Yves de Kermabon, to Belgrade resulted in an
agreement on how to move forward rapidly on the
judiciary issue, in particular as it affects the North
Mitrovica courthouse. Despite having been duly
apprised of its contents beforehand, Pristina publicly
rejected the terms after they were embraced by
Belgrade.
The
international
community’s
executive
authority has yet to be used to put this breakthrough
into effect and thereby pave the way for a constructive
dialogue on the matter of customs. Instead, these two
areas of shared interest — integral parts of the

5

S/PV.6314

Secretary-General’s report — remain open to the
detriment of the Kosovo Serb population in particular.
Regrettably, the Secretary-General’s report
downplays a number of growing challenges in Kosovo,
from organized crime and corruption to police
misconduct and judicial dysfunctionality. The
European Commission’s most recent progress report,
on the other hand, paints a more realistic picture. It
states that organized crime and corruption continue to
be issues of “serious concern” and affirms that the
judicial system is “weak, vulnerable to political
interference and inefficient”.
More recently, EULEX Acting Chief Prosecutor,
Johannes van Vreeswijk, stated that Pristina’s so-called
Minister of Transport and Telecommunication, Fatmir
Limaj, together with a tight-knit group of associates, has
been under investigation since May 2009 for “moneylaundering, organized crime, misappropriations of office,
fraud in office and soliciting bribes”. The EULEX Acting
Chief Prosecutor has also suggested that the so-called
Prime Minister of Kosovo, Hashim Thaci, along with
other Pristina-based figures, have strongly discouraged
him from moving forward in his work.
In another high-profile case, the Kosovo
Liberation Army (KLA) War Veterans Association
made threats against EULEX after the recent arrest of
former KLA commander Sabit Geci. He was charged
with crimes related to organ harvesting committed on
ethnic Serb civilians in the well-known “yellow house”
in neighbouring Albania.
Several Serbian officials, including Minister
Goran Bogdanović and his deputy, were illegitimately
expelled by Pristina under armed escort, despite being
legal residents of the province. At around the same
time, unilateral force was used by a Kosovo special
police unit on Serbian mobile and fixed telephony,
disrupting the ability of Kosovo Serbs to communicate
beyond their enclaves — a serious breach of
contemporary humanitarian norms. No warning was
given. It was quick and violent, apparently catching
many international actors in Kosovo off guard.
Thankfully, the situation on the ground is
improving and the technical damage is being repaired.
We must make sure this sort of unilateralism does not
happen again. In this context, I would like to welcome
the statements by UNMIK and EULEX that
disassociated them from the controversial strategy for
northern Kosovo. This unilateral scheme was

6

sponsored by the so-called International Civilian
Office. Its intent was to forcibly implement the
delegitimized Ahtisaari proposal, in violation of
resolution 1244 (1999).
The precarious state of Serbian patrimony
remains a deeply troubling part of the reality on the
ground in Kosovo. The report of the Secretary-General
highlights a number of disturbing incidents, including
church vandalism, graveyard desecration, the looting
of icons and other relics, and the denial of property
rights. Inexplicably, it continues to remain silent on the
lack of progress in reversing the outrageous decision to
pave over with concrete the remains of the twicedestroyed Serbian church in the centre of Djakovica.
Serbia is today raising for the fifth time in the Council
the fact that nothing has been done to reverse that
awful act of cultural cleansing.
These illustrative examples are not isolated
incidents. They cause, result in and reinforce each
other, all at the same time. They are an integral part of
the post-UDI reality on the ground that directly affects
the return of the 205,835 expelled Kosovo Serbs
registered by the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).
Especially in south Kosovo, the police seem
unable to prevent acts of intimidation and violence
against Serbs exercising their right of return. For
instance, the reconstructed village of Žac was
repeatedly attacked over several months: homes were
vandalized, power lines were cut, car tyres were
slashed and children were stoned. As a result, most of
its inhabitants decided to leave Kosovo. And just three
days ago, one of the returnees who chose to remain
was shot at by an unknown assailant while he sat in the
tent in which he lives.
Senior UNHCR official Eduardo Arboleda has
stated that “the return of displaced persons has literally
stopped”. This has been echoed by the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE), which
has written that local authorities in Kosovo “have done
little to encourage displaced persons to return”. The
well-respected Minority Rights Group International has
gone further, saying in a recent report that since UDI
the situation for Kosovo Serbs and other
non-Albanians has worsened, and that this is forcing
them to leave Kosovo “because they face exclusion and
many instances of discrimination”.

10-36420

S/PV.6314

Notwithstanding numerous statements by the
province’s ethnic Albanian authorities that have
claimed the return of internally displaced persons
(IDPs) to be a priority, the reality on the ground is that
in the past year, only a few hundred Kosovo Serbs have
returned to their homes. That amounts to less than one
half of one per cent: a staggering figure. It represents a
failure of monumental proportions that must urgently
be addressed. The Republic of Serbia nevertheless
continues to be dedicated to finding a way to overcome
these and many other concrete challenges in statusneutral ways consistent with Council resolution 1244
(1999).
In this context, I should like to underline that an
understanding was recently reached with UNHCR to
establish three specialized offices in central Serbia that
will enable IDPs to receive Kosovo Property Agency
decisions. We hope this will pave the way for more
than 40,000 claims by Serbs to be finalized, leading to
the recovery of illegally seized property without
further delay, after more than a decade of
prevarication.
The Republic of Serbia has continued to work
with the international community in a number of other
important areas of mutual concern. We greatly
appreciate UNMIK’s concerted efforts to, in the words
of the report, “decrease tensions and focus on common
needs” (S/2010/169, para. 12) in north Kosovo. Its
irreplaceable role in resolving practical problems is
very welcome, as is the offer to chair a number of
multi-ethnic task forces composed of representatives of
north Kosovo institutions and local ethnic Albanian
authorities. We also support the European Union’s
(EU) enhanced status-neutral presence in north Kosovo
and look forward to European Union House beginning
to function at full capacity in the near future.
I am pleased to underline that day-to-day
cooperation between Serbia and the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) on issues of
police, justice and customs has also continued apace.
Information is exchanged on a regular basis, and
technical discussions in a number of important
competency areas have proven to be useful to both
sides. Close working relationships have developed,
leading to increased understanding of the needs and
priorities of everyone concerned.
I would like to salute the international
community’s indispensable role in protecting Serbian

10-36420

cultural and religious heritage in Kosovo. A positive
development that took place during the reporting
period was the status-neutral appointment by the
European Union of the head of Greece’s liaison office
in Pristina, Ambassador Dimitris Moschopoulos, to the
position of facilitator for the protection of Serbian
heritage in the province. We have already begun to
work with him in accordance with Council resolution
1244 (1999) and the Secretary-General’s six-point
plan.
Serbia is encouraged by early signs of
accomplishment.
For
example,
Ambassador
Moschopoulos has been able to convince the local
ethnic Albanian authorities in the municipality of
Vucitrn to redress a terrible wrong. For a decade, the
Church of Saint John the Baptist in the village of
Samodreza had been used as a garbage dump by the
nearby elementary school. This shrine is particularly
important for the Serbian people, as it was built on the
foundations of the church in which the martyrs of 1389
took communion before going into the historic battle of
Kosovo.
I would like to express cautious optimism that
issues related to the supply of electricity for Serbian
communities throughout the province will be resolved
in the near future. Thanks to the constructive role
played by UNMIK and especially the EU, it appears
that a status-neutral solution is being worked out.
I come to the matter of the Kosovo Force
(KFOR). Its unique ability to bridge existing
communal divides and maintain peace and stability on
the ground remains acknowledged by all. The Republic
of Serbia will continue to work with our partners to
ensure that KFOR’s role is not diminished, especially
in the context of safeguarding Serbian patrimony. We
believe that proposals to hand over operational
jurisdiction for guarding a number of these sites to
local police units would not contribute to improving
the fragile security situation. This is especially
important given the opposition to such plans clearly
expressed by the affected monastic communities.
Despite recent setbacks on the ground, I believe
we are approaching a new, more promising moment on
Kosovo. In the time ahead, we should concentrate our
efforts on coming together to find a solution through
dialogue. In October 2008, the General Assembly
tasked the International Court of Justice with
determining whether the UDI conforms to international

7

S/PV.6314

law. Late last year, a crucial stage in the judicial
process — oral hearings — came to an end, with a
record number of countries presenting their views,
including all five permanent members of the Council.
That has made it the largest case in the history of the
Court.
The Court is close to completing its deliberations
and we all have an obligation to take that fact very
seriously. The judges’ work should be allowed to run
its course unhindered by political pressures, such as
further recognition of the UDI. It is deeply regrettable
that in recent months a couple of States have chosen to
do this anyway, reportedly under foreign pressure,
which amounts to disregard for the principal judicial
organ of the United Nations.
Once the International Court of Justice reports
back to the General Assembly, an unprecedented
opportunity will be created to build momentum for
achieving the ultimate goal: a strategic compromise
between Serbs and Albanians. There is no doubt that
the roots of the many problems we face in Kosovo are
buried deep in history. Those problems are made even
more difficult by the consequences of unilateral action.
Yet I strongly believe that we have the ability to
look beyond the divisions of the past and create a new
environment that will make future solutions possible.
We must summon the will and courage to do what this
moment in history demands. This can only be achieved
through peaceful dialogue which results in a mutually
acceptable outcome that provides for lasting stability in
the region and the wider world.
A solution through dialogue — and not
unilateralism — is our goal. We ask for the support of
all United Nations Member States in solving this
problem once and for all. This year can be the year of
our shared success. I want to assure this Council that
Serbia stands ready to flexibly engage in all sincerity,
for our intent is neither to freeze the conflict nor to
triumph or subjugate.
The issue of Kosovo cannot be solved by forcing
conditions of submission on a party that would be
compelled by circumstances to accept, for that would
be done in humiliation, under duress and at an
intolerable cost to democracy. It would inevitably leave
a deep stain of resentment, a bitter memory upon which
the terms of a one-sided outcome would rest — not
even permanently, but only as upon quicksand.

8

On the other hand, a solution that leaves no one
defeated can unite the world and contribute to
advancing regional priorities within the framework set
forth by international law. Only such a solution, built
with the free consent of all responsible stakeholders,
can last. Only such a solution can erase the divide
among United Nations Member States caused by the
UDI. Only such a solution merits the support of the
world — not UDI.
Serbia will pursue a compromise with Pristina
constructively and in good faith, as if they had never
opted for UDI. But make no mistake: we are equally
prepared to resist UDI unremittingly, as if no
compromise were on the horizon.
I trust that the limits of the achievable can be
extended because of the commitment by all to the same
cause — and that cause is European integration.
Dialogue between Serbs and Albanians that produces a
fair and balanced agreement will provide a critical
boost to securing a peaceful European future for the
whole of the Western Balkans. Membership in the EU
is Serbia’s central strategic priority. We strongly
believe in the shared destiny of all European nations.
And we remain dedicated to embracing Robert
Schuman’s dream of an organized and living Europe
indispensable to the maintenance of peaceful relations
among States.
These ideas stand at the foundation of our
democracy and our genuine desire for reconciliation.
They remind us of the importance of cooperation,
compromise and consensus-building, while prompting
us to move beyond all of our differences and
disagreements to achieve common prosperity. Even
though there have been many hardships along the way,
and even though much sorrow has resulted, we believe
the moment has come to put aside the fear. And we
believe that together we can transform the plot of land
that is Kosovo and Metohija — dear to both peoples —
from one of contention to one of harmony.
Let us therefore gather our strength and start
preparing for the end of this historic journey. “All
endeavour calls for the ability to tramp the last mile,
shape the last plan, endure the last hours’ toil”, Henry
David Thoreau said, adding that this is the virtue we
must possess if we are to face the future as finishers.
This is the task at hand: to create momentum and then
sustain it until we achieve peace and security for all
through peaceful dialogue.

10-36420

S/PV.6314

Waiting around for an indeterminate period in the
vague hope that one side will eventually give in is a
recipe for freezing Kosovo’s limbo, and that is most
certainly not what any responsible stakeholder wants.
The only way forward is to bring about a just
compromise that balances the desires and interests of
our two peoples. That is the goal of Serbia, and we will
pursue it until it is achieved, for no stopping point
short of agreement will ever be justified.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Jeremić for his statement.
I now give the floor to Mr. Skender Hyseni.
Mr. Hyseni: It is with deep appreciation that I
take this opportunity to speak before the Security
Council and inform it about the steady progress my
country, the Republic of Kosovo, has continued to
make in all areas during the reporting period.
Celebration of the second anniversary of my country’s
independence precisely three months ago was another
solemn and appropriate occasion to look back and take
stock of achievements, progress, key events and
developments in Kosovo during these two years of
independence.
The recognition of Kosovo as an independent and
sovereign State has continued. Since the last Security
Council deliberations on Kosovo (see S/PV.6264),
three more countries — the Kingdom of Swaziland, the
Republic of Vanuatu and the Republic of Djibouti —
have recognized the independence of my country. I
wish to extend our profound thanks and appreciation to
the peoples and the Governments of those countries for
supporting the legitimate right of the people of Kosovo
to freedom and independence.
That makes 68 nations around the world that have
extended formal recognition to the youngest State in
the world. But on top of that, Kosovo is blessed to have
equally supportive countries among those that are still
non-recognizing countries, such as those that have
supported Kosovo’s membership in the International
Monetary Fund and the World Bank. And I am very
happy to inform the Council that many other countries
around the world have announced early recognition or
have said that the procedure of formal recognition is
under way.
Internally, since the last Security Council debate,
Kosovo has seen a number of positive developments,
as well as challenges. The overall security situation has

10-36420

remained calm and stable. Discussions and efforts to
make Kosovo’s European perspective and integration
more tangible have marked the reporting period. As we
are firmly committed to vigorously pursuing the goal
of European Union (EU) and NATO membership, the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo has engaged in
a comprehensive process with institutions of the EU in
order to give new dynamism to Kosovo’s European
perspective. Based on our Constitution, we have
recently established a Ministry for European
Integration, an institution that will coordinate the work
of all line ministries related to specific requirements
deriving from the European integration process. The
establishment of the Ministry and the swift
appointment of the Minister show the profound
importance the Republic of Kosovo attaches to its
European perspective.
Kosovo
equally
supports
the
European
perspective of all the other countries of the Western
Balkans. In line with that, we consider that cooperation
and mutual assistance among the countries in the
region are crucial to a speedy integration in the
European Union of all seven countries of the Western
Balkans.
The Republic of Kosovo has already started to
implement a wide range of ambitious reforms to meet
the required European benchmarks. Of course, we
understand that this is going to be a very demanding
journey. We are of the view that, just like other
countries in our region, Kosovo should also soon be
invited to open a visa liberalization dialogue with the
European Commission.
Trade and the economy is another important
sector in which we seek a more specific European
perspective. A trade agreement between the Republic
of Kosovo and the EU is an objective of ours. We are
making every effort to reach that goal. On 16 April, the
Government of the Republic of Kosovo handed over
the completed questionnaire on trade relations with the
European Union. We hope that this and other
preparatory work at all levels will enable the
Commission to start negotiations soon.
The Government of the Republic of Kosovo has
stepped up its efforts to address and resolve many
issues of the utmost importance for our economy:
justice and security, as well as the fight against crime,
corruption and cross-border criminal activity. The
Government of the Republic has established a special

9

S/PV.6314

task force to tackle the issues of corruption and
organized crime. The European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo provides indispensable assistance in
the police and justice sectors. We are working closely
together.
Let me emphasize here how crucial bilateral and
regional cooperation is in fighting organized crime. An
example of close cooperation to fight illicit crossborder activity was the recent visit to Skopje of the
Kosovo Interior Minister to meet with his Macedonian
counterpart. On that occasion, they reconfirmed the
commitment of both countries to cooperate in fighting
organized crime and cross-border criminal activity. The
Government of Kosovo has strongly condemned the
incident that occurred recently in Macedonia in the
vicinity of the Kosovo border.
On the economic front, the Government of the
Republic of Kosovo recently signed a contract with the
Bechtel-Enka consortium on a major project to build
the Morine-Merdar highway. The construction of the
four-lane motorway, connecting Kosovo with Albania
in the west and with Serbia in the east, has already
started. The highway will provide Kosovo — and
indeed the entire region — with a highly profitable
corridor, which will be very beneficial to all countries
in the Western Balkans and beyond.
Moreover, the restructuring of socially owned and
public companies and enterprises has also continued,
through either privatization or concession, as is the
case with the concession to operate the Pristina
International Airport. Another crucial major project
under way is the new Kosovo coal-based power plant,
which is part of the governmental energy strategy.
The institutions of the Republic of Kosovo have
continued to work on improving conditions in the
minority community areas, especially in Serb-majority
areas. To confront the new challenges, overwhelming
support has been provided to the newly established
municipalities and to the recently elected leadership of
those municipalities. Over the reporting period, both
President Sejdiu and Prime Minister Thaci have
continued to reach out to the Serb community through
frequent visits to Serb-majority municipalities. The
authorities of the Republic of Kosovo have reached out
to Zallq returnees as well, condemning strongly the
incidents involved.
Furthermore, decentralization based on the
Ahtisaari plan remains a political priority for the entire

10

country. The Kosovo Central Election Commission has
scheduled municipal elections to take place on 20 June
for the newly established Serb-majority municipality of
Partesh.
It is with reluctance, though, that I must yet again
say that, through its disruptive and profoundly
destabilizing interference, the Republic of Serbia has
continued to be very unhelpful. Encouragement and
support for illegal structures in the north has continued.
The announced so-called elections to be organized by
the Republic of Serbia in the north of Kosovo are
another example of irresponsible and unacceptable
interference. Acts such as those are aimed at
undermining efforts to enforce law and order as
contained in the comprehensive strategy for the north.
To the extremely misleading reactions and comments
to the Kosovo Government/European joint strategy for
the north, I say that all that the strategy seeks to
achieve is proper and normal living conditions for all
Kosovo’s citizens throughout our country’s territory.
Normalcy through the restoration of law and order
throughout my country is much wanted by all Kosovars
regardless of their ethnic or religious background. We
are there to provide that for them.
Bilateral cooperation with neighbours, as well as
regional cooperation, continues to be in the focus of
the Republic of Kosovo as a high priority. The
Republic of Kosovo has very good relations with its
immediate neighbours — Albania, Macedonia and
Montenegro — and has been cooperating closely on a
wide range of issues of mutual concern. We invite the
Republic of Serbia to join in the efforts of other nations
of the Western Balkans to establish an environment of
cooperation and understanding in the region, including
the normalization of relations with the Republic of
Kosovo. My Government stands ready to engage in
talks with Serbia on a long list of issues of mutual
interest, as two independent and sovereign States.
Dialogue would help to ease tension and normalize
relations between our countries.
The recent discovery in Serbia of a mass grave
containing the bodies of hundreds of Kosovo Albanians
has triggered a new wave of profound sadness, with
thousands of Kosovar families affected by still
unresolved questions concerning missing persons from
the Kosovo war. It is disgraceful that, even 11 years
after the war, the whereabouts of another 1,862 people
are still unknown. We call upon all stakeholders to do

10-36420

S/PV.6314

their utmost to finally resolve the issue of missing
persons.
In conclusion, let me emphasize Kosovo’s strong
commitment to becoming a contributing member of the
international community. The Republic of Kosovo
looks forward to working with all the members of the
Council as we promote the shared goal of international
peace and security. Once again, I wish to thank the
Council for the opportunity to present the views of the
Republic of Kosovo.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
I shall now give the floor to members of the
Security Council.
Mr. Ebner (Austria): I would like to welcome
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign Minister of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni, Foreign Minister of Kosovo, and
thank them for their statements. Let me further thank
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for submitting the report before
us (S/2010/169) and for the important contribution of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK) to peace and stability in Kosovo.
Austria fully supports the continued efforts of UNMIK
to facilitate dialogue between all parties in an evolving
environment.
The period from December to March and up to
today has seen progress, including the recent
successful elections. At the same time, challenges
continue to persist in the areas of economic
development, good governance, the rule of law and the
fight against corruption and organized crime, and with
regard to the situation in northern Kosovo. In order to
ensure sustainability and preserve the gains achieved
thus far, we hope to see a continued focus by the
international community in these areas and to receive
information on progress made. The common strategic
framework developed by UNMIK and the United
Nations Development Programme will also serve this
purpose.
Unfortunately, there are still no signs of
communication, let alone cooperation, between the
Kosovo and Serbian sides. We strongly believe that,
despite the fundamental disagreement regarding the
most basic legal and territorial questions, a pragmatic
approach is possible, feasible and necessary for the
sake of the people of Kosovo, irrespective of their

10-36420

ethnic background. In this sense, we hope that both
sides will intensify their efforts to find pragmatic
solutions to unresolved issues affecting the lives of the
people living in Kosovo on a daily basis. We hope that
pragmatism will also apply with regard to
arrangements for the participation of Kosovo in
regional and international forums, in consultation with
the respective organizations.
We share the assessment that the situation in the
North continues to be difficult. We believe that we
need a gradual reintegration of the North into the rest
of Kosovo, which will happen only through dialogue
and the acceptance of both the local communities and
Belgrade. We welcome the European Union’s (EU)
accelerated efforts to enhance its visibility and
presence in the North, particularly through the
establishment of the EU House in northern Mitrovica.
We welcome the recent conduct of security
checks of freight going through gates 1 and 31 and the
joint patrolling of the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) with Kosovo police, as
well as the intention of EULEX to continue to increase
its presence and activities in order to address more
efficiently the rule of law challenges in northern
Kosovo, including the restoration of full customs
controls. We fully support the efforts of EULEX to
reintegrate Kosovo Serb and Kosovo Albanian judges
and prosecutors into the Mitrovica court and the indepth discussions on this matter with the authorities in
Belgrade and Pristina. We believe that the reintegration
of local judges should be among the highest priorities
of the international community for the North. It will
offer the possibility of justice in an area where it has
long been denied.
We are encouraged by the relatively calm security
situation and the decrease in tensions between
communities. In this context, Austria supports the steps
taken by NATO to restructure the Kosovo Force
(KFOR) and successively reduce troop numbers in
Kosovo, which will also enhance local responsibility.
Austria, which is currently the biggest non-NATO
contributor to KFOR, is determined to keep up this
strong commitment to the operation. Moreover, Austria
will continue to provide up to 30 experts for EULEX.
Austria would also like to highlight the valuable
contributions made by the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) mission in Kosovo
in supporting the development of democratic

11

S/PV.6314

institutions, in particular its continued assistance to the
Central Election Commission and in the monitoring,
protection and promotion of human rights, including
community rights. As pointed out in the SecretaryGeneral’s report and according to a recent OSCE
assessment, the implementation of return strategies is
still facing a number of challenges and would require
enhanced political commitment to lead to sustainable
results.
Let me finally reiterate the importance of
working towards a common future for all countries of
the Western Balkans in the European Union. This
message was again reconfirmed at a high-level expert
seminar hosted by Austrian Foreign Minister Michael
Spindelegger with the participation of Greek Alternate
Foreign Minister Dimitris Droutsas and DirectorGeneral Michael Leigh of the European Commission in
Vienna on 12 May. Experts from the Western Balkans
and the EU addressed the current political, economic
and social challenges in the Western Balkans in view of
EU integration. These discussions and some of the
proposals made should stimulate the debate on the
future enlargement the EU in view of the Sarajevo
conference to be held on 2 June.
Mr. Rugunda (Uganda): I wish to thank the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
for his report. I welcome His Excellency Mr. Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia,
to this debate and thank him for his statement. I also
thank Mr. Hyseni for his statement.
From the outset, Uganda would like to commend
UNMIK for its continued efforts in promoting security
and stability in Kosovo and the region. We are
encouraged that the overall security situation in
Kosovo during the reporting period remained relatively
calm. We commend UNMIK for its proactive
engagement with all communities, as well as the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade and international
actors in furthering peace and stability in Kosovo. We
are convinced that the work of UNMIK in supporting
minority communities, encouraging reconciliation and
facilitating dialogue and regional cooperation is
critical.
We welcome the readiness of the authorities in
northern Kosovo to cooperate with UNMIK in order to
resolve the practical problems on the ground. It is

12

important that progress be made on the discussions of
practical issues despite the political differences. To this
end, we commend UNMIK for engaging both sides and
setting up task forces in order to promote the
depoliticization of the problems and adherence to
established rules and procedures.
We encourage all leaders on both sides to commit
themselves to dialogue and to avoid any provocation.
Every effort needs to be made to promote peaceful
coexistence. The persistence of security-related
incidents perpetuates insecurity among the minority
communities. It is important that the perpetrators of
violence be brought to justice so as to foster a sense of
security among the minority communities. In this
regard, we call on all parties to exercise restraint,
mutual respect and tolerance in order to live in
harmony.
We therefore welcome the message of peace
delivered by the President of Serbia during his visit to
the Dečani monastery to celebrate Orthodox Christmas,
urging all people regardless of their identity to
reconcile their differences for the sake of a common
future. These are the kind of messages that are needed
from leaders to promote peace and dialogue.
My delegation welcomes the cooperation between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX) on exchanges of information and
coordinating on issues of mutual concern. This
cooperation is vital, and we encourage its
strengthening within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999).
The Kosovo Force (KFOR) plays an important
complementary role in maintaining an overall safe
environment. In this regard, we salute the efforts of
UNMIK, in coordination with EULEX and KFOR, to
encourage both sides to find a sustainable and peaceful
solution.
We commend UNMIK for facilitating the
activities of UNESCO and for facilitating agreement
on power supply issues. These activities are important
because they build confidence and create better
understanding among communities. We therefore
encourage UNMIK to continue, in coordination and
cooperation with local and relevant international
actors, its efforts to address critical social service
needs.

10-36420

S/PV.6314

Regional cooperation plays an important role in
enhancing development. We therefore encourage the
authorities in Pristina and Belgrade to work together in
pursuance of that goal. We are convinced that UNMIK
continues to play an important role in facilitating
Kosovo’s engagement in international and regional
forums. We call on the international community to
continue to support UNMIK’s important work,
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999).
Finally, we commend the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, and
the staff of UNMIK, for their good work.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): I welcome His Excellency
Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of the
Republic of Serbia, and we thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for his briefing and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.
As Brazil has stated on previous occasions,
resolution 1244 (1999) was intended to provide a legal
framework for a negotiated solution to the dispute on
the status of Kosovo. Also, it expressly recognizes the
need to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the former Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. The
resolution remains in force and therefore continues to
be the key parameter guiding the United Nations
presence in Kosovo and international efforts to resolve
the dispute. In that regard, we look forward to the
outcome of the proceedings in The Hague on this
matter. The search for a negotiated settlement on the
final status of Kosovo should remain our ultimate goal.
We are satisfied that the security situation on the
ground remains largely calm. The United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
continues to play an important role in promoting
engagement between Belgrade and Pristina as well as
with relevant stakeholders.
It is also positive that the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo remains active in its efforts
to support stability in that country. We note with
satisfaction the appointment by the European Union of
a facilitator for the protection of the religious and
cultural heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church.
The risk of increased ethnic tensions in northern
Kosovo, however, has not disappeared. Reported
attacks against Serbian returnees in some localities, for

10-36420

example, are quite disturbing, and must not be
tolerated. Regardless of the position one takes on the
status of Kosovo, now or in the future, all concerned
must ensure that it is a place where ethnic tolerance
and multiculturalism allow for peaceful coexistence
among communities. We urge the Kosovo Force and
the Kosovo Police Service to redouble their vigilance
to prevent new incidents of violence.
Continued disputes related to the provision of
services to the population are also worrisome. We fully
endorse the call by the Secretary-General for all sides
to demonstrate openness and flexibility in this regard.
Pragmatism is what serves people better at this
juncture. Depoliticizing problems will help find
solutions, or at least some modus vivendi that
addresses the practical needs of regular citizens. The
UNMIK-facilitated working groups on issues of
interest for local communities in northern Kosovo
show that such cooperation is possible.
Full cooperation with UNMIK is also needed. It
is regrettable that Pristina did not consult with the
Mission in preparing and announcing its “strategy for
northern Kosovo”. Kosovar authorities must always
bear in mind that the Security Council has given the
Mission the authority to administer Kosovo in its
entirety.
In the Western Balkans, as much as anywhere
else, there is no substitute for dialogue and negotiation
when differences arise and have to be surmounted in
the interest of the people. We hope that sustained
engagement and full cooperation with UNMIK, by all
stakeholders, will pave the way for a transparent and
inclusive approach to address issues still unsettled. We
also hope that the advisory opinion of the International
Court of Justice will help all parties achieve a just
solution.
Brazil will continue to support the work of the
Special Representative in implementing the mandate of
UNMIK, within the framework of resolution 1244
(1999).
Mr. Okuda (Japan): I thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, for his comprehensive briefing. I would also
like to extend a warm welcome to Foreign Minister
Jeremić of Serbia and Foreign Minister Hyseni of
Kosovo.

13

S/PV.6314

Japan highly values the contributions made by the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK), the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), the Kosovo Force and
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe on the ground to support a multi-ethnic,
democratic Kosovo and Western Balkan region. We
also appreciate the leadership of Mr. Zannier in
mediating the communication between Pristina and
Belgrade and between Pristina and the northern
provinces. Regarding the current situation concerning
the governing institutions in northern Kosovo, we
believe it is essential to avoid complications by
maintaining a dialogue with the Serb community. In
this context, we highly value Mr. Zannier’s visit to
northern Kosovo and his dialogues with both Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb leaders to address practical
problems.
Establishing the rule of law across different
ethnicities is among the highest priorities in Kosovo, in
particular, in order to address such issues as organized
crime and corruption. In this area as well, the dialogue
between Pristina and Belgrade is essential. We
commend the role that both UNMIK and EULEX are
playing in this regard.
We also take note of the slight increase in returns
of internally displaced persons (IDPs). At the same
time, we are concerned about sporadic incidents
targeting minorities, which continue to present physical
and psychological obstacles to sustainable returns. We
urge further efforts and cooperation by all relevant
parties to promote the return of minorities. Japan will
continue to support the engagement of the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in
IDP returns.
In enhancing stability and prosperity in the
Western Balkan region, advancing the European
perspective through regional cooperation is key. I share
the concerns of the Secretary-General, raised in his
report (S/2010/169) and urge all parties to show further
flexibility, so that their common interests can be
addressed, together with Kosovo’s participation in
international frameworks.
Japan, as a proponent of human security, has
supported the efforts of international aid agencies, such
as the United Nations Development Programme,
towards peaceful inter-ethnic coexistence and
sustainable development. A human-centred approach is

14

particularly relevant in the northern provinces, with
due consideration given to reducing the level of
vulnerability among the population. We also have held
a number of bilateral consultations with Kosovo on
nation-building. We are encouraged by Kosovo’s
progress in building its institutional capacities.
Japan remains committed to helping Kosovo to
develop as a vibrant, multi-ethnic and fully democratic
country, and to cooperating with Serbia and other
countries in the region to enhance the stability and
prosperity of the entire Western Balkan region,
including Kosovo.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): The
Chinese delegation, thanks you, Mr. President, for
having convened today’s meeting. We welcome the
report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK)
(S/2010/169), and we thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Kosovo, for his briefing. We listened very closely to
the statements by Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and by Mr. Hyseni.
Although there are still many destabilizing
factors in Kosovo, it has been possible recently to avert
a deterioration of the situation, which remains
relatively stable. We welcome that. We trust that,
through its ongoing mediation, UNMIK will continue
to encourage all parties to enter into dialogue and to
promote reconciliation and peaceful coexistence among
the various communities in the region. In the future,
UNMIK must be particularly vigilant regarding the
impact of the strategy for northern Kosovo on the local
population once it is implemented, and it must be able
to react promptly.
The situation in Kosovo is both complex and
sensitive. It affects peace and stability throughout the
Balkans, and indeed throughout Europe. China respects
the territorial integrity of Serbia and recommends that
Kosovo’s problems be resolved in accordance with the
principles and purposes of the United Nations Charter
and on the basis of Security Council resolutions. We
still believe that a negotiated solution acceptable to
both stakeholders is the best way to resolve the
problems besetting Kosovo, which should also be the
objective of all concerned parties.
We note that UNMIK has carried out its
reconfiguration and reduction. In our view, UNMIK’s
adjustment is not linked to the issue of Kosovo’s status

10-36420

S/PV.6314

and should not affect the neutral position of the United
Nations. UNMIK must continue to implement its
mandate pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999) and the
relevant documents. We trust that UNMIK will
continue to strengthen communication with Serbia and
Kosovo and to play its part by providing coordination
and good offices in seeking an appropriate solution to
Kosovo’s problems, facilitating the return of minority
communities, protecting cultural and religious heritage,
and maintaining security and stability throughout the
Balkans.
We call on all parties concerned to support
UNMIK’s efforts. We trust that the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo will continue to play
its role, under United Nations auspices, in the context
of neutrality pursuant to resolution 1244 (1999). We
trust that it will cooperate with UNMIK and thus play
an appropriate role in maintaining peace and stability
in the region.
Mr. Araud (France) (spoke in French): Allow me
to thank Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs
of the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Skender Hyseni,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of the Republic of
Kosovo, for their presence and their statements. I
commend the work of Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and that of all
the members of his Mission.
More than two years since its declaration of
independence, Kosovo continues to make progress,
stabilize its institutions and demonstrate its resolve to
meet European standards. An increasing number of
States are joining those that have already recognized
Kosovo’s independence. Such recognitions, 68 to date,
of which 22 are members of the European Union, help
the young State to strengthen and take its place on the
international scene.
Kosovo’s status has already been the subject of
endless negotiations under various auspices. Such
negotiations, which have explored all possible avenues,
have made clear the impossibility of reaching a
mutually acceptable compromise. In that context,
independence, which is the expression of the will of
the great majority of the Kosovar people, was the only
solution. That is an undeniable and irrevocable fact.
As the Secretary-General notes in his report
(S/2010/169), the security situation on the ground has
improved, with a decrease in incidents during the
reporting period. We welcome that, but any incident —

10-36420

be it a case of common crime or inter-communal
violence and regardless of whether it targets Albanians
or Serbs — is unacceptable. The Kosovo authorities,
supported by the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo, must therefore prosecute the perpetrators of
such crimes and step up efforts in that area.
Regional cooperation is also growing owing to
calmer dialogue between political leaders and civil
society throughout the Western Balkans. In that regard,
we call on Serbian and Kosovo leaders to take
advantage of opportunities to participate jointly in
regional meetings.
While the future presence of Serbia and Kosovo
in the European Union is, in our view, assured, it is
equally clear that it cannot come about until both
countries have taken the paths to dialogue and calmer
neighbourliness and have learned the lessons of a
reality that transcends vain and dangerous rhetoric. As
our Foreign Minister and the European Minister for
Foreign Affairs have pointed out, that is not a
condition, but a political necessity.
Kosovo must focus on its basic priorities and to
continue to make progress on the rule of law and good
governance. We also call on the Kosovo Government to
do its utmost for those belonging to national
minorities. Such twofold efforts will enable Kosovo to
advance on the path towards membership of the
European Union.
France will continue to give the situation in
Kosovo the highest priority and to promote, to the best
of its ability, dialogue between Serbia and Kosovo and
their mutual European rapprochement.
Mr. Barbalić (Bosnia and Herzegovina): On
behalf of the delegation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, I
would like to express our appreciation to the SecretaryGeneral for his comprehensive report (S/2010/169) on
the United Nations Interim Administration in Kosovo
(UNMIK). I would also like to thank Mr. Lamberto
Zannier, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral for Kosovo, for introducing the report. We
welcome the participation of His Excellency Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and
Mr. Skender Hyseni in today’s meeting.
We note with appreciation that the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo, operating
within the framework of resolution 1244 (1999), is
successfully continuing the implementation of its

15

S/PV.6314

strategic goal — the promotion of security, stability
and respect for human rights in Kosovo. We
particularly welcome and commend UNMIK’s efforts
to encourage the process of reconciliation and to
facilitate
constructive
dialogue
and
regional
cooperation, as well as its focus on mediation between
the communities and its support to minority
communities.
In that context, we are of the view that efforts to
encourage inter-community dialogue and confidencebuilding among the parties are of particular importance
in the area of returns. Although the number of
voluntary minority returns remains low, we are
encouraged by the fact that there has been an increase
in comparison to 2008. Furthermore, in stressing the
importance of providing conditions conducive to
sustainable return, we welcome UNMIK’s efforts to
establish task forces, with the main objective of
decreasing tension and drawing attention to common
needs.
Furthermore, during the reporting period,
UNMIK continued to facilitate the activities of the
Reconstruction Implementation Commission, led by
the Council of Europe, on the reconstruction of cultural
and religious heritage sites. We also welcome the
European Union’s announcement of the appointment of
the head of the Greek Liaison Office in Pristina as
facilitator in that area, and we urge the key
stakeholders to engage constructively in consultations
led by the facilitator.
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina
believes
that
strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo is of great
importance. Hence, we welcome the activities of
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), operating within the statusneutral framework of the United Nations, in that
regard. We also support the existing practice of
cooperation and coordination among UNMIK, EULEX,
the Organization for Security and Cooperation in
Europe and NATO — the latter present through the
troops of the Kosovo Force (KFOR) — and we hope
that this practice will continue. Furthermore, we note
that, during the reporting period, the transition of
KFOR to a deterrent presence was implemented in
gradual and phased manner, as stated in the SecretaryGeneral’s report.
In conclusion, Bosnia and Herzegovina would
like to reiterate that stability and security in Kosovo

16

are important to achieving lasting peace and prosperity
in our region. We believe that the international
community should continue to play an important role
in supporting the aspirations of the countries of the
region to their integration into European and EuroAtlantic structures. At the same time, we believe that
the countries of the region should continue to
cooperate with the international community in order to
reach these goals. Finally, we would like to reiterate
that fostering good relations and cooperation with its
neighbours is of the utmost importance to Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Mr. Issoze-Ngondet (Gabon) (spoke in French):
At the outset, Gabon welcomes the presence among us
of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister for
Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia. We assure
him of our willingness to further strengthen the
felicitous links of friendship and cooperation between
our two countries, and of our readiness to work
towards a peaceful settlement of the dispute under
consideration.
My delegation also thanks M. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General, for
the clarity and quality of his briefing on the SecretaryGeneral’s report (S/2010/169) on the United Nations
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK). We congratulate him
and express our appreciation for his commitment to
peace and stability in Kosovo.
The current report, which follows that (S/2010/5)
which formed the basis of our debate of 22 January
(see S/PV. 6264), offers an assessment of the activities
undertaken since then by UNMIK and the evolution of
the situation on the ground. It addresses, inter alia, the
political and security situation, the return of displaced
persons and refugees, the consolidation of the rule of
law, human rights and the protection of cultural and
religious heritage.
My delegation reaffirms its support for the central
role played by UNMIK in encouraging and facilitating
dialogue and reconciliation among the various
communities of Kosovo, and with Pristina and
Belgrade. We also appreciate the tremendous work
done on the ground by the European Union Rule of
Law Mission in Kosovo, the Organization for Security
and Cooperation in Europe and the Kosovo Force in
coordinating their operational and strategic activities.
Gabon has always advocated dialogue and
cooperation in the peaceful settlement of crises and

10-36420

S/PV.6314

conflicts. We continue to believe that these two tools
are absolutely necessary to achieving peace and
stability in Kosovo and throughout the region. In this
regard, we urge the two parties to resume discussions
on matters of disagreement in order to settle their
dispute, taking into account the security of the entire
region.
As we outlined in the debate of 22 January, we
support maintaining UNMIK’s presence in Kosovo
until the final settlement of the dispute. We take this
opportunity to reaffirm our attachment to the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of
Serbia. Moreover, it should be recalled that resolution
1244 (1999) remains the legal basis for any peace
initiative with respect to this matter. The plan laid out
by the Secretary-General is therefore an important
contribution to the search for a peaceful and negotiated
solution to the Kosovo issue.
Gabon, like many other countries, continues to
believe that the final recognition of Kosovo’s status by
the international community must be based on the rules
for processes leading to self-determination. In this
regard, my country awaits the decision of the
International Court of Justice pursuant to the request of
the General Assembly in its resolution 63/3.
Mr. Puente (Mexico) (spoke in Spanish): Like
other speakers, I welcome Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Minister
for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and thank him for his
statement. I also thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General for Kosovo,
for introducing the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2010/169), and Mr. Skender Hyseni for his briefing.
My country notes the adjustment of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Administration Mission
in Kosovo (UNMIK) to circumstances on the ground.
We welcome the fact that UNMIK’s coordination with
the European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo
(EULEX) has been undertaken in accordance with
resolution 1244 (1999). That resolution is the legal
basis for achieving a solution to the situation in
Kosovo and contributing to stability in the Balkans.
The report of the Secretary-General indicates that
the security situation in Kosovo is calm but fragile. It
warns of a potential exacerbation of tensions in the
northern part of the territory. UNMIK will therefore
have to continue to ensure five key areas on the
ground: security, stability, human rights, mediation
among communities, and humanitarian assistance and

10-36420

development. Its mandate must also continue to enjoy
the support of the parties, the Security Council and the
international community.
The United Nations provides a forum for
promoting a peaceful solution to the situation in
Kosovo that is acceptable to the parties. It must,
however, work in cooperation with such regional
organizations as the European Union and the
Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe.
In the past, Mexico has indicated that the United
Nations must strengthen its strategic relations with
regional organizations pursuant to Chapter VIII of its
Charter in order to cooperate in the prevention and
timely mitigation of regional conflicts and the
consolidation of human rights and the rule of law. That
is why we again encourage the strengthening of
cooperation among UNMIK, EULEX and other
regional organizations in order to support minority
communities, resolve inter-community conflicts,
promote reconciliation, dialogue and regional
coordination, and encourage development in Kosovo.
With respect to security, we note that since the
most recent debate of the Security Council (see
S/PV.6264) on this topic, the situation in Kosovo has
not improved, particularly in the North. Although the
report notes a decline in the number of incidents,
Mexico is concerned that the situation remains a factor
for instability and an obstacle to the return of refugees
from minority communities. We reaffirm our support
for UNMIK’s work to promote confidence-building
measures, assist communities seeking reconciliation,
facilitate dialogue on problems of common interest,
and support development.
With regard to the specific situation in northern
Kosovo, my delegation considers it necessary that, in
the elaboration and implementation of programmes for
the integration of minorities, the parties should give
priority to the protection of human rights and maintain
open dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK. All such
measures would contribute to transparency and to the
inclusion of parties interested in ensuring the
effectiveness of such programmes to the benefit of the
population and the prevention of violence.
Regarding the situation of displaced persons,
although
some
Kosovo
municipalities
have
implemented return strategies for 2010, the conditions
necessary to the safe conduct of such returns —
including security, access to public services, the right

17

S/PV.6314

to housing and property, and socio-economic and
development opportunities — have yet to be
established. One positive contribution of UNMIK in
this regard has been its support for the establishment of
community working groups to help create such
conditions. It is appropriate to recall, however, that
consistent with resolution 1244 (1999) — and in
particular with international humanitarian, human
rights and refugee law — the parties are obliged to
create an environment conducive to the safe voluntary
return without discrimination of all those who so
desire. We again encourage UNMIK to enhance its
coordination with the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, local institutions
and other humanitarian agencies in the field to that
end.
With respect to the rule of law and human rights,
my delegation commends the cooperation between
UNMIK and EULEX in promoting the strengthening of
judicial and human rights institutions in Kosovo and to
ensure that the civilian population, including minority
communities, has full access to justice and that victims
receive due attention.
We acknowledge the importance of promoting the
rule of law to fight impunity, ensure accountability,
reconcile
divergent
interests,
encourage
the
reconciliation process among communities, and
provide compensation for damages caused by human
rights violations. We therefore encourage UNMIK to
continue providing mediation and support to the
Serbian authorities and the International Committee of
the Red Cross in carrying out forensic investigations
and investigations into disappeared persons. We also
recognize the essential role played by UNMIK,
together with EULEX, in the protection of the cultural
and religious heritage of Kosovo, and welcome the
appointment of a European Union facilitator.
With regard to the unilateral declaration of
independence of Kosovo, I wish to reaffirm my
country’s position that this matter is seized by the
International Court of Justice. Until the Court rules, the
principle of respect for sovereignty and territorial
integrity, which all Member States are bound to uphold
under the United Nations Charter, remains fully in
force. Mexico has been a staunch and unwavering
promoter of the principles of justice and international
law enshrined in the United Nations Charter and the
work of the International Court of Justice. In this
respect, we eagerly await the Court’s decision.

18

Sir Mark Lyall Grant (United Kingdom): I
would like to join other Security Council colleagues in
welcoming the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier; the Foreign Minister
of Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić; and the Foreign Minister
of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni, to the Council
Chamber today and to thank them for their statements.
I would like to commend, in particular, the important
work of the United Nations Mission in Kosovo
(UNMIK) in promoting stability and reconciliation in
Kosovo and to thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, Mr. Zannier, for his continued
leadership and hard work.
The United Kingdom’s support for Kosovo’s
independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity is
unwavering. Since the Secretary-General’s most recent
report (S/2010/169), we are pleased that four more
United Nations Member States have recognized
Kosovo, bringing the total to 68. I would also like to
recognize
Kosovo’s
second
anniversary
of
independence, which took place this February.
We are pleased to note that progress has
continued in Kosovo over recent months. Following
local elections, the Kosovo Government established
four of the six new Kosovo Serb majority
municipalities envisaged in former United Nations
Special Envoy Ahtisaari’s Comprehensive Proposal for
the Kosovo Status Settlement (S/2007/168/Add.1). The
remaining two municipalities are due to be established
later this year after municipal and mayoral elections in
Partesh/Parteš on 20 June and North Mitrovica in the
autumn. This demonstrates a real commitment by the
Kosovo Government to improve the everyday lives of
minority communities. We encourage the residents of
Partesh/Parteš and North Mitrovica to take part in these
elections and to embrace the advantages that
decentralization will offer local communities. This
includes greater access to public services, more control
over the resources provided to them by the Pristina
Government, and a stronger voice to make their
legitimate concerns heard by Kosovo’s decisionmaking institutions and the international organizations
assisting their development.
We note the Secretary-General’s finding that
there has been no increase in the number of ethnicallymotivated violent incidents in Kosovo. Given that the
last reporting period saw a decrease in the number of
security incidents, we are pleased to see that this
positive trend has continued. Moreover, it helps create

10-36420

S/PV.6314

the right atmosphere for the transition of the Kosovo
Force to a deterrent presence.
It is important, however, that Kosovo take further
steps to improve its standards in governance and rule
of law. This is essential if Kosovo is to match the
progress towards European integration made by its
neighbours. The United Kingdom supports efforts to
help Kosovars of all communities to rebuild and return
to their pre-conflict homes.
The ability of all communities in Kosovo to live
in safety and dignity is of paramount importance. The
recent incidence in Zallq/Žac was serious and should
be condemned. There is no place in Kosovo for
violence. All sides have committed themselves to this,
and we look to Pristina to honour this commitment and
to others to take a measured response to the incident.
We strongly encourage deeper cooperation
between Belgrade and Pristina on practical issues and
echo the Secretary-General’s call for flexibility and
pragmatism in finding solutions. This can only be to
the benefit of all communities in Kosovo. It is also
important for all parties to continue addressing the
wrongs of the past in order to promote reconciliation
and to improve regional relations. In that vein, the
United Kingdom commends recent cooperation on
missing persons, which has led to the discovery of a
mass grave in Serbia. We also welcome the Serbian
Parliament’s recent resolution condemning the
Srebrenica massacre. These are both positive steps.
The United Kingdom strongly supports Serbia’s
goal of European Union membership. We encourage
Serbia to devote its full resources to making progress
along this path. Continued disagreement over status
issues will only serve as a distraction from achieving
this important strategic objective.
The United Kingdom supports the valuable work
that the European Union Rule of Law Mission in
Kosovo (EULEX) is doing in Kosovo. It is important
that Belgrade and Pristina continue to cooperate
closely with EULEX so that the rule of law, higher
standards of governance and justice can be delivered to
all of Kosovo’s communities. Steps to enable the full
functioning of the court in Mitrovica would be a clear
demonstration of that cooperation.
UNMIK also continues to do useful work in
Kosovo, particularly in support of minority
communities. It is important, however, to keep

10-36420

UNMIK’s size and resources under close review to
ensure that they are commensurate with the scale of its
responsibilities.
Kosovo has established its position as a viable,
independent State with European Union support for its
European perspective. The United Kingdom remains
committed to working with Kosovo, Serbia and the
wider international community in promoting stability,
reconciliation, regional cooperation and economic
progress so that Kosovo can advance towards a
European Union perspective in parallel with its
neighbours.
Ms. Anderson (United States of America): Let
me start by welcoming Kosovo Foreign Minister
Hyseni and Serbian Foreign Minister Jeremić to the
Council today. Let me also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Zannier for his
excellent and comprehensive briefing. The United
States deeply appreciates the work he and his team are
doing to support peace and security.
The
second
anniversary
of
Kosovo’s
independence was 17 February, an occasion to mark
Kosovo’s development as an open, multi-ethnic and
democratic republic. Sixty-eight countries have now
recognized Kosovo, and the United States
congratulates Kosovo and its citizens on the progress
they have made to strengthen their democracy and
governing institutions and to contribute to stability in
the Balkans during these two years.
With this in mind, I would like to focus on five
points. First, we welcome the progress made by the
Government of Kosovo in enhancing its institutional
capacity as it pursues democratic development,
regional stability and Euro-Atlantic integration.
Kosovo authorities are building on the strong
foundation of last fall’s municipal elections in
implementing the decentralization process laid out in
the Ahtisaari plan, which will improve governance and
empower all communities. With help from the central
Government, newly elected mayors and Serb majority
municipalities are putting good governance structures
in place and reaching out to the population to address
local needs. Deputy Secretary of State Steinberg met
with these Serb mayors in April. He found them to be
enthusiastic about decentralization and the resources it
affords them. We commend these forward-thinking
leaders of Kosovo’s Serb community for their

19

S/PV.6314

constructive and courageous engagement on behalf of
their communities.
This effort is still a work in progress, but we
believe that success here will encourage engagement
by Kosovo Serbs in the North, who also demand and
deserve responsive local Government that serves their
communities’ real interests.
The upcoming June elections in Partesh/Parteš
will provide another opportunity for citizens to make
their voices heard and effect real change. In contrast,
the parallel elections again planned for Mitrovica later
this month are not the path to a thriving community.
They only detract from good faith efforts to promote
stability and reconciliation in Kosovo and the region.
Secondly, improving governance and the rule of
law in northern Kosovo is essential. We welcome the
Government of Kosovo’s efforts to refine and
implement a strategy — which was endorsed by the
Kosovo Assembly with the support of representatives
of all Kosovo’s communities — to extend the benefits
of good, accountable, legitimate Government to
citizens in the North.
We also welcome the European Union’s (EU)
plans, with the help of the robust presence of the EU
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo in the North, to step
up efforts there. We call on Belgrade and Pristina to
find opportunities for pragmatic cooperation that can
improve life for communities in Kosovo’s North,
including on cross-border, crime, customs and other
rule of law and judicial issues.
Thirdly, we commend the efforts of Kosovo and
Serbia to resolve issues affecting displaced persons,
including setting the conditions for safe return to their
homes in Kosovo. We welcome the recent decision to
reopen the Kosovo Property Agency offices in Serbia
under the auspices of the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees. We now look to the
stakeholders to expedite the Agency’s work and
remove impediments to resolving remaining cases. As
the Secretary-General’s report (s/2010/169) notes,
there were nearly five times the number of returns in
January and February this year than in the same period
in 2009. We call on both Kosovo and Serbia to support
conditions to extend this constructive trend to facilitate
sustainable returns.
Fourthly, let me commend the statements made
recently to promote reconciliation by the leaders of

20

both Serbia and Kosovo, including President Tadić’s
remarks on Orthodox Christmas and President Sejdiu’s
remarks on Orthodox Easter. It is an encouraging sign
that Easter services were held in the Sveti Sava Church
in South Mitrovica for the first time since 2004. I
should note that the United States is pleased to support
the reconstruction efforts at Sveti Sava and at other
sites, working with the Reconstruction Implementation
Commission, in which the Government of Kosovo
actively participates. We hope that the Commission’s
work can now move forward more rapidly with the
cooperation and participation of all affected parties. To
this end, we support the EU’s newly appointed
facilitator, Ambassador Moschopoulos.
Finally, we agree with the Secretary-General’s
conclusion that the overall situation has remained
relatively calm but fragile. We
condemn
recent
incidents of inter-ethnic violence, although, as the
report notes, there has been no overall increase in the
number of incidents, including those affecting minority
communities. The 20 April attack against 26 Kosovo
Serb returnee families in the Istog/Istok municipality
was unacceptable. We commend Prime Minister
Thaci’s swift response, including the commitment to
providing financial and technical assistance to the
victims and 24-hour Kosovo Police patrols for the
returnees. The Kosovo Police’s smooth assumption
from the Kosovo Force in March of responsibility for
protecting the Gazimestan monument offered another
example of the Government stepping up to its
responsibilities.
We also condemn the recent incidents of violence
against licensed telephone system operators, apparently
in retaliation against Kosovo Government regulatory
efforts. Violence is an unacceptable response that
undercuts the rule of law and legitimate efforts to
ensure that entities licensed by Kosovo can provide
public services in Kosovo.
Kosovo’s independence is irreversible. Partition
is not acceptable. Kosovo’s status and borders are
settled. The development of effective democratic
institutions and efforts to maximize the participation of
all citizens is an ongoing process. The United States
stands with Kosovo, Serbia and all of the Balkan
countries as they advance along the path of building
stable, secure democracies that are fully integrated into
European and Euro-Atlantic institutions.

10-36420

S/PV.6314

Mr. Amieyeofori (Nigeria): We welcome the
presence of His Excellency Mr. Vuk Jeremić, Foreign
Minister of Serbia, and his insightful statement. We
thank the Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral, Mr. Lamberto Zannier, for his comprehensive
briefing in the context of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2010/169) pursuant to resolution 1244
(1999). We also thank Mr. Skender Hyseni for his
remarks.
We commend the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) for its
role in helping to maintain peace and stability in the
region. Its efforts to facilitate dialogue among all of the
parties concerned, activities in the rule of law area and
coordination among the various actors enjoy our strong
support. We are encouraged by the collaboration
between UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo in fostering cooperation and peace
in the region, within the status-neutral framework of
the United Nations. We welcome the intervention of
the European Union in setting up a mechanism to
facilitate the preservation of the religious and cultural
heritage of the Balkan region. It is an initiative, given
the traditional respect for these institutions and values,
that will further promote mutual tolerance, harmony
and coexistence among the people.
Despite these positive developments, we note that
some challenges exist. We share the concern noted in
the Secretary-General’s report about the possibility of
increased tension in northern Kosovo should the
implementation of the strategy for northern Kosovo by
the authorities in Pristina take place without dialogue
with local communities and all relevant stakeholders. It
is important that sensitive issues related to northern
Kosovo be addressed through peaceful means and close
consultation and coordination between all relevant
actors, taking into account the specific circumstances
and concerns of all communities. Reported incidents of
attack against minority communities only serve to raise
the perception of insecurity in Kosovo. They also
constrain efforts to promote returns of displaced
persons, reconciliation and the longer-term stability
and development of Kosovo and the region. My
country stresses the need to ensure that perpetrators of
crimes are brought to justice, such incidents roundly
condemned, and efforts made to reach out to victims.
On the issue of minority returns, we welcome the
increased number of returnees recorded during the
reporting period. We are concerned, however, that

10-36420

overall numbers of returns remain low and that, in the
assessment of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, the implementation of returns
strategies in 2010 may be hampered by lack of funding
for returns activities, lack of political commitment and
structural problems in local governance, as well as
concerns over the viability of conditions for returns.
We call for concerted efforts by all stakeholders, in
particular UNMIK and the Office of the United Nations
High Commissioner for Refugees, to ensure that
returns are voluntary and safe.
Nigeria reiterates its full support for dialogue and
a negotiated settlement of the dispute. In concluding,
we commend the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team for their unrelenting
efforts in promoting peace and stability in Kosovo and
in the region.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We are grateful to Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for introducing the
report of the Secretary-General on UNMIK
(S/2010/169) and for his efforts in the complex
situation in the district. We welcome the participation
in today’s Council meeting of Mr. Vuk Jeremić,
Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and we share his
assessments.
We also listened attentively to Mr. Hyseni’s
statement, which, once again, was not distinguished by
its objectivity or compliance with resolution 1244
(1999).
Our position of not accepting Kosovo’s unilateral
declaration of independence (UDI) is well known.
Russia supports the territorial integrity and sovereignty
of the Republic of Serbia. We are convinced of the
need for strict compliance with resolution 1244 (1999),
which remains fully in force. It remains binding for all
as an international and legal basis for a settlement in
Kosovo and for ensuring security in the district. Not
understanding or accepting that means not accepting
international legality.
The Russian Federation fully supports the work
of UNMIK in Kosovo in discharging its mandate. The
Mission must continue to play a leading role vis-à-vis
the other international presences in the district, as set
forth in the November 2008 report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2008/692). Nobody is entitled to hinder the

21

S/PV.6314

use of its vested authority, including in helping to
ensure the rights and security of national minorities
and in achieving the international community’s
democratic standards for Kosovo. This applies equally
to the Mission’s duty with respect to the external
representation of Pristina in regional and international
mechanisms. We note the irreplaceable role of the
Mission in promoting intercommunal dialogue,
especially in the northern part of the district. In this
context, we welcome its efforts to establish special
working groups to attract all interested parties with a
view to solving practical problems encountered by the
local population.
We see no particular improvement in the relations
between the Mission and Pristina in spite of continuing
protocol contacts between the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the Kosovo authorities.
The Kosovars are still ignoring the United Nations
Mission in spite of the principles for a settlement set
forth in resolution 1244 (1999).
The situation in Kosovo causes us serious
concern, first and foremost the attempt of the Pristina
authorities to implement, come what may, the “strategy
for northern Kosovo”. We are convinced that any
unilateral steps in this area could ignite the already
complex inter-ethnic situation in the district, especially
against the backdrop of the growing dissatisfaction in
the socio-economic situation and the high level of
crime and corruption.
In addition, we are just as concerned by the
Kosovars’ attempts to instigate steps by the
international presences, especially the European Union
Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX), to
dismantle the repeater stations of Serbian mobile
communications operators as well by Pristina’s
intention to adopt legislation establishing a system by
which Serbian citizens could enter Kosovo only on
foreign passports. It is vital that there be a legal and
political assessment of these actions by the Kosovo
authorities. Otherwise, they could lead to a sharp
increase in intercommunal tension.
We still find the situation of returns to Kosovo by
internally displaced persons to be unsatisfactory.
Unfortunately, there still are numerous instances of
Kosovo Serbs being forced to sell their property and
leave the district, a situation to which no attention has
been paid. All of that demonstrates no trend in Kosovo
towards increasing inter-ethnic tolerance. Quite the

22

contrary: the situation has regressed. The territories of
large Serbian enclaves are gradually shrinking, and the
small ones are simply dying off.
The situation with respect to protecting Serbian
religious and cultural heritage is alarming. Of course,
we have a positive view of the appointment of
Ambassador Moschopoulos of Greece as European
Union facilitator on these issues. However, we note
that the desecration of Serbian graveyards and
cathedrals in Kosovo continues. In this context, we are
especially concerned about NATO’s transfer to the
Kosovo police of responsibility for guarding important
Serbian cultural sites, a transfer which has begun, and
about the general trend towards reducing the numerical
strength of the Kosovo Force.
We would especially like to emphasize that
EULEX’s catering to Pristina authorities, and at times
its inactivity, has harmed the authority of that mission,
which has been practically exceeding the neutral status
set out in its mandate. In these conditions, EULEX
must scrupulously comply with the principles of
resolution 1244 (1999) and act in a balanced fashion,
bearing in mind the interests of both parties, and within
the framework of the general coordinating functions of
UNMIK.
The complex situation in Kosovo proves the need
for the Security Council to retain a leading role on
Kosovo. The Council must remain the guarantor of
compliance with international law, the Charter of the
United Nations and its own decisions. Russia confirms
its readiness to continue political efforts to help
develop a legally correct and fair resolution of the
question of Kosovo under resolution 1244 (1999).
Mr. Apakan (Turkey): Allow me to extend a
warm welcome to the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Serbia, Mr. Vuk Jeremić, and to the Minister for
Foreign Affairs of Kosovo, Mr. Skender Hyseni. It is a
pleasure to see them with us today, and I thank them
both for their comprehensive presentations.
I would also like to welcome Mr. Lamberto
Zannier and to thank him for his briefing and for
introducing the report of the Secretary-General
(S/2010/169). I would like also to thank Mr. Zannier
for his leadership and to commend the work of the
United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo (UNMIK). We are pleased to see that UNMIK
continues to discharge its mandate with an eye to
evolving circumstances. The common strategic

10-36420

S/PV.6314

framework that is being developed by UNMIK and the
United Nations team in Kosovo to allow the United
Nations family there to focus on the implementation of
development programmes is a welcome step.

Kosovo. Like President Sejdiu, we believe that it is
important that people of all ethnicities in all parts of
the country should come to feel that Kosovo is their
home and that Kosovo’s future is their future.

We also welcome the close cooperation between
UNMIK and the European Union Rule of Law Mission
in Kosovo (EULEX), and the expansion of the role and
functions of the latter. We remain committed to
continuing our contribution to both EULEX and KFOR
in accordance with needs and requirements on the
ground.

It is with this understanding that we expect
Kosovo Serbs to take part in the political process and
administrative structures of the country. We also urge
all stakeholders to refrain from actions that will cause
unnecessary burdens in their lives.

In the two years since Kosovo became
independent, the number of countries that have
recognized Kosovo has constantly grown. Turkey
considers this to be an irreversible process that will
ultimately contribute to lasting peace, stability and
prosperity in the region. On the other hand, as a young
State, Kosovo faces some important challenges. To
surmount those challenges and to provide a better life
for all of its citizens, Kosovo must concentrate on its
priorities and continue to make improvements in areas
such as the economy, the rule of law, good governance
and human rights.
That said, as Minister Hyseni’s statement
demonstrates, Kosovo has already made progress in
solidifying its democracy. Elections which are widely
recognized as fair and credible have been held.
Concrete achievements have taken place with regard to
decentralization, which is a key element in creating a
multi-ethnic society. Important steps have been taken
and legislation adopted towards the protection of
human rights and the integration of minorities. We are
also glad to see that there is a new momentum in the
returns process.
We are equally pleased to see that the security
situation remains stable. We share the concern related
to northern Kosovo and welcome the steps taken by the
Kosovo authorities towards reconciliation and the
integration of all of the communities there. Such efforts
will take time and require important resources, but we
believe that they will contribute to gathering all of
Kosovo’s citizens around a common vision. In that
respect, we were very much encouraged by the words
of President Sejdiu, who, on the occasion of Orthodox
Christmas, confirmed the commitment of the Kosovo
institutions to work for a brighter, prosperous and
peaceful future in which all citizens of Kosovo would
feel totally free and equal in their common home,

10-36420

It is encouraging that Kosovo is taking steps to
build friendly relations with its neighbours and
strengthen regional cooperation. It is our sincere hope
that relations between Belgrade and Pristina will also
ultimately serve to contribute to lasting regional peace,
stability and prosperity. While there are disagreements
over the status issue, it should not be a reason for both
parties not to cooperate pragmatically and make
progress towards reconciliation and the resolution of
some outstanding problems in areas such as cultural
heritage, energy, infrastructure, customs and organized
crime.
We
agree
with
the
Secretary-General’s
observation that, by putting aside status considerations,
Belgrade and Pristina should show flexibility to enable
Kosovo’s representation in regional and international
mechanisms and forums that are essential to the
economic and democratic development and long-term
stability of the region. We call on both sides to find
pragmatic solutions towards that end.
As an important player in the region, Serbia can
contribute more to the consolidation of peace,
democracy and prosperity in the Balkans. We also
welcome and support developing relations between
Serbia and the European Union. The international
community should continue to support Serbia in its
efforts to integrate with European structures. As for
Turkey, we are pleased to enjoy close and cooperative
relations with Serbia, which we are determined to take
even further to the benefit of both our countries and of
the entire region.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I shall now
make a statement in my capacity as the representative
of Lebanon.
I would first like to thank Mr. Lamberto Zannier,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General and
head of the United Nations Interim Administration
Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK), for his comprehensive

23

S/PV.6314

briefing. I would also like to welcome Mr. Vuk
Jeremić, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia, and to
thank him for his statement. My thanks also go to
Mr. Skender Hyseni for his statement.
With regard to the security situation, the
Secretary-General has referred in his report
(S/2010/169) to incidents, including those affecting
minorities, not having increased in comparison with
the previous reporting period. Apart from that, the
security situation has remained relatively stable. We
call upon all parties to cooperate to bring about justice
and support victims, by ensuring accountability for
criminals. Such efforts will have a positive impact on
stability and security and serve to reassure various
groups. It is important also to improve institutional
mechanisms for the protection of human rights.
With regard to the situation in northern Kosovo,
we believe that sustained efforts must be made vis-àvis local communities. Any effort to ensure inclusion
for northern Kosovo must include open, flexible
dialogue and ongoing consultation with all
stakeholders. We call upon all stakeholders in northern
Kosovo to play a constructive role by encouraging
local communities to meet and enter into dialogue with
a view to finding practical solutions to sensitive issues.
With regard to the missions working in Kosovo,
we commend UNMIK for its work to strengthen
security and stability, ensure respect for human rights
and foster reconciliation through cooperation among
the various groups. We urge the Kosovo authorities to
continue dialogue and cooperation with UNMIK in a
constructive and practical manner. We welcome the
coordination among UNMIK, the European Union Rule
of Law Mission in Kosovo and the Kosovo Force in the
context of neutrality set out in resolution 1244 (1999).
With regard to cooperation on humanitarian,
cultural and development issues, we welcome the fact
that in 2010 there has been an increase in volunteer
minority returns compared with 2008, according to
statistics from the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees. We commend efforts by
the UNMIK and the European Commission Liaison
Office to permanently resolve the problem of camps
for minorities. The number of those repatriated remains
very low. We need to ensure security and development
conditions that are conducive to returns.
The various parties to cooperate have committed
themselves to protecting the religious and cultural

24

heritage of the Serbian Orthodox Church in Kosovo,
which is an encouraging step forward in protection of
that heritage. We commend the constructive work done
by the head of Greece’s liaison office in Pristina as
facilitator of those efforts.
We call upon all parties to find practical solutions
to matters of common interest by moving away from
politicization with respect to the status of Kosovo.
There must be cooperation among all parties to
improve daily life of the people of Kosovo, irrespective
of their affiliations. We encourage Belgrade and
Pristina to adopt a constructive approach to ensure the
participation of representatives of Kosovo’s institutions
in international and regional forums. We also call on
them to pursue constructive and direct dialogue aimed
at reducing tensions. Lebanon encourages peaceful
solutions to these problems, which can strengthen
regional security and stability throughout the Western
Balkans.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Council.
The Minister for Foreign Affairs of Serbia has
asked to make a further statement, and I give him the
floor.
Mr. Jeremić (Serbia): I am going to be very
brief. I just want to reflect on a few thoughts that I
heard this afternoon.
I cannot agree with some of the speakers’
assessments that Serbia is exercising irresponsible
interference in other countries’ regional affairs. When
it comes to Serbia’s regional outlook and the way that
it deals with the region, I think that the Government
has demonstrated clearly that reconciliation and peace
are at the forefront of how we see the future of the
Balkans: a future in the European Union.
I am glad that a few speakers today noted that the
Serbian parliament has passed the resolution on
Srebrenica. But I would like to underline that that is
the first decision of a parliament in the history of
Europe to extend an apology for something that took
place in history. As we all know, the history of Europe
is full of occurrences that would necessitate an apology
of one sort or another. But Serbia was the first in
history to extend an apology.
My Government is very proud of what we are
doing in order to make sure that there is peace and

10-36420

S/PV.6314

stability throughout the region — in Bosnia, in Croatia,
in the disputed parts of Serbia and elsewhere.
Serbia places no preconditions on the reopening
of a dialogue. We do not attach — as I heard that
Pristina does — conditions that someone is to be
treated in this way or that way. We are ready to talk
about everything. We are ready to talk about all the
outstanding issues, including the one that is at the very
heart of all outstanding issues, that is, the future status
of the province.
I believe that borders anywhere in the world can
be settled only upon agreement by all interested
parties, and not by announcements of any unilateral
action, no matter how mighty the supporters of such
unilateral action may be. That goes for the borders of
Serbia and the borders of any other country of the
world. Serbia stands ready to engage in a dialogue that
would settle all the outstanding issues once and for all
in a peaceful manner, and Serbia asks for the support
of this Council and of the United Nations in this
peaceful approach.
This is the first time in the history of the Balkans
that an issue of this sort is not being resolved by
conflict. Nobody is trying to go to war with anybody,
and I think this is a great, positive development,
because we are talking about 600 or 700 years of
Balkan history. This is the first time that somebody is
trying to do to settle such issues peacefully, including
the issue of the border. That is what we propose. We
stand ready to engage, in the best possible faith, to
resolve it.
I want to draw attention to one thing. Somebody
said that, during this reporting period, five times more
internally displaced persons returned than in the
previous period. In the previous period, there were 50
people, and this time 259, but that is out of 200,000.
Yes, the math is correct, but if we look at the absolute
numbers, I think they represent our common failure,
and we need to address it in the best possible faith. As
we have engaged on all outstanding regional issues in
the best possible faith and in full sincerity, the
Government of Serbia stands ready to engage with all
interested parties in resolving this issue once and for
all. But it is only through dialogue — peaceful
dialogue — that we believe we can solve it. That is all
I wanted to say.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to Mr. Hyseni.

10-36420

Mr. Hyseni: Very briefly and, in a way, quite
reluctantly, I will continue to take a few more minutes
of the Council’s time in reaction to a few quite
misleading allegations.
Very generally, on the rule of law and the
commitment of the Government of the Republic of
Kosovo to fighting organized crime and corruption, no
one should doubt that determination. The very fact that
one can see tangible action on that front shows how
determined the Government of the Republic of Kosovo
is. We are working closely on that with all international
presences, especially the European Union Rule of Law
Mission in Kosovo (EULEX).
The game of figures — 200,000 or 250,000
displaced persons — continues. We have informed the
Council of the real figures many times. The United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees reports of
1999 included not only Serb internally displaced
persons or refugees, but all of them. But, really, it is
not about numbers; again, it is about the determination
of the Government of Kosovo to seeing progress in the
repatriation of all of its citizens, especially the
numerous Serb citizens still outside the borders of our
country.
We have protected the cultural heritage and
religious heritage of all ethnic communities in Kosovo
for centuries, and we are going to continue to do so.
Nothing can stand in the way of our protecting cultural
heritage, and we will continue to take over those duties
from the highly respected Kosovo Force units that have
been giving us a hand in this very important task.
I need to inform the Council that we long
tolerated illegal mobile telephone service providers in
a part of our country for the sole reason of not
disturbing some members of our country. Those illegal
telephone service providers have been removed in an
effort to restore law and order in that part of our
country.
At the same time, we have undertaken very
tangible and successful efforts to make sure that all
members of the Serb community in that part of Kosovo
will swiftly have access to means of communication.
The public telecom company has offered thousands and
thousands of SIM cards and telephones free of charge
to the members of the Serb community.
Unfortunately, there was an illegal, violent attack
on legal telephone providers in that part of our country,

25

S/PV.6314

and that is unacceptable. Indeed, the perpetrators
removed the antennas of the IPKO and Vala
companies — which are legal, licensed telephone
service providers — instead trying to use the services
that those companies offered. We have invited the
Republic of Serbia to enter into roaming agreements
with very serious telephone companies in Kosovo, and
we are open to that.
I wish to say just a little more on regional
cooperation and dialogue. I need to re-emphasize very
strongly yet again that Kosovo is ready to sit and talk
with the authorities in Belgrade on many issues of

26

mutual concern. Kosovo and Serbia will continue to be
where they are as close neighbours, and they need to
work together for a future common good and a future
European perspective — not only a common KosovoSerbia European perspective, but also a regional
European perspective.
The President (spoke in Arabic): There are no
further speakers on my list. The Council has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
The meeting rose at 5.30 p.m.

10-36420
