S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9246th meeting
Wednesday, 18 January 2023, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Ishikane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Japan)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Stastoli
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Tian Bingxu
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Morghad
Ms. Bouanga Ayoune
Mr. Nyarku
Mr. Camilleri
Mr. Irachande Gouveia
Mr. Glukhov
Mr. Hauri
Mr. Almazrouei
Mr. Gibbon
Ms. Postel

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-01876 (E)
*2301876*

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The meeting resumed at 3 p.m.
The President: I would like to remind all speakers
to limit their statements to no more than three minutes
in order to enable the Council to carry out its work
expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars of the
microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after three minutes.
I now give the floor to the representative of Tunisia.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to sincerely congratulate you,
Mr. President, on Japan’s assumption of the presidency
of the Security Council for this month and to wish you
every success. I thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his valuable briefing. I would also like to express our
appreciation for the efforts of the Secretary-General to
revive the Middle East peace process.
The occupying Power continues its disregard for
international law and Security Council resolutions
through its measures of imposing, de facto on the
ground, its settlement policy, the forced displacement
of Palestinians and the confiscation of their homes
and land, while trying to change the historical,
demographic and legal status of the city of Jerusalem.
Tunisia categorically condemns and rejects those
practices and the repeated violations of the holy sites
in Jerusalem. We also call for preserving the status quo
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, and we reiterate the primacy
of the Hashemite custodianship over the holy sites of
Muslims and Christians in Jerusalem. We furthermore
call on the international community to assume its legal
and historical responsibilities related to supporting the
Palestinian people and acting swiftly and effectively to
provide them with protection and to decisively address
Israel’s provocative practices, such as the storming
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif courtyard by the Minister of
National Security. Such practices threaten to further
destabilize the region and prolong the cycle of violence.
The occupying Power’s persistence in collectively
punishing the Palestinian people once again reflects its
efforts to evade its commitments under international
law and international humanitarian law. In that context,
we express our rejection and condemnation of the Israeli
Government’s decision to impose further collective
punitive measures on the Palestinians and their
leadership and civil society following the adoption of
General Assembly resolution 77/247, which requested
2/21

18/01/2023

the International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion. We reaffirm the Palestinians’ right to resort to
United Nations entities.
The impasse in the peace process, the continued
deteriorating situation in the occupied Palestinian
territories and the limited international response
to addressing the repeated cycles of violence
without focusing on their root cause — namely, the
occupation — will lead only to further escalation
and complications in the region and will increase the
suffering of the Palestinian people. In that regard,
we reaffirm that security and stability in the Middle
East must be achieved through a fair, comprehensive
and lasting solution of the Arab-Israeli conflict, based
on international law and United Nations resolutions.
Accordingly, we call for urgent and immediate
action to explore ways to launch meaningful and
effective negotiations within a specific time frame
in order to reach a lasting, comprehensive and fair
settlement in the Middle East based on resolutions of
international legitimacy.
In conclusion, Tunisia reiterates its firm and
principled support for the Palestinians’ rights, above all
their right to self-determination, ending the occupation
and the establishment of their own independent
sovereign State along the 4 June 1967 borders, with
East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Alwasil (Saudi Arabia) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking Japan for convening
this important debate. I also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his valuable briefing. We appreciate his pivotal role
and constructive efforts in that regard.
This meeting is being held in the context of the
sensitive and critical situation faced by the brotherly
Palestinian people and the entire region as a result of
the continued actions taken by the Israeli occupying
Power against the unarmed Palestinian people, who
have suffered for decades from the consequences of
the Israeli occupation of their territories. The Israeli
occupying Power continues its daily aggression
against the Palestinian people and their holy sites and
property, the most recent of which was the provocative
act of storming the Al-Aqsa Mosque complex, which
has enraged Muslims around the world and which the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has condemned in the strongest
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

terms. That was a clear violation of all international laws
and norms. In addition, acts of aggression by extremist
settlers have been directed against unarmed Palestinians,
while at the same time hate and discriminatory speech
continues with disregard for human values, international
law and relevant international resolutions. That
represents a challenge for the international community,
as long as the aggression against the occupied Palestinian
territories continues.
Such Israeli measures will necessarily lead to
undermining the possibility for peace in the Middle
East. A lasting and just peace will be achieved only
through a two-State solution, not through continued
settlement activities, displacements and confiscations
of property. Peace and security will be achieved for all
through a two-State solution, based on the establishment
of an independent sovereign Palestinian State within the
4 June 1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
in accordance with international and Security Council
resolutions and the Arab Peace Initiative, which the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia introduced in 2002.
We therefore call on the Security Council once
again to shoulder its responsibilities and implement its
resolutions to end all unilateral, illegal and provocative
measures; all continued Israeli violations related to the
building and expanding of Israel’s illegal settlements; the
targeting of Palestinian residents in Jerusalem; attempts
to alter the legal and demographic status of Jerusalem;
and the special measures taken against Muslim holy sites
in order to place them under Israeli control. We urgently
call for international protection for the Palestinian
people in line with the proposals of the SecretaryGeneral, which the General Assembly has endorsed.
The Israeli Government must immediately reverse its
unilateral punitive measures against the Palestinian
people, their leadership and civil society following the
adoption of General Assembly resolution 77/247, which
requests the International Court of Justice to render an
advisory opinion.
In conclusion, we call on the newly elected Israeli
Government to heed the calls for peace and act seriously
to settle the conflict with the Palestinians. Resolving
the conflict will serve the interests of the entire
region, including Israel. We call on Israel to commit to
meaningful negotiations in good faith in order to achieve
peace on the basis of a two-State solution and to ensure
stability in the region. We call for guaranteeing the
legitimate rights of the Palestinian people and reiterate

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

the need for the international community to address the
conflict in a manner that fulfils all the legitimate rights
of the brotherly Palestinian people.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Qatar.
Mr. Al-Maawda (Qatar) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, let me thank you, Mr. President, for holding this
important meeting. We also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland,
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his thorough and comprehensive briefing.
This open debate on the Palestinian question is
being held soon after the end of 2022, a year that saw an
increase in violence and indiscriminate fatal attacks by
Israeli forces and extremist settlers against Palestinian
civilians, which resulted in the greatest number of
fatalities and injured people in many years. Today’s
meeting is also taking place against the backdrop of
continued escalation by the Israeli Government and
about two weeks after the Minister of National Security,
together with other Israeli occupying forces, stormed
Al-Haram Al-Sharif. The State of Qatar has condemned
and denounced that measure as a flagrant violation by the
occupying Power of the Charter fo the United Nations,
international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. It was a blatant attack against Palestinian
rights and a provocation of Muslim sentiment around
the world. The State of Qatar also strongly condemns
and denounces any attempt to expand the Jewish
character over the occupied city of Jerusalem and alter
its Arab Muslim and Christian identity. We stress the
need to respect the current legal and historical status
of Al-Haram Al-Sharif in its entirety. We reject any
attempt to partition it spatially or temporally. We also
underline the Jordanian custodianship of the Muslim
and Christian holy sites.
The continued escalation and provocation by
the Israeli occupying Power shows a disregard for
international law and international legitimacy and
will lead to further escalation that threatens regional
and international peace and security. That will also
undermine international efforts to achieve the twoState solution, which represents the consensus of the
international community and has been determined to
be the only means to a settlement for the Palestinian
question. The independent, contiguous and viable
Palestinian State must be established along 1967 borders
with East Jerusalem as its capital, in line with relevant
Security Council resolutions and the Arab Peace

23-018763/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Initiative. Similarly, the Israeli occupation of Arab
territories, including the Syrian Golan, and Lebanese
land must end. Immediate and complete settlement
activities must end. And the Palestinian people must
achieve their legitimate rights, foremost of which their
right to self-determination and the return of refugees.
We must undertake everything possible to change the
situation on the ground, which will not lead to the twoState solution. The State of Qatar therefore calls for urgent
action to end the Israeli aggression, provide protection
for the Palestinian people and get Israel to commit to
ending its settlement policies and annexation of land and
to implement the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
which calls for an end both to violence against civilians
and settlement activity, as well as for supporting dispute
settlement based on the two-State solution.
Humanitarian and economic support for the
Palestinian people must be provided within a political
context that helps both sides to achieve progress towards
a lasting, comprehensive and fair solution. The State of
Qatar continues its efforts aimed at helping to improve
the living conditions of the brotherly Palestinian people
in cooperation with the United Nations, including a grant
of nearly $360 million in 2022 that was directed towards
ensuring electricity in the Gaza Strip and providing
financial assistance through salary disbursements to
public-sector employees in Gaza, where more than
2 million people have effectively been living under an
unjust siege for more than 15 years. That grant was in
addition to our ongoing support for the United Nations
Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in
the Near East, which provides support to millions of
Palestinian refugees.
In conclusion, notwithstanding the grave incidents
that happened last year and the beginning of this year, the
State of Qatar is still hopeful that a comprehensive peace
is possible, provided that there is a will and commitment.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Türkiye.
Mrs. Özgür (Türkiye): We thank you, Mr. President,
for convening today’s open debate and also thank Special
Coordinator Wennesland for his briefing.
Today’s meeting takes place at a critical juncture.
The challenges facing the State of Palestine and the
Palestinian people have grown immensely. We note with
deep regret and concern that 2022 was the deadliest
4/21

18/01/2023

year since the United Nations started recording civilian
fatalities in the occupied Palestinian territory, in 2005.
Israel’s unilateral steps, namely, the expansion of illegal
settlements, demolitions, forced evictions and increased
loss of life in the occupied Palestinian territory, are
serious cause for concern and continue to undermine the
prospects for a two-State solution to the conflict. The
international community cannot turn a blind eye to this
alarming situation. The additional punitive measures by
the Israeli officials against the Palestinian people and
leadership do not help to solve any issues. We call on
Israel to reconsider this policy.
Continuing violations against the sanctity and
status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif, including the provocation
earlier this month at Al-Aqsa Mosque, are unacceptable
and add to the serious concerns about what lies ahead.
Türkiye condemns this blatant act of violation. The
status of Al-Haram Al-Sharif must remain above
domestic political considerations.
The lack of interest by the international community
in find a just, lasting and comprehensive solution to the
Palestinian question is deeply frustrating. The situation
in the occupied territory is not sustainable, and it is also
a major source of destabilization in the wider region.
There cannot be lasting peace in the Middle East
without an independent and sovereign State of Palestine
on the basis of 1967 borders with East Jerusalem as its
capital. Until and unless Israel’s unilateral acts come
to an end, tension and imminent risk of escalation will
continue to be present.
Ending the occupation is a prerequisite for, and
key to, finding a solution. A genuine peace deal to end
the occupation should be the objective for all parties
concerned. Similarly, in order to contain tensions, the
international community should collectively prioritize
the preservation of the sanctity and status of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. In all those efforts, the Security Council
and its members have a special responsibility that they
cannot abdicate.
The United Nations Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East (UNRWA) plays a
vital role in delivering on our joint responsibility as the
international community to provide assistance to the
Palestine refugees until a just solution is found to their
problems. We welcome the General Assembly’s renewal
last month of the Agency’s mandate until June 2026.
Equally significant is to ensure the Agency’s financial
stability so that its lifeline services for millions of
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Palestine refugees can continue. We strongly encourage
everyone to provide generous financial support
to UNRWA.
For its part, in 2022 Türkiye continued its annual
contribution of $10 million and provided 26 tons of
flour as in-kind contribution. We also look forward
to the Secretary-General’s proposals for consideration
by the relevant General Assembly committees at the
Assembly’s seventy-eighth session, with a view to a
gradual increase in the United Nations regular budget
allocation to the Agency.
Let me conclude by reiterating Türkiye’s continued
support for all efforts aimed at finding a comprehensive
and lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Türkiye’s support for the Palestinian people reaching
fulfilment of their long-delayed rights to live in their
own sovereign and independent State is unwavering.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Abdelaziz.
Mr. Abdelaziz (spoke in Arabic): Allow me to
begin, Mr. President, by congratulating you and Japan
on your election as a new non-permanent member of
the Security Council and on presiding over the Council
this month.
I also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland for his
briefing today.
There is no doubt that the Palestinian situation is
currently experiencing one of its worst phases, at the
same time as international liquidity is constrained by
multiple international crises and sudden changes in the
political inclinations of the world’s major Powers for
reasons unrelated to our region. Such circumstances
are negatively affecting prospects for achieving justice,
enforcing the rule of law and ensuring accountability.
That situation is also negatively affecting the credibility
of the United Nations, especially the Security Council,
as the organ mandated to uphold international legitimacy
and maintain international peace and security.
Despite the legal foundations established by the
Council and by the international community to address
the Palestinian question on the basis of a two-State
solution, including the principle of land for peace,
the Oslo Accords, the Madrid terms of reference,
the Arab Peace Initiative and resolution 2334 (2016),
the initial statements made by the new extremist
Israeli Government have shocked the international
community. It has destroyed all prospects for achieving
a just and comprehensive solution to the situation in the

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

Middle East, at the heart of which lies the Palestinian
question, which is a central issue for the League of
Arab States and the entire Arab world. The new Israeli
Government has dashed all hopes for peace by asserting
its intention to expand settlement activities in stark
violation of resolution 2334 (2016), which will include
forced displacement and the demolition of homes and
communities and expulsion of refugees, in an effort to
alter the historic and actual status quo on the ground and
tighten Israeli control over all the occupied Palestinian
territories. Such acts will effectively eliminate the
prospects for a two-State solution and the establishment
of an independent Palestinian State with East Jerusalem
as its capital within the borders of 4 June 1967.
The League of Arab States, along with the
rest of the world, was shocked by the recent grave
Israeli violations in the occupied city of Jerusalem,
in particular the storming of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/
Al-Haram Al-Sharif by a minister in the new Israeli
Government on the morning of 3 January under the
guard and protection of the occupying Power’s military
and police forces. That provocative step constituted a
flagrant violation of international law, as well as of the
historic and legal status quo in Jerusalem and its holy
sites. It also demonstrates blatant disrespect for the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan’s custodianship of the
holy sites. The Arab Ministerial Committee mandated
to address the illegal Israeli policies and measures in the
occupied city of Jerusalem condemned those violations
in the strongest terms. The Secretary-General of the
League of Arab States also condemned them strongly,
as did all stakeholders advocating peace, the two-State
solution and a just and comprehensive settlement of
the Palestinian question, including the Movement of
Non-Aligned Countries, the Organization of Islamic
Cooperation, the Committee on the Exercise of the
Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian People and other
individual or groups of States from all over the world.
Despite the international calls addressed to the
entire international community, particularly the
Security Council, to deal with those violations through
effective measures that would oblige the new Israeli
Government, as the occupying Power, to adjust its
course, reverse its aggressive policies and cease its
attacks on the Palestinian people and its violations
of international law and international humanitarian
law — as well as to ensure that it does not take any
additional provocative steps in Al-Quds Al-Sharif
that would cause great distress to millions of Muslims

23-018765/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

18/01/2023

around the world and threaten security and stability
in the region — the Security Council has failed to
respond in any way to those violations. There was no
response after the emergency meeting convened by the
Japanese presidency at the request of the Arab League
with a number of Council members on 5 January (see
S/PV.9236), at which we witnessed a feverish attempt by
the Israeli representative to distort the steadfast historical
and legal facts. All of that has encouraged the extremist
Israeli Government to adopt, the day after that meeting,
further unjust punitive and provocative measures
against the Palestinian people and their leadership,
including by confiscating millions of dollars due to the
Palestinian Authority, placing a ban on granting travel
permits to senior officials of the Palestinian Authority
and even prohibiting the raising of the Palestinian flag.
As declared by the Israeli Government itself, the aim is
to punish the Palestinian Authority for its political and
legal resistance in resorting to the Security Council and
in the recent adoption of a General Assembly resolution
requesting that the International Court of Justice
render an advisory opinion on the legality of the Israeli
occupation of the State of Palestine (General Assembly
resolution 77/247).

the new Government’s practices, which constitute a
flagrant violation of the democratic identity claimed
by Israel. Those violations have proved that the Israeli
Government is not, unfortunately, sincere in their
claims. In Tel Aviv on 15 January, 80,000 Israelis
protested against the plans of the extreme right-wing
Government to introduce legal amendments that make it
easier for the Parliament to cancel rulings issued by the
Supreme Court, thereby undermining the independence
of the judiciary and supporting corruption. It is clear
that such amendments contradict the most basic values
of democracy and accountability.

Israel’s deliberate actions and wilful violation
of the sanctity of the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as well as its
frantic endeavour to alter the historic status quo in
Jerusalem and its persistent arbitrary punishment of
the Palestinian Authority, is considered by the League
of Arab States as a punishment aimed against the
entire United Nations system, including the Security
Council, the General Assembly and the International
Court of Justice itself. The League of Arab States also
considers all of those actions as a sign of disrespect of
the United Nations Charter, the international rules and
values which underpin the multilateral international
community and the democratic decision-making
approach. Meanwhile, Israel claims falsely to be the
biggest democracy in the region.

From that standpoint, the League of Arab States
calls on the Security Council to assume its full
responsibilities in defending international legitimacy
and the rule of law and confronting the grave violations
of the new Israeli Government in Al-Aqsa Mosque,
while ensuring that they do not reoccur. We also call
on all United Nations organs, including the General
Assembly and the International Court of Justice, to
fulfil the roles entrusted to them by the Charter in
accordance with the rule of law, including by addressing
the apartheid practiced by Israel in the occupied
Palestinian territories based on the law of the Jewish
State, which we reject legally and morally, along with
other discriminatory measures against the Palestinian
people who defend their land and the two-State solution
established by General Assembly resolution 181 (II),
which must remain the governing framework for all
settlement efforts.

It is shameful and deplorable that Israel has
committed all of those violations despite receiving
repeated warnings, including the open letter from
more than 300 American rabbis stating that the new
Israeli Government’s practices have caused irreparable
damage to Israeli relations with the Jews in the diaspora,
and the open letter from 100 Israeli ambassadors and
former officials in the Israeli Foreign Ministry to
Prime Minister Netanyahu in Le Monde newspaper
on 9 January expressing their grave concern about
6/21

The League of Arab States aligns itself with the
call made by the Secretary-General during the highlevel open debate of the Security Council on the subject
of the rule of law (see S/PV.9241). Respecting the rule
of law when addressing the Palestinian question at the
United Nations is inevitable, as is ensuring respect
for the international legitimacy established in this
Organization; justly and honestly implementing the
two-State solution; and refraining from altering the
situation on the ground through unilateral measures.
Only negotiations between the Palestinian and Israeli
sides can lead to a solution.

In conclusion, I reiterate the Arab League’s warnings
of the disastrous consequences of the continued absence
of any political horizon for a peaceful settlement of the
Palestinian question. We underscore the importance
of reviving the role of the Middle East Quartet in
order to prepare for convening the international peace
conference that has long been called for by Palestinian
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

President Mahmoud Abbas before the Council and
the General Assembly. It is necessary to launch an
integrated negotiations process between the Palestinian
and Israeli parties on all five final-status issues while
maintaining the full commitment not to seek to alter
the status quo on the ground in any way until a final
political settlement is reached.
I also reiterate the citment of the League of Arab
States to ending the Israeli occupation of the occupied
Syrian Arab Golan, in accordance with the relevant
international terms of reference, and to maintaining
regional peace and territorial integrity in Syria and
Lebanon. The League of Arab States stands ready
to work with the Security Council to achieve peace,
security and stability in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Islamic Republic of Iran.
Mr. Jalil Iravani (Islamic Republic of Iran): Last
year was a deadly year in the occupied Palestinian
territory, as the Israeli regime’s oppressive, expansionist
and apartheid practices against Palestinians continued
unabated. As a result, the Palestinian people, in
particular women and children, have suffered severe
deprivation and violations of their fundamental rights.
Owing to the inhumane blockades, Gaza has become
the world’s largest open-air prison.
The Israeli regime’s recent incursion into Al-Aqsa
Mosque on 3 January violated the Mosque’s sanctity and
worship rites and was a brazen provocation of Muslim
feelings. Such illegality and recklessness has serious
consequences that should not be underestimated. If
not addressed properly, it could further destabilize an
already fragile situation, endangering regional and
international peace and security.
For more than 70 years, the Israeli regime
has committed such atrocities without being held
accountable or facing any consequences. Apartheid is
still in effect, and the occupation has not ended. In the
meantime, the viability of establishing a Palestinian
State is difficult and even meaningless owing to the
Israeli regime’s ongoing settlement activities, which are
explicitly prohibited by international law and pertinent
United Nations resolutions.
We believe that the conflict in the occupied
Palestinian territory can be resolved only if the
occupation is ended and the Palestinian people’s
inalienable right to self-determination is fully

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

recognized, upheld and protected. That will result in
the full restoration of Palestinian sovereignty over
the entire Palestinian territory. But as long as the
Security Council remains silent, that is impossible to
do. The Council’s current position has done nothing
except strengthen and encourage the Israeli regime to
carry out its brutal occupation and crimes against the
Palestinian people.
What threshold must the Israeli regime cross,
as the Permanent Representative of Palestine rightly
asked, for the Security Council to emerge from its
hibernation and carry out its duties under the Charter
of the United Nations? As we have repeatedly stated, if
the international community, in particular the Security
Council, remains entirely silent about the Israeli
regime’s ongoing aggressions, it will be encouraged to
commit more atrocities and aggression.
The Security Council must act immediately and in
a decisive manner to support the Palestinian people.
Sympathy alone is not enough. All war crimes, acts
of State terrorism and persistent violations of human
rights committed against the Palestinian people by the
Israeli regime must be held accountable and prosecuted.
Those atrocities are well documented and irrefutable.
Therefore, the Security Council is obligated to uphold
its mandate to maintain international peace and
security, in accordance with the Charter of the United
Nations, and to hold the Israeli regime accountable for
its crimes using the legal means at its disposal.
The Islamic Republic of Iran welcomes the General
Assembly’s request to the International Court of Justice
in resolution 77/247, adopted on 30 December 2022,
for an advisory opinion on the legal consequences of
Israel’s ongoing violation of the Palestinian people’s
right to self-determination, as well as its prolonged
occupation, settlement and annexation of Palestinian
territory. We believe that action could contribute to the
liberation of all Palestinian territories.
The Islamic Republic of Iran recognizes as its duty
the protection of the legitimate right of the Palestinian
people to resist the oppression and violence of the
apartheid regime, in accordance with their right to selfdetermination. That will continue to be our steadfast
position until the end of the occupation.
Finally, in keeping with the Israeli regime’s usual
standard practice, the regime’s representative again
veered off the Council’s topic of discussion and tried
to abuse this Chamber by lying and falsely accusing

23-018767/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Iran of being responsible for the nefarious activities
that the Israeli regime is committing in the region and
elsewhere. Iran strongly denies such absurd claims.
Those unfounded allegations have one clear objective:
to deflect attention from the main issue, namely, the
atrocities committed by the apartheid regime against
the Palestinian people, as well as its systematic and
deliberate violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law in the Palestinian-occupied territories.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of South Africa.
Mr. Mabhongo (South Africa): We thank you, Sir,
for convening this meeting.
Every year, month and day that the illegal Israeli
occupation of Palestinian lands continues results in
a more elusive peace. The monthly Security Council
briefings present a bleaker picture month by month.
Since we last met (see S/PV.9236), the situation
has become even more precarious for Palestinians.
Increased settler violence, apartheid-like conditions,
attacks on civilians, extrajudicial killings and attacks
on holy sites are some of the examples of the worsening
situation. Four children have been killed by the Israeli
security forces this year and the first month of this year
is not yet over.
That situation cannot be allowed to continue.
If nothing is done, we will meet again in a month’s
time and lament even more violence and deaths. Is
that why the United Nations was created — we ask
ourselves — to receive reports on violations of human
rights and international law, increased violence and
civilians being killed without attempting to say or
do anything?
The international community has acknowledged
that the only solution to the Palestinian-Israeli matter is
a two-State solution whereby Palestinians and Israelis
live side by side. That has been the consistent United
Nations approach since the General Assembly adopted
resolution 181 (II) in 1947. Yet today Palestinians
continue to live under occupation and be deprived of
their right to self-determination. We cannot sit in this
Chamber and lament the non-implementation of United
Nations resolutions if we continue to condone the
non-implementation of resolutions adopted 75 years ago.
Let us be clear: the continued occupation perpetuates
violence and increases violations of Palestinian
rights. It is also disconcerting that sacred, holy sites
8/21

18/01/2023

have again become proxy grounds for incitement and
provocation. Those actions distance us further from a
two-State solution.
As the international community, we must be
resolute in upholding international law, international
humanitarian law and international human rights law in
order to ensure the maintenance of peace and security.
General Assembly resolution 77/247, which was
adopted a few weeks ago, in accordance with Article
96 of the Charter of the United Nations, requests the
International Court of Justice to render an advisory
opinion on the legal consequences arising from Israel’s
ongoing violation of the right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination, from its prolonged occupation,
settlement and annexation of the Palestinian territory
occupied since 1967, including measures aimed at
altering the demographic composition, character
and status of the Holy City of Jerusalem, and from
its adoption of related discriminatory legislation
and measures.
In conclusion, South Africa will continue to
advocate for a solution premised on a just settlement
with just laws that are rights-based. We, as the
international community, must seek a solution that
facilitates equality and equity for all who have the right
to live in the territories of Israel and Palestine. In the
absence of that, security, dignity and prosperity will
not be achieved.
The President: I now give the floor
representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.

the

Mr. Sabbagh (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): At a time when the world was celebrating
the New Year and looking forward to a year in which
crises will be fewer and peace, prosperity and stability
will prevail, the Israeli occupation authorities have
undermined the aspirations of our Arab people in
Palestine and Syria by adding new attacks to their
full record of acts of aggression and violations of
international law and the Charter of the United Nations.
That proves one thing only, which is that Israel continues
to escalate its aggression, and that it is undermining
peace and security in the Middle East region.
On 2 January, the Israeli occupation forces
committed another act of aggression against Syria’s
sovereignty by targeting the Damascus International
Airport with a barrage of missiles, which led to people
martyred and injured, caused material losses and led
the airport to be out of service for some time.
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 3 January, the Minister of National Security
of the Israeli occupation authorities carried out
a provocative and escalatory act by storming the
courtyard of Al-Quds Al-Sharif, disgracing an Islamic
holy site without respect for the feelings of Palestinians
and Muslims around the world and ignoring the
repercussions of that act at various levels.
The Israeli occupation authorities also announced
collective punitive measures against the Palestinian
people after the adoption by the General Assembly
of resolution 77/247, by which it rightfully requests
an advisory opinion from the International Court of
Justice on the legal consequences arising from Israel’s
continued violation of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination and on how the policies
and practices of Israel affect the legal status of
the occupation.
The Syrian Arab Republic condemns in the
strongest terms all the violent incursions by the Israeli
occupation entity and considers those provocative
practices part of its systematic and aggressive policy
of occupation. Syria holds the Israeli entity and the
countries that support it fully responsible for the
ongoing escalation and its repercussions. We call upon
the United Nations to condemn those violations, work
to stop them and ensure that they do not recur, as well as
to implement the resolutions of international legitimacy
related to the Palestinian question in order to enable the
Palestinians to enjoy their legitimate and inalienable
national rights to establish an independent State, with
Jerusalem as its capital.
Syria also condemns the decision of the Israeli
occupation authorities to impose more illegal and
inhuman collective punitive measures against the
Palestinian people and stresses its support for their
legitimate struggle to liberate their land, restore their
rights and protect their holy sites.
On behalf of my country’s Government, I sent a
letter dated 2 January addressed to you, Mr. President,
and to the Secretary-General (S/2023/4) regarding the
Israeli occupation authorities’ continuing military
aggression against Syrian territories and targeting of
civilian infrastructure, the most recent of which was the
attack on Damascus International Airport. Syria also
emphasized that Israel’s deliberate aggression against
civilian facilities and infrastructure was not the first of
its kind. The Israeli occupation forces had previously
targeted the international Damascus and Aleppo

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

airports and the commercial port of Latakia, causing
severe damage to those structures and disrupting
the Air Transport Service of the United Nations,
designated for humanitarian work, which affected the
provision of necessary humanitarian aid to the Syrian
people. We also called on the Security Council to take
the necessary measures to stop Israel’s repeated attacks
on Syria’s sovereignty and to hold the occupation
authorities accountable for all of their violations and
aggressive practices.
Moreover, Israel, the occupying Power in the
Syrian Golan, has continued its aggressive policies
against the Syrian people for more than five decades,
in stark violation of international law and international
humanitarian law, including through the arrest,
killing and displacement of Syrians. Israel feverishly
implements its systematic policy of expanding
settlements in the occupied Golan with the aim of
entrenching occupation, increasing the number of
settlers and imposing demographic change, and steals
the natural resources of the Golan, confiscating its
lands and establishing projects on them that will have
catastrophic effects on the lives of Syrians in the Golan.
Such Israeli crimes would not have continued had
the successive United States administrations and their
allies not guaranteed impunity for Israel, which has led
to the unprecedented levels of tension and instability in
the region.
The Syrian Arab Republic holds the countries that
support Israel responsible for the continuation of Israel’s
occupation of the Golan and its continued attacks on
Syria’s sovereignty, as well as its repercussions on
regional and international peace and security. Syria
calls on the Security Council to break its silence and
to urgently shoulder its responsibilities to bring an end
to Israel’s occupation of the Arab territories occupied
since 1967 and to implement the relevant resolutions
of the United Nations, foremost among which are
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973), as well as
resolution 497 (1981), which considers Israel’s decision
to annex the Golan null and void and of no legal effect.
Before I conclude my statement, I would like to
express my delegation’s disapproval of the insistence
of the European Union delegation on including issues
related to Syria in its statement, as these issues have
nothing to do with the topic of today’s open debate.
It has done so in order to divert attention away from
the main objective of our discussion. In order to use

23-018769/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the Council’s time wisely, and out of our commitment
to today’s topic, I am not going to respond to the
political lies in that statement. However, I would like
to remind the delegation of the European Union that
it deliberately turned a blind eye in its statement to
all of Israel’s violations in the occupied Syrian Golan
and its continuous attacks on Syria’s sovereignty. That
is the height of political hypocrisy and demonstrates
the double standards that the European Union has
been practicing.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Malaysia.
Mr. Abd Aziz (Malaysia): At the outset, Malaysia
would like to thank you, Mr. President, for convening
today’s open debate. We also thank Mr. Tor Wennesland
for his briefing.
The update that we have heard today is extremely
concerning. It mentioned, among others, the continued
killing of the Palestinians, the demolition of houses
and schools, the expansion of illegal settlements and
attacks by illegal settlers. Last year was one of the
deadliest, with more than 230 lives lost, including those
of innocent children. We are barely in the new year,
and already 14 Palestinians have been killed, including
4 children. Malaysia reiterates its condemnation of the
continued atrocities and abuses committed against the
Palestinians by the Israeli regime.
Malaysia is equally appalled by the recent incursion
into Al-Haram Al-Sharif by an Israeli minister on
3 January. This provocative act is simply outrageous
and undermines efforts towards the peaceful resolution
of the question of Palestine. It is clearly another effort
by Israel to assert its sovereignty over the Holy City
and change the historical and legal status quo at the
holy sites in Jerusalem. Malaysia calls upon the
international community to urge Israel to fully respect
resolution 2334 (2016), which condemns acts of
provocation and incitement.
Such behaviour must not be condoned under any
circumstances, as it jeopardizes the long-standing goal
of a sovereign Palestinian State, which the international
community has been relentlessly pursuing. It is
imperative that the Council view that provocative and
inflammatory action seriously. Affirmative action by
the Council is therefore crucial. It is incumbent upon the
Council to ensure the full protection of the Palestinian
people. As long as the international community and
the Council remain paralysed, the apartheid regime
10/21

18/01/2023

will continue its dastardly actions against the people of
Palestine with impunity. Israel must therefore be held
accountable for its horrendous crime and deliberate
breach of numerous laws and resolutions.
Malaysia also strongly condemns Israel’s
retaliatory measures against the Palestinians, including
the restriction of movement of Palestinian authorities
and other punitive measures. Such unilateral actions
not only reaffirm the systematic apartheid practices
isolating the Palestinian community, but also reflect
Israel’s contempt and lack of faith in and respect for
the primacy of the United Nations and its judicial
organ, the International Court of Justice, as well as for
international law and multilateralism. The international
community should render its full support to Palestine
in its endeavour to obtain an advisory opinion from
the Court.
The protracted agony and suffering of the
Palestinian people in pursuing their inalienable right to
an independent, free and sovereign State has continued
for far too long. Like all of us here in this Chamber,
the people of Palestine have the right to live in dignity
and freedom. They deserve to join the community
of nations as citizens of a full Member State of the
United Nations, like all of us.
Malaysia will continue to stand with the people
of Palestine and expresses its unwavering support to
and solidarity with them. We remain convinced that
the internationally recognized two-State solution, with
East Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, and based on
pre-1967 borders, can be realized if the international
community, especially members of the Council, exert
all efforts to ensure its full implementation.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Iraq.
Mr. Bahr Aluloom (Iraq) (spoke in Arabic): It
is my pleasure to congratulate Japan on becoming a
non-permanent member of the Security Council and
on assuming its presidency for this month. We thank
Ambassador Ishikane for presiding over this important
meeting and wish him every success as he conducts
the Council’s work in January. We also thank the
representative of the Secretary-General and the Special
Coordinator, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for his briefing.
The ongoing and escalated Israeli aggression
against the Palestinian people cannot continue
indefinitely. The solution is the declaration of a fully
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

sovereign, contiguous and independent Palestinian
State, with occupied East Jerusalem as its capital, based
on the 4 June 1967 borderlines. That is the only way
to bring an end to the conflict and establish just and
comprehensive peace.
We call upon the Security Council to shoulder
its responsibilities and to implement its relevant
resolutions, particularly resolution 2334 (2016),
wherein the occupying Power is requested to bring
an end to all of its settlement activities, all illegal,
unilateral, provocative and escalatory measures and all
the violations it is continually carrying out in order to
build and expand its illegal settlements.
The occupying Power is killing innocent people. It
is constantly invading Palestinian towns and villages.
It is confiscating land and property. It is destroying
Palestinian homes and facilities and chasing out the
Palestinian inhabitants, including in Al-Quds Al-Sharif.
We have seen a recent escalation of tension when a
minister of the occupying Israeli Government stormed
the courtyard of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. That act constitutes a message to the
international community that the occupying Power
is not engaged in efforts for peace and stability. It is
doing whatever it wants, contrary to the will of the
international community, which seeks peace in that
important part of the world. Despite that, we reiterate
that we are committed to peace as a strategic choice and
that there is a need to find a fair solution to the Palestinian
question in line with international law and relevant
resolutions and initiatives of international legitimacy.
We call upon the Council to play its role in ending
the Israeli occupation and ensuring its full military
withdrawal from the occupied Arab territories since
1967, including East Jerusalem. We also call upon the
Council to support the accession of the State of Palestine
to the United Nations as practical embodiment of its
positions and responsibilities to support the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination, pursuant to
international terms of reference.
Al-Haram Al-Sharif and its surrounding 144 acres
is a place of worship. We stress that the Jordanian
Administration Department of Awqaf and Al-Aqsa
Mosque Affairs is the only authority for managing
all Al-Aqsa Mosque affairs under international
humanitarian law. We commend the continuous efforts
of the sisterly Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan to maintain
the current historic and legal status of the Muslim and

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

Christian holy sites, and to address the Israeli measures
that target Al-Aqsa Mosque while protecting the Arab
Islamic and Christian identity of the holy sites under
the Hashemite custodianship.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Iqbal.
Mr. Iqbal: I have the honour to deliver this
statement on behalf of the Secretary-General of the
Organization of Islamic Cooperation (OIC). At the
outset, I would like to extend my warm congratulations
to you, Mr. President, on your country’s resumption of
the presidency of the Security Council for the month of
January and on your able stewardship of the Council’s
meetings.
International reports reveal that the year 2022
was among the deadliest for the Palestinian people
since 2005 in terms of the alarming scale of Israel’s
violations and crimes, particularly in the occupied West
Bank, including East Jerusalem. In fact, 230 Palestinian
civilians were killed by the Israeli occupying forces,
including 61 children, in addition to thousands of others
who were injured or detained, while hundreds of homes,
civilian properties and structures and agricultural crops
were destroyed by the occupying army and settlers.
It has by now become patently clear that Israel’s
illegal, oppressive and destructive policies aim to
further entrench and perpetuate the longest belligerent
occupation in modern history, in grave breach of
international law. The methods used in that regard have
included, inter alia, military aggression against the
defenceless Palestinian civilian population, the building
of colonial settlements and a wall on confiscated
Palestinian land, the transfer of Jewish settlers to the
occupied territory, the ethnic cleansing of Palestinians
from their homes and land, decades of blockade and
the arrest and detention of thousands of Palestinian
civilians. All those violations are occurring flagrantly,
systematically and with the full knowledge of this organ,
yet without any consequences for the perpetrators.
Accordingly, it should be reiterated that the lack
of accountability has continued to embolden Israel to
persist in such illegal policies, which are exacerbating
the situation on the ground, causing immense human
suffering, deepening the current political impasse
and threatening the two-State solution. Moreover, it
is widely acknowledged that such prolonged, illegal
occupation and impunity have impaired the credibility
and authority of the international system, including the
Security Council.

23-0187611/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

The OIC is deeply alarmed by Israel’s ongoing
acts of aggression, incitement and provocation against
Christian and Islamic holy places, including the
Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif. Such actions
constitute deliberate, systematic and grave breaches
of international law and the relevant United Nations
resolutions. In that regard, we strongly condemn and
reject the recent deplorable and provocative incursion
by Israel’s Minister for National Security, Itamar BenGvir, into the Al-Aqsa Mosque.
In line with the relevant OIC resolutions, including
resolution No. 1/48-PAL, on the cause of Palestine,
adopted by the Council of Foreign Ministers on 23 March
2022, we reaffirm our rejection of all Israeli measures
and attempts to alter the historical and legal status
quo of the Al-Aqsa Mosque/Al-Haram Al-Sharif and
reiterate our demand to fully respect the status quo and
international law. Time and again, we have cautioned
that such provocative and irresponsible Israeli acts
offend the feelings of Muslims across the globe, violate
their religious rights and eternal attachment to that holy
site and jeopardize stability in the region and beyond.
We underscore that the Security Council and all
other key actors in the international arena must uphold
their responsibilities and obligations towards ensuring
Israel’s compliance with international law and United
Nations resolutions in relation to the question of
Jerusalem, the occupied capital of the State of Palestine,
which has been enduring endless Israeli attempts at
isolation, colonization and subjugation and erasure
of the city’s Arab, Islamic and Christian character,
heritage and presence. All those illegal actions must
be halted.
The dire situation in Palestine is becoming even
more dangerous owing to the decision by the new
Israeli Government, the members of which are known
for supremacist ideologies and hateful actions against
the Palestinian people, to impose punitive measures on
the Palestinian leadership for its legitimate pursuit of
accountability for Israel’s crimes, including the decision
to withhold Palestinian tax revenues. Such an illegal
decision is an act of piracy and collective punishment of
the Palestinian people, thereby constituting a violation
of international law, exacerbating the financial,
economic and humanitarian crisis encountered by the
Palestinian people and risking further destabilization
of the fragile situation.
12/21

18/01/2023

In conclusion, our Organization reaffirms that, for a
just and lasting peace to materialize, an internationally
sponsored political process, based on international
law, the relevant United Nations resolutions and the
Arab Peace Initiative, must be launched with a view
to ending the Israeli occupation and enabling the
Palestinian people to exercise their legitimate and
national rights, including to self-determination and the
independence of the State of Palestine, on the territory
occupied since 1967, with East Jerusalem as its capital,
and to find a just and lasting solution to the question
of Palestine refugees, in line with General Assembly
resolution 194 (III).
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Kuwait.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. President,
on your presidency of the Security Council for this
month and on the membership of your friendly country
in the Security Council. I wish you every success in
managing the rest of the Council’s work. I also cannot
miss the opportunity to congratulate the newly elected
members of the Security Council, namely, Ecuador,
Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland. I wish them
success during their membership over the next two
years. In that context, I would like to thank the Member
States that concluded their membership in the Council,
namely, India, Ireland, Kenya, Mexico and Norway. We
appreciate their valuable efforts during their tenure on
the Council over the past two years.
Israel, the occupying Power, continues to violate
international resolutions in full view of the States
members of the Security Council, particularly those of
the Security Council. It continues its flagrant violations
of the Charter of the United Nations, international law,
international humanitarian law, international human
rights law, the Geneva Conventions of 1949 and other
international treaties and covenants.
We have entered a new year, and the proud
Palestinian people unfortunately continue to suffer
from the most severe acts of aggression against them by
Israel, the occupying Power. Israel continues its series
of violations of all the rights of the Palestinian people
with no response from the Council or attempt to put an
end to such injustices.
The facts before the Security Council are evident.
The occupation of Palestinian and other Arab territories
has been clear to the Council for decades. The killings
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

and criminal practices against Palestinians persist,
human rights violations against Palestinians continue,
and the systematic settlement policy has not stopped.

in flagrant violation of international resolutions, above
all resolution 2334 (2016). Those steps undermine the
two-State solution.

The new year began with escalation and provocation
by the occupying Power in the occupied Palestinian
territories. As we heard from Special Coordinator Tor
Wennesland in his briefing today, in the past weeks
a number of unarmed Palestinians were killed by the
occupying forces. We strongly condemn that, and
we reiterate the need for accountability for the daily
systematic violations committed by the occupying
Power in the occupied Palestinian territories.

Given the bitter situation on the ground and the
injustice that the brotherly Palestinian people endure,
the State of Kuwait once again calls on the international
community to take urgent action to provide them with
protection. We call upon the Security Council to assume
its responsibilities pursuant to the Charter of the United
Nations and to hold the Israeli occupation forces fully
responsible for the consequences of their crimes and
their illegal and provocative practices in Al-Quds and
Al-Haram Al-Sharif, as well as the violations against
the defenceless Palestinian people on their land and
holy sites. The State of Kuwait strongly supports the
State of Palestine in its quest for full membership in
the United Nations. We also call upon all States that do
not recognize Palestine as a State to reconsider their
positions and bring them into line with international
law. Occupation does not change from one State to
another. The legitimate right of self-defence does not
change from one State to another. The implementation
of resolutions of international legitimacy, especially
those of the Security Council, should not differ from
one situation to another.

A few weeks ago, we also witnessed the storming
of the Al-Aqsa Mosque courtyard by a minister in the
Israeli occupation Government under the protection
of the Israeli occupation forces. The State of Kuwait
reiterates its strong condemnation and denunciation
of that incursion and other repeated violations, since
such actions constitute a provocation to the feelings of
Muslims and a violation of the relevant resolutions of
international legitimacy. The most recent incursion is
part of the continued attempts of the Israeli occupation
authorities to alter the current legal and historical
status of Jerusalem and its holy sites. In addition, in yet
another attempt to restrict Palestinians, the Government
of the Israeli occupying Power has recently imposed
punitive measures on the Palestinian people, their
leadership and their civilian institutions in response to
the adoption of General Assembly resolution 77/247,
which requests the International Court of Justice to
render an advisory opinion on the issue of the Israeli
occupation of Palestinian territories. In that regard, we
welcome the joint statement made a few days ago by
a significant number of Member States and groups at
the United Nations, which rejects the punitive measures
imposed on the Palestinian people.
Due to the arrogance of Israel, the occupying
Power, and its continued criminal practices in
violation of international laws and agreements, the
international community is now further away from a
political horizon that could lead to a just solution to
the Palestinian question, which is the key question for
Arabs and Muslims. As we have said before, it is as
simple as that. There is no peace, security or safety
under a continued occupation. We have seen in recent
years systematic steps that take us further from peace
by seeking to prolong the illegal occupation through the
ongoing illegal building and expansion of settlements,

In conclusion, the leadership, the Government and
the people of the State of Kuwait reiterate their support
for the brotherly Palestinian people, as well as their
historical and principled solidarity with the just cause
of the Palestinians. Kuwait commends the efforts of
the Palestinian people and supports their legitimate
struggle to realize all their legitimate political rights in
defiance of the occupation. The State of Kuwait upholds
the Arab, Islamic and international position that peace
is the strategic option and that a lasting, comprehensive
and just solution must be based on a two-State solution,
in line with the agreed upon terms of reference,
including the relevant Security Council resolutions and
the Arab Peace Initiative. That will lead to realizing all
the political legitimate rights of the Palestinian people
and their establishment of an independent State on their
territory, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Maldives.
Mr. Zuhuree (Maldives): I wish to thank Japan for
convening today’s debate. I would also like to thank
Mr. Wennesland for his briefing.

23-0187613/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

On 3 January, Itamar Ben-Gvir, the recently
appointed Israeli National Security Minister, stormed
the courtyards of Al-Aqsa Mosque, with a large
contingent of forces. The Maldivian Government
denounces that highly provocative action. That forceful
entry violates all norms, escalates tensions around the
holy sites, provokes violence and threatens to change the
identity and legal and historical status quo of Al-Haram
Al-Sharif. It is not in the region’s interest or in anyone’s
interest. Allow me to highlight a few reasons why
the Israeli actions in the occupied territories violate
international law and international humanitarian law
and threaten the peace and security of the Middle East.
First, the Maldives recalls General Assembly
resolutions 476 (1980) and 478 (1980), which declare
null and void all legislative and administrative
measures and actions taken by Israel that have altered
or purport to alter the character and status of the holy
city of Jerusalem. Resolution 2334 (2016) calls upon all
States to distinguish in their relevant dealings between
the territory of the State of Israel and the territories
occupied since 1967. The Security Council, which
is mandated by the Charter of the United Nations to
maintain international peace and security, must ensure
that its own decisions are upheld and respected by all
countries. Its very credibility depends on that.
Secondly, the people of Palestine have been
suffering under Israeli occupation for 50 years despite
several Security Council resolutions and broad
international condemnation. The most recent report
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2334 (2016) (S/2022/945) states that 2022
has been the deadliest year for Palestinians in the
West Bank since 2005. The report further notes the
continuation of settlement activities, as well as the
seizures and demolitions of Palestinian-owned civilian
structures by Israel, including schools and houses.
Settler violence continues to undermine the rights and
the dignity of the Palestinian people.
Finally, the Maldives wishes to reiterate that the
rule of law should be applied equally to all countries.
It is critical that perpetrators of blatant violations of
international law and international humanitarian law
be held accountable for their actions. The Council
is mandated under the United Nations Charter with
the primary responsibility for the maintenance of
international peace and security. But when the Council
fails, the international community has no choice but
to find other avenues for justice. For that reason, the
14/21

18/01/2023

Maldives supported General Assembly resolution
77/247, which requested the International Court of
Justice to render an advisory opinion on the legal
consequences arising from the ongoing violation by
Israel of the rights of the Palestinian people.
The Maldives reiterates its steadfast support for any
resolution that outlines the formation of an independent
and sovereign State of Palestine, established on the
pre-1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
We firmly believe that is the only viable solution to
ensure an end to the conflict so that the people of both
Palestine and Israel can enjoy meaningful and enduring
peace and live side by side with dignity.
Since the start of the conflict in Syria, hundreds
of thousands of people have been killed, millions have
been displaced and entire cities have been destroyed.
From 1 October 2022 to 22 November 2022 alone,
the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner
for Human Rights recorded 136 civilian deaths in the
north-west of the country, including many women
and children. The Maldives urges the Council and the
international community to undertake urgent efforts to
resolve that conflict.
The Maldives reaffirms its commitment to working
with the Council and Member States to find long-term
solutions to improve stability across the region and lay
the foundation for lasting peace in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Bangladesh.
Mr. Muhith (Bangladesh): I thank you,
Mr. President, for giving me the floor. I would like
to commend the presidency of Japan for its able and
dynamic stewardship of the work of the Security
Council in January 2023. I also thank all the briefers
for their comprehensive briefings.
We have just experienced another unfortunate
and gruesome year of aggressive and deadly activities
against our Palestinian brothers and sisters by the Israeli occupying forces. The year 2022 was the deadliest
for the people of Palestine in nearly two decades since
2005, when the United Nations began recording fatalities in a systemic manner. A total of 230 Palestinians,
including 61 children, were killed by Israel, in addition to the injuring and detention of thousands of other
innocent Palestinians. There have been repeated calls
by the international community, including through the
adoption of numerous General Assembly and Security
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Council resolutions, to stop the brutal and inhumane
acts. Yet the new year has not brought with it any good
news. The Israeli occupation forces have continued the
blockade of the Gaza Strip, the indiscriminate killing
of women and children, the expansion of illegal settlements, the demolition of Palestinian homes and the
forcible transfer of Palestinian civilians throughout the
occupied Palestinian territory. It is a shame on all of us
that, in the first two weeks of this year, 15 Palestinians,
including four children, were killed by Israel.
Moreover, at the very beginning of the year, we saw
provocative and illegal actions by Israel on 3 January
in grossly violating the historic and legal status quo
at the Al-Aqsa Mosque on the Al-Haram Al-Sharif.
Those illegal policies and activities clearly demonstrate
the unwillingness of Israel to respect the decisions of
the United Nations and the international community.
Such actions are designed to make the solution to
the crisis more elusive and will make the situation in
the occupied Palestinian territory more vulnerable.
It is also a demonstration of sheer disrespect for, and
insolence with regard to, the unanimous decision by the
international community to reach a two-State solution.
In this alarming and dangerous situation, I would like
to reiterate a number of points that we have raised on
numerous occasions in the Council.
First, the Council should take stern action against
Israel and make it accountable for the grave injustice
and violence against the people of Palestine and the
repeated violations of international human rights law
and international humanitarian law in the occupied
territory — and that should be done immediately. We
urge the Council to take concrete actions to implement
its own resolutions, including resolution 2334 (2016),
in order to achieve the two-State solution, with East
Jerusalem as the capital of Palestine, which is the only
solution to the crisis.
Secondly, it is equally important to respect the sole
authority of the Islamic Waqf Administration and the
custodianship of the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
with regard to the Muslim and Christian holy sites
in Jerusalem.
Thirdly, we reiterate our grave concern about the
dire humanitarian situation in the occupied Palestinian
territory. Furthermore, the 15-year-long sea, land and
air blockade of the Gaza Strip and the discriminatory
lack of access of Palestinians to basic services, such as
education, health care and access to water, sanitation

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

and electricity infrastructure, among other resources,
must be ended without delay in order to prevent the
further deterioration of the humanitarian situation. We
are equally concerned about discriminatory practices
such as the lack of access to justice, the attacks on
innocent people, the evictions, the demolition of
property and the detention of Palestinians, including
children, as well as all other discriminatory policies
and practices undertaken by Israel.
Regrettably, we have been having the same
discussion decade after decade and the question of the
inalienable rights of the Palestinian people remains
unresolved. The existence of this issue calls into
question the credibility of the work of this organ. In this
situation, let me reiterate that the only way to ensure
the rights of the people of Palestine is the establishment
of an independent, viable and sovereign Palestinian
State, with East Jerusalem as its capital, based on a
two-State solution and the pre-1967 borders. I reiterate
Bangladesh’s unwavering and steadfast support for that.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Norway.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Norway thanks Special
Coordinator Tor Wennesland for his briefing. My
statement today will focus on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict. I will also briefly address the situations in
Syria and Yemen.
Throughout Norway’s membership of the Security
Council for the term from 2021 to 2022, we regularly
stated our clear positions on the Israeli-Palestinian
conflict and the Middle East peace process. We worked
to bring the parties together, encouraged de-escalation
and called for the resumption of direct negotiations. We
are troubled by the lack of progress towards peace that
we saw during the past year. We are deeply concerned
about the tense situation in the West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, and the large number of civilians
killed last year and already this year, including many
young people. Violence against civilians must end. The
status quo of the holy sites in Jerusalem must be upheld
and respected.
We are also concerned about the Israeli Government’s
recent announcements of punitive measures against the
Palestinian Authority. Israel’s withholding and seizure
of funds belonging to the Palestinians will weaken
Palestinian institutions and place additional strains on
the Palestinian economy. Ultimately, that will bring
harm to ordinary Palestinians. We strongly urge Israel

23-0187615/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

to respect signed agreements and transfer all funds
belonging to the Palestinians. Israel’s announcement of a
moratorium on Palestinian construction in Area C in the
West Bank is also unacceptable. It violates Palestinians’
right to use and develop their land and further limits
economic growth. We also reject the Israeli announcement
of measures against organizations that carry out
humanitarian work in the West Bank. Civil society
organizations and humanitarian actors must be allowed
to work freely. Further limiting the freedom of movement
of the representatives of the Palestinian Authority is also
unacceptable and will impair Palestinians’ ability to
carry out their international activities. We believe that
the Israeli Government’s decision to impose punitive
measures against the Palestinian people following the
General Assembly’s request for an advisory opinion by
the International Court of Justice is unacceptable and
must be reversed.
The path out of the conflict and towards peace
does not lie in the denial of the rights and legitimacy
of others. It is not found in illegal unilateral steps that
change the demographic composition or the status of the
occupied areas. The path is not created through the use of
violence. A solution to the conflict will come about only
through dialogue, trust-building and cooperation. We
encourage the members of the Negev Forum to use the
spirit of regional cooperation, which was most recently
demonstrated in Abu Dhabi on 9 and 10 January, to
contribute to a more constructive path towards a solution
to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. I once again reiterate
our firm belief that a negotiated two-State solution
based on the 1967 borders, relevant United Nations
resolutions and international parameters is the best way
to achieve lasting peace and ensure the rights, safety and
independence of both Israelis and Palestinians.
I now turn to the situation in Syria. An important file
during our tenure in the Security Council involved our
co-penholdership with Ireland on extending cross-border
humanitarian assistance to north-west Syria. We are
very pleased that the mandate was extended many times
over the past two years, most recently via resolution 2672
(2023), adopted unanimously on 9 January, which is
crucial for the more than 4 million people in north-west
Syria who are dependent on humanitarian assistance.
With regard to the situation in Yemen, we continue
to be concerned about the dire humanitarian situation. It
is crucial to ensure unhindered humanitarian access to
Yemenis in need. All actors must refrain from actions
that could lead to the escalation of the armed conflict and
16/21

18/01/2023

close the window for dialogue. We hope to see a renewal
of the truce, and we support all actors in their efforts to
find a solution to the conflict. The Special Envoy of the
Secretary-General has Norway’s full support.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Cuba.
Mr. Pedroso Cuesta (Cuba) (spoke in Spanish):
Cuba supports the statement to be made by the Chair
of the Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable
Rights of the Palestinian People.
On 27 October, the Chair of the Independent
International Commission of Inquiry on the Occupied
Palestinian Territory, including East Jerusalem, and
Israel presented to the General Assembly her most
recent report, which explicitly calls on the Security
Council to take measures to put an end to the illegal
situation resulting from the permanent occupation
imposed by Israel. Regrettably, despite the systematic
appeals of the international community, the subjugation
of the Palestinian people continues, and the Security
Council has been incapable of stopping one of the
greatest outrages committed against an entire people
in the last century, with total impunity on the part of
its perpetrators.
The aforementioned Commission, created at the
request of the United Nations Human Rights Council,
has concluded that the Israeli occupation of Palestinian
territory is contrary to international law because of
its permanent nature and because of the measures
adopted by Israel to expand both its de facto and de jure
annexation of parts of the Palestinian territory. These
violations of international humanitarian law being
suffered by the Palestinian people are scandalous.
Article 49 of the Fourth Geneva Convention
prohibits an occupying Power from transferring part of
its own population to occupied territories for political or
racial reasons or to colonize those territories. However,
in the area of East Jerusalem alone, more than one third
of the Palestinian land there has been expropriated to
build Israeli settlements, which constitutes a practice of
segregation tantamount to apartheid.
The impact on Palestinian families living in a
climate of constant harassment and intimidation is
immeasurable. These effects are much greater on
such vulnerable sectors of the population as women
and children. It has been documented that, since
1967, thousands of children have experienced forced
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

displacement and relocation as a result of the demolition
of 28,000 Palestinian homes. The United Nations
Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia
has estimated that the participation rate of Palestinian
women in the labour force is among the 10 lowest in
the world, mainly owing to the limitations imposed
by the advancing Israeli colonization. The blockade of
the Gaza Strip and plans for annexation of Palestinian
territories in the Jordan Valley and other parts of the
West Bank and East Jerusalem also remain ongoing.
Violence, detention, imprisonment, human rights
violations and killings of Palestinian civilians in the
occupied territories continue.
This reality is not new. For decades, the
international community has demanded an end to
Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestine. However, the
situation on the ground continues to deteriorate, as the
Secretary-General’s Special Coordinator for Middle
East Peace Process has reported to the Security Council
(see S/PV.9246). We condemn the double standards and
the political selectivity and manipulation that damage
the cause of international peace and security and
undermine the legitimacy of the Security Council.
The United States, a self-proclaimed defender
of the principles of the United Nations Charter and
international peace and security, is covering up the
heinous crimes committed against the Palestinian
people by Israel on a daily basis. We cannot forget the
repeated obstruction by the United States of the Security
Council’s action to achieve a comprehensive, just and
lasting solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, as
well as the impunity it has guaranteed for Israel.
We reiterate once again our condemnation of the
unilateral decisions of the Government of the United
States to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel
and establish its diplomatic representation there,
ignoring its historical status, as well as to recognize
the sovereignty of Israel over the Syrian Golan. These
constitute serious violations of the Charter of the United
Nations, international law and the relevant resolutions
of the Security Council, contravene the legitimate
interests of the Arab nations and make the possibility
of a solution to the conflict even more remote.
We reaffirm our strong support for a two-State
solution that allows the Palestinian people to exercise
their right to self-determination and have their own
independent and sovereign State within the pre-1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital, and where

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

the right of return of refugees is also guaranteed.
We will continue to support the entry of the State of
Palestine into the United Nations as a full member.
We support its President’s call for an international
peace conference.
We reiterate our demand for the total and
unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the Syrian
Golan and all of the occupied Arab territories. We
demand the cessation of external interference in Syria
and full respect for its sovereignty and territorial
integrity, while supporting the search for a peaceful
and negotiated solution to the situation being imposed
on that sister Arab nation.
We affirm our support for the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran and for the inalienable
right of States to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. We
reiterate our rejection of the unilateral withdrawal of
the United States from the JCPOA.
In conclusion, we call once again for an immediate
and unconditional end to the arbitrary and illegal
unilateral coercive measures imposed by the United
States on sovereign nations in the Middle East.
The President: I now give the floor to Mr. Niang.
Mr. Niang: On behalf of the Committee on the
Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People, I would like to congratulate Japan for its able
presidency of the Security Council this month.
The Committee would also like to congratulate
Ecuador, Malta, Mozambique and Switzerland — in
addition to Japan — upon assuming their membership
in the Council.
Allow me also to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, the
Special Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process,
for his efforts and commitment to bringing about a just
and lasting solution, based on international law and the
relevant United Nations resolutions, which would fulfil
the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people and
finally see Israelis and Palestinians living side by side
in peace and security.
The Committee expresses its deep concern and
dismay at the recent provocations at the holy sites in
Jerusalem, the first such incursion by an Israeli Minister
since 2017. On 3 January, Israel’s Minister of National
Security, accompanied by a heavy security presence
and without having coordinated with the Jordanian
Waqf, entered the Al-Aqsa Mosque compound in

23-0187617/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

occupied East Jerusalem. Such violations of the
historical and legal status quo and repeated provocative
actions at this sensitive holy site have sparked outrage
among Palestinians, the Muslim community and the
international community.
We commend Japan for convening the Security
Council emergency meeting on 5 January to discuss this
worrisome situation (see S/PV.9236). The long history
of this conflict reveals that the cost of such violations of
the historical status quo, breaches of international law,
and unilateral measures and provocations is very high
and is the primary cause of the rising levels of violence
and instability. Such illegal actions have repeatedly
undermined efforts to find a just and peaceful solution
to the Palestinian-Israeli conflict and are subverting
the viability of the two-State solution.
The Committee stands firmly for preserving the
historical status quo at the holy sites in Jerusalem.
Any unilateral actions that undercut the historical
status quo are unacceptable, as are any violations of
Israel’s obligations under international humanitarian
law, particularly the Fourth Geneva Convention, which
prohibits an occupying Power from altering the character,
status and demography of an occupied territory.
The Committee also remains concerned at the high
levels of violence we continue to witness throughout
the occupied Palestinian territory, including East
Jerusalem, including clashes, protests, attacks, settlerrelated violence and Israeli security operations, which
continue to cause civilian casualties, including among
children. The Special Coordinator reported that in
2022 more than 150 Palestinian children and more
than 20 Israelis were killed in the West Bank and
Israel — the highest number of fatalities in years. The
violence, provocations, incitement and spreading of
inflammatory rhetoric must stop and all perpetrators
must be held accountable.
Despite
the
Security
Council’s
repeated
affirmations that settlements constitute a flagrant
violation of the relevant Security Council and General
Assembly resolutions and international law and despite
repeated calls for their cessation, Israel’s settlement
expansion in the occupied West Bank, including
East Jerusalem, continues unabated. Those illegal
actions, which systematically erode the possibility of
establishing a contiguous, independent, viable and
sovereign Palestinian State, must cease immediately
and there must be accountability.
18/21

18/01/2023

In February 2023, the Committee will finalize its
independent legal study on the legality of the Israeli
occupation of the occupied Palestinian territory,
including East Jerusalem, which was commissioned in
2021. The study addresses whether Israel’s de facto and
de jure annexation measures, its continued settlement
activities and its protracted occupation of Palestinian
territory — the West Bank, including East Jerusalem,
and the Gaza Strip — render the occupation illegal
under international law and the implications of that
action. The study is timely, following the General
Assembly’s adoption of resolution 77/247 and the
request to the International Court of Justice for an
advisory opinion. The Committee supports the General
Assembly decision and urges the Secretary-General to
take the necessary follow-up action.
The Committee is also deeply concerned about
Israel’s punitive actions against the Palestinian
people, leadership and civil society in retaliation for
the adoption by the General Assembly of a resolution
requesting that the International Court of Justice render
an advisory opinion. We reject punitive measures
in response to a peaceful, multilateral request for an
advisory opinion or in retaliation for any General
Assembly resolution and call for the immediate reversal
of those deplorable actions.
Equally troubling are the continued demolitions
and seizures of Palestinian homes and structures in the
occupied West Bank, including East Jerusalem. The
Committee calls on Israel, as the occupying Power, to
stop such practices in line with its obligations under
international humanitarian law and international
human rights law. In that regard, we also consider that
the proposed dangerous judicial reforms by the Israeli
Government are further undermining the possibility
of legal recourse for Palestinians on violations of their
rights, including the right to land and property.
The Committee also remains increasingly
concerned by the political and security dynamics and
rising tensions. In the Gaza Strip, the situation remains
fragile, and the risk of escalation persists, despite the
commendable efforts by the United Nations and regional
and international partners, including Egypt and the
State of Qatar, to alleviate the deprivation and suffering
caused by the Israeli blockade, now nearing its sixteenth
year. We recognize that the United Nations Relief and
Works Agency for Palestine Refugees in the Near East
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

remains indispensable and a key stabilizing element in
the lives of thousands of Palestinians, and we call once
again for its sufficient and predictable funding.
The deepening occupation and the increased
violence, as well as the absence of a political horizon,
have empowered extremists and are eroding hopes
among Palestinians and Israelis alike that a just
resolution of the conflict is achievable. The situation is
unsustainable and needs immediate corrective action.
Our responsibilities obligate us, under the Charter of the
United Nations and the relevant resolutions, including
those of the Council, to respond. The Committee
welcomes the Special Coordinator’s call for Israelis
and Palestinians, along with the States of the region and
the broader international community, to take concrete
steps to change the negative trajectory on the ground,
as called for in resolution 2334 (2016).
The Committee stands ready to help garner the
support needed to advance the peace process towards
ending the Israeli occupation that began in 1967. It
appreciates Member States’ messages of solidarity at
the annual commemoration of the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People on 29 November
and their unwavering support for the four General
Assembly resolutions on the question of Palestine.
The Committee commits to implementing the renewed
General Assembly mandate and will commemorate
the seventy-fifth anniversary of the Nakba with a
high-level event to be held on 15 May 2023. We call
on the Security Council and all Member States to join
the commemoration and our efforts to promote the
realization of a just solution to that historic injustice.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Argentina.
Ms. Squeff (Argentina) (spoke in Spanish):
Argentina continues to believe that a solution to the
Palestinian-Israeli conflict can be achieved only
through negotiations between the two sides aimed
at reaching an agreement on the final-status issues
identified in the Oslo Accords — namely, Jerusalem,
the refugees, the settlements, the borders and security
measures. My delegation supports a peaceful, final and
comprehensive settlement of the Palestinian question on
the basis of a two-State solution within the 1967 borders
and in line with whatever the parties determine in the
course of negotiations, in accordance with the relevant
resolutions of the Security Council and the General
Assembly. We reaffirm our support for international

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

law and the inalienable right of the Palestinian people
to self-determination and to establish an independent
and viable State, recognized by all nations, as well as
the right of the State of Israel to live in peace alongside
its neighbours within secure and internationally
recognized borders.
We reiterate our concern at the persistent and
continuing growth of illegal Israeli settlements in the
occupied Palestinian territories and call for a halt to their
expansion. The gravity of the situation was recognized
by the Security Council in resolution 2334 (2016),
the terms of which we fully subscribe to. Argentina
also condemns the indiscriminate firing of rockets
from Gaza against civilians in Israel, as well as all
violent actions by Hamas and other armed groups. The
Palestinian leadership needs to sincerely address Israeli
security concerns. In that context, we recognize Israel’s
right to exercise self-defence, while emphasizing the
importance that, in taking such actions, Israel fully
respect its obligations under international humanitarian
law, in particular with regard to the principles of
distinction and proportionality.
With regard to the situation in East Jerusalem,
Argentina reaffirms the special status of Jerusalem
in accordance with the relevant resolutions, including
resolution 478 (1980). In that regard, we reject any
unilateral attempt to alter that status quo, in particular
with regard to the Old City, which has a special
significance for the three great monotheistic religions.
My country believes that the Old City must be a peaceful
meeting place and that Jews, Muslims and Christians
must be guaranteed free access to the holy sites. Any
attempt to deny or minimize the historic link and
profound significance of those sites for any of the three
monotheistic religions is completely unacceptable. That
will not contribute to the objective of finding a solution
to the conflict, but instead will reinforce prejudices and
mistrust between the parties. Argentina considers the
final status of Jerusalem to be an issue that should be
defined by the parties in bilateral negotiations.
With regard to the Syrian Golan, Argentina
maintains a principled position on the illegality of the
acquisition of territory by force and respect for the
territorial integrity of States. We firmly believe in the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes and
therefore consider it important to seek a negotiated
solution to the conflict between Syria and Israel with

23-0187619/21

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

the aim of ending the occupation of the Golan Heights
as soon as possible, in accordance with resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for peace.
Argentina has taken note with particular concern
of the recent measures adopted by the Government
of Israel against the Palestinian National Authority
as a result of the General Assembly’s recent adoption
of resolution 77/247, which requests the International
Court of Justice to render an advisory opinion. My
country voted in favour of that resolution. Israel’s use of
that request for an advisory opinion to the International
Court of Justice as an argument to support the sanctions
against Palestine is questionable.
Indeed, the Statute of the International Court of
Justice establishes, in Article 65, that the Court may
give an advisory opinion. At the same time, the Charter
of the United Nations establishes, in Article 96, that
the General Assembly may request the International
Court of Justice to give an advisory opinion on any
legal issue. General Assembly resolution 77/247
was adopted in accordance with international law.
Therefore, it is not appropriate for a State Member
of the United Nations — even if it disagrees with a
decision — to establish unilateral sanctions or other
types of measures of that nature against another State
based on what has been legitimately decided by that
organ. An action of that nature affects not only the
country against which such measures are taken but
also the entire international community, including
those States that did not vote in favour of that decision,
since it jeopardizes the very mechanism available to
countries to seek solutions by peaceful means in their
international relations.
Argentina believes that it is crucially important to
respect international law in general and United Nations
resolutions in particular. Consequently, Argentina
believes that the General Assembly’s decision as
expressed in resolution 77/247 must be respected.
We also believe that we must bear in mind that the
legal decisions issued in advisory opinions do not
have less weight or authority than those issued in
judgments of the International Court of Justice. The
international community should take into account what
the Court decides in accordance with the advisory
opinion requested.
In conclusion, Argentina wishes to once again urge
the Palestinians and Israelis to resume peace talks,
in good faith, with flexibility and in accordance with
20/21

18/01/2023

international law and relevant Security Council and
General Assembly resolutions, in order to seek an
agreement on outstanding issues relating to the final
status of Palestine in all its aspects.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of Brunei Darussalam.
Ms. Sulaiman (Brunei Darussalam): At the outset,
I would like to congratulate Japan on its presidency
of the Security Council for the month of January. I
would also like to thank Mr. Tor Wennesland, Special
Coordinator for the Middle East Peace Process, for his
comprehensive briefing.
The question of Palestine is as old as the
United Nations itself, and unfortunately that issue
remains unresolved. Decades after it was first addressed
by the United Nations, Palestinians continue to live
under hardship and duress, with daily struggles under
the occupying Power, and they continue to be deprived
of their inalienable rights to self-determination and
independence. Despite the various calls, debates and
resolutions in this Chamber, many have turned a blind
eye. That cannot continue.
As members of the international community, we
have the responsibility to help the Palestinians in their
long struggle for peace and justice. As the guarantor
of international peace and security, the Council has
a duty to uphold the Charter of the United Nations
and an obligation to ensure the implementation of its
resolutions, including those on the realization of the
two-State solution based on the pre-1967 borders. In
that regard, Brunei Darussalam respects the integrity
of the Security Council resolutions on Palestine, in
particular resolution 2334 (2016), which provides an
effective and viable path to peace, and we call for that
resolution to be fully respected and upheld.
We deeply condemn in the strongest terms the
recent incursion into the Al-Aqsa Mosque and its
courtyard led by the authorities and military forces
of the occupying Power. That deliberate provocation
and aggression clearly violated international law with
the intention of changing the status quo of Jerusalem
and Al-Haram Al-Sharif. We see that blatant action as
affecting the sanctity of the holy site, which is sacred to
many faiths. We are also deeply concerned that such an
act has the potential to exacerbate tensions and provoke
violence, which may result in the loss of innocent lives.
23-01876

18/01/2023

The situation in the Middle East, including the Palestinian question

Brunei Darussalam also strongly rejects and
condemns the continued annexation by the occupying
Power through its ongoing illegal settlement activities,
which have forced the displacement of Palestinian
families from their rightful homes and lands. Those
continued acts of provocation and aggression and
systematic violations of basic human rights violate
international law, accelerate the further deterioration
of the situation in Palestine and further diminish the
prospect of peace. Therefore, we once again call upon
the occupying Power to cease all acts of provocation
and aggression and fully comply with its obligations
under international law, including the Fourth
Geneva Convention.
In that regard, Brunei Darussalam reiterates its full
support for all international efforts aimed at achieving
a comprehensive and lasting peace and security in the
Middle East, in accordance with the rule of law as
enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations and all
relevant United Nations resolutions. We reaffirm our
commitment to a two-State solution, based on the pre1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as the capital of the
State of Palestine, and remain steadfast in our support
for the full membership of Palestine at the United
Nations as a step towards its recognition as a sovereign
independent State.
The President: I now give the floor to the
representative of the Republic of Korea.
Mr. Kim Dongjoon (Republic of Korea): I would
first like to thank the Special Coordinator for the
Middle East Peace Process, Mr. Tor Wennesland, for
his briefing.
At the outset, the Republic of Korea expresses
deep concern about the recent rising tensions around
the holy sites in Jerusalem, as well as the Israeli
Government’s recent decision to take several measures
against Palestine in response to General Assembly

S/PV.9246 (Resumption 1)

resolution 77/247, which requests the International
Court of Justice to render an advisory opinion relating
to the Israeli occupation of Palestinian territory.
Notwithstanding my delegation’s position to abstain
in the voting on that resolution, such measures are not
conducive to a two-State solution, in accordance with
relevant Security Council resolutions, international law
and bilateral agreements, which Korea continues to
support. Against that backdrop, my delegation believes
that measures that undermine relevant parties’ efforts
to create an environment in which to resume peace
talks should be reversed.
My delegation also takes this opportunity to
reiterate its position that the status quo of the holy sites
in Jerusalem must be respected. We call upon all sides
to exercise restraint and refrain from any actions that
would erode the likelihood of a two-State solution. My
delegation is deeply concerned about Israeli’s ongoing
settlement expansion, demolitions and evictions in the
occupied West Bank, in violation of relevant Security
Council resolutions and international law. Such actions
will not help address the root causes of the conflict
but will only exacerbate tensions and undermine the
foundation for a political solution.
My delegation also expresses serious concern at
the rising number of civilian casualties over the past
year. We condemn all terrorist attacks in the strongest
terms and reiterate that any violence against civilians
can in no way be justified. We furthermore remain
concerned about the deteriorating humanitarian
situation in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip due to
chronic political instability, as well as the recent hike in
commodity and energy prices. The Republic of Korea
expresses its strong support for the ongoing efforts of
the international community to meet the humanitarian
and development needs of the Palestinian people and
reaffirms its continued humanitarian support.
The meeting rose at 5 p.m.

23-0187621/21
