S/PRST/2005/38

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
2 August 2005
Original: English

Statement by the President of the Security Council
At the 5245th meeting of the Security Council, held on 2 August 2005, in
connection with the Council’s consideration of the item entitled “Reports of the
Secretary-General on the Sudan”, the President of the Security Council made the
following statement on behalf of the Council:
“The Security Council expresses its profound regret over the death of
First Vice President of Sudan Dr. John Garang de Mabior in a helicopter crash
on 30 July 2005. The Security Council offers its deepest sympathy and
condolences to the family of Dr. Garang and to the people and Government of
the Republic of Sudan.
“This is a time for the world community to come together to support
Dr. Garang’s vision of a united and peaceful Sudan. The Security Council
commends the perseverance and commitment which the parties in Sudan
demonstrated in achieving the Comprehensive Peace Agreement and the
promise of a new future. Over the last few years, Dr. Garang’s courageous
efforts were instrumental in ending the over 21-year civil war that cost the
lives of millions of Sudanese. His leadership offered hope of democracy and
peace for all people of Sudan.
“The Security Council calls on all Sudanese to honour his memory by
restoring peace and calm throughout Sudan. The Security Council trusts that,
despite the sudden death of Dr. Garang, the people of Sudan remain united and
continue to work for the consolidation of peace in the country by
implementing the Comprehensive Peace Agreement for which Dr. Garang
worked unstintingly.
“The Security Council stresses that the death of Dr. Garang should not
deter the struggle of the Sudanese people for justice and dignity; and
encourages the people of Sudan to refrain from violence and maintain peace in
the midst of mourning.
“The Security Council reiterates its determination to assist the Sudanese
people in their efforts to promote national reconciliation, resolve the conflict
in Darfur and restore peace and stability throughout the country, and to build a
prosperous and united Sudan.
“The Security Council looks to the international community to continue
its support for the people of Sudan to implement the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement, to resolve the humanitarian crisis in Darfur, and to proceed with
the reconstruction and rehabilitation process.”

05-44956 (E) 020805

*0544956*
