S/PV.9407

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9407th meeting

Monday, 28 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Ms. Dautllari
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Dai Bing
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Agyeman
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Fernandes
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Hauri
Mrs. Alhefeiti
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 18 August 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/611)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25283 (E)
*2325283*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

sequence, while taking into account the need for an
orderly process to be conducted in complete safety.

The meeting was called to order at 10.05 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda

(spoke in English)

The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Mali
Letter dated 18 August 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/611)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Mali to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. El-Ghassim
Wane, Special Representative of the Secretary-General
and Head of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali, and
Ms. Beatrice Abouya, Acting Regional Director of
Search for Common Ground.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/611, which contains the text of a
letter dated 18 August 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
I now give the floor to Mr. Wane.
Mr. Wane (spoke in French): I would like to thank
you, Madam President, for the opportunity to update
the Security Council today on the progress made in the
withdrawal of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
following the 30 June decision to terminate its mandate,
as requested by the Malian authorities. My remarks are
intended to complement the Secretary-General’s letter
of 18 August (S/2023/611).
Immediately after the adoption of resolution
2690 (2023), which called for the withdrawal of the
Mission to be completed by 31 December, MINUSMA,
in coordination with the Secretariat, established an
integrated working group to prepare a plan for the
Mission’s drawdown and withdrawal. The plan provides
for the withdrawal and repatriation of the personnel and
equipment deployed in MINUSMA’s areas of operation
according to a precise timetable and a specific
2/18

28/08/2023

Given the central importance of cooperation with
the Malian authorities in ensuring that the undertaking is
conducted efficiently, I met with the Minister for Foreign
Affairs of Mali on 3 July to discuss the requirements for
a safe and orderly process. Subsequently, coordination
mechanisms, consisting of representatives from both
the transitional Government and MINUSMA, were
put in place at the technical and political levels to
coordinate all aspects of the withdrawal and to ensure
that the 31 December deadline is respected. I commend
the Malian authorities for the cooperation and support
they have extended so far.
Closing a mission built over a decade in a period
of six months is a complex and ambitious endeavour.
In concrete terms, it entails the repatriation of
12,947 uniformed personnel, the separation of 1,786
civilian staff, the repatriation or relocation of a load
of approximately 5,500 sea containers of contingentand United Nations-owned equipment and almost
4,000 vehicles, as well as the closure and handover
of 12 camps and one temporary operating base to the
Malian civilian authorities. The task is made even
more challenging by a host of other constraints linked
to geography, climate, logistics and infrastructure. To
that, one should add the serious risks associated with
the prevailing security situation.
As outlined in the Secretary-General’s letter, the
drawdown and closure of the Mission is unfolding in
two phases: the period through 31 December; and,
following that, the liquidation period, which will begin
on 1 January 2024.
The first phase of the programme and withdrawal
began on 17 July, focusing on the closure of the
outposts that are smallest and furthest from our
supercamps in Timbuktu, Gao and Mopti and
shrinking our geographical footprint by 25 per cent. On
25 August — a few days ago — we completed that first
phase with the closure of the Ménaka base. Earlier this
month, we successively closed the temporary operating
base in Ogossagou, in the Bandiagara region of central
Mali, as well as the camps in Ber and Goundam, in the
Timbuktu region.
The departure of MINUSMA from each of those
camps was accompanied by the signing, with the
designated civilian representatives of the Malian
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9407

authorities, of documents that attest to the state of
the vacated camps and the fulfilment of the Mission’s
environmental obligations. In that respect, I would like
to emphasize that the Mission is making all reasonable
efforts to complete environmental remediation and
the removal of hazardous materials prior to returning
premises to the authorities, in spite of serious time
constraints and the progressive reduction of the security
umbrella under which we are operating.

countries, while 79 containers of materials and
equipment have already been transferred out of Mali.
A further reduction in uniformed personnel is expected
by the end of September. With regard to civilian staff, in
accordance with the Staff Regulations and Rules of the
United Nations, 291 civilian staff members, including
United Nations volunteers — approximately 33 per
cent of our civilian staff — will have been separated by
30 September 2023.

In addition, negotiations are under way to finalize
an overarching framework agreement that will spell
out the obligations of the two parties in line with the
relevant United Nations instruments and policies.

The second phase of the downsizing and
withdrawal process, which we are now beginning,
will run until 15 December 2023. It will focus on the
closure of six bases: Tessalit, Aguelhok and Kidal in
the north of Mali; Douentza and Mopti in the centre of
the country; and Ansongo in the east. The personnel,
equipment and materials concerned will be redeployed
to the Timbuktu, Gao and Bamako supercamps before
being repatriated to their respective countries. That
phase will be extremely difficult. Convoys to evacuate
personnel, equipment and materials from Tessalit,
Aguelhok and Kidal to Gao, for example, will have to
travel 563 kilometres in each direction for Tessalit; 415
kilometres for Aguelhok; and 352 kilometres for Kidal.
At least 1,050 trucks will be needed to transport all the
equipment and materials belonging to the contingents
and those belonging to the United Nations. In addition
to that is the fact that the terrain is difficult and
insecurity omnipresent.

(spoke in French)
Significant progress has been made to date, and we
remain on track to close the Mission by 31 December
2023. However, there have been difficulties in
implementing the first phase of the withdrawal plan.
In that connection, our experience with the
closure of Ber camp was revealing. The final convoy
of peacekeepers, equipment and materials that left
Ber to return to Timbuktu took 51 hours to cover
the 57-kilometre route, owing to the unfavourable
terrain — a situation exacerbated by the rainy season
and overall insecurity. The convoy was attacked twice
by unidentified armed elements, resulting in four
peacekeepers injured and three vehicles damaged
before they reached Timbuktu.
The withdrawal from Ber also proved difficult in
the political sense, as the Malian authorities and the
signatory movements to the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali disagreed on the fate of the
camp after MINUSMA’s departure. The Mission, for its
part, had to bring forward its departure from the camp,
which took place on 13 August instead of 15 August as
initially planned, owing to the spread of the fighting to
the Ber area and the risks that the situation posed for
peacekeepers’ safety.
Similarly, convoys carrying supplies and equipment
from our bases at Goundam in the Timbuktu region and
Ogossagou in central Mali were targeted by improvised
explosive devices, while the final convoy from Gao
to Ménaka was also targeted by unidentified armed
elements. Fortunately, there was no material damage or
loss of life as a result of those attacks.
With the end of the first phase, we have repatriated
a total of 1,096 uniformed personnel to their respective

As well as security concerns, there are logistical
constraints on the withdrawal of materials and
equipment from Timbuktu. We will not be able to
transport more than six containers a day using barges
on the Niger River during the navigable months, which
run from August to November each year. With such
limitations, withdrawing as planned the 2,000 loads
from Timbuktu to transit zones abroad will require the
identification of additional routes.
The situation in the Niger is also having an impact
on our withdrawal plan, which relies on the use of the
Cotonou and Lomé transit zones. It is essential that we
are able to transport equipment and materials through
the Niger to those ports for subsequent repatriation to
the troop- and police-contributing countries concerned.
In addition to logistical and security constraints,
the closure of MINUSMA also has a political
dimension. That was to be expected, given that the
Mission’s presence in the northern outposts contributed
to the signatory parties’ compliance with the ceasefire
and security arrangements, while also supporting

23-252833/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

the implementation of the 2015 Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation.
The withdrawal is taking place against the backdrop
of the paralysis of the peace Agreement’s monitoring
structures, which have not met since November 2022,
and by a serious lack of trust between the parties.
Unsurprisingly, the parties have adopted divergent
positions on the fate of the camps to be liberated by
the Mission. In that respect, the transitional authorities
have informed the Mission that they intend to take
back all the MINUSMA camps once they have been
evacuated, stressing that the peace Agreement does not
abrogate the State’s responsibility to assume control
of its territory in order to protect the population and
ensure security. The signatory movements, on the other
hand, in particular the Coordination des mouvements de
l’Azawad, have invoked the 2014 security arrangements
to object to the deployment of Malian armed forces in
the areas they control and insist on the need to operate
within the framework of the peace Agreement.
In the context of resolution 2690 (2023),
MINUSMA has reminded and continues to remind all
stakeholders of the tight timetable for the Mission’s
departure and of the parameters underlying the closure
of its camps, including the fact that the bases are to
be legally transferred to the Malian State. In addition,
the Mission continues to encourage the parties to
reach an agreement in order to avoid unnecessary
incidents, the consequences of which could be
significant. Such incidents would indeed complicate
the drawdown process, adversely affect the work of
United Nations entities after the closure of the Mission
and seriously compromise the prospects for resuming
the implementation of the peace Agreement, which
is a cornerstone of long-term stabilization in Mali. It
is hardly necessary to underscore the urgency of the
situation, given the very short deadline for the closure
of the Mission and the limited flexibility we have in our
withdrawal process.
It is encouraging to note that the parties involved
are aware of the delicate nature of the process and the
need to manage it carefully. In several meetings with
me and Under-Secretary-General Lacroix during his
visit to Mali two weeks ago, the Malian authorities
stressed that they had no intention of having any
confrontations with the signatory movements and
underscored their commitment to dialogue, in order
to resolve any problems that might arise, and to the
efforts being made to that end. Similarly, the signatory
4/18

28/08/2023

movements have expressed their readiness to resolve
differences peacefully and contribute to the creation
of the conditions necessary for a resumption of the
peace process. It is now incumbent on all the parties to
transform those expressions of goodwill into concrete
measures with a view to preventing a crisis that is
as dangerous as it is inopportune, and to advancing
the cause of peace and reconciliation in Mali, while
building on the progress made over the past eight
years, including by ending the armed conflict. Leading
members of the Arab and Tuareg communities in
Bamako launched an initiative last week to facilitate
dialogue and understanding between the signatory
movements and the transitional authorities in order to
prevent escalation and preserve the peace agreement.
Developments linked to the Mission’s withdrawal
highlight the importance of the work being done
in collaboration with the transitional authorities on
the transfer of the tasks previously carried out by
the Mission. From 2 to 4 August, together with the
Government of Mali, MINUSMA hosted a three-day
round table on activities in support of the transition,
the peace process, the restoration of State authority,
the promotion and protection of human rights and other
cross-cutting issues. Representatives of the United
Nations country team, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel, the African Union, the
Economic Community of West African States and the
European Union capacity-building mission in Mali
attended the meeting. The aim was to better explain
the work that has been done and assess the prospects
and practical possibility for the Malian authorities, in
particular, and, where appropriate, the United Nations
country team and other stakeholders, to continue tasks
carried out by MINUSMA until now. Government
representatives reaffirmed that they would assume
their responsibilities. Members of the United Nations
country team also expressed their readiness to support
the authorities, based on the United Nations Sustainable
Development Cooperation Framework 2020–2024, and
said that they would take over some of MINUSMA’s
residual programmes, while stressing the need for
additional resources.
Discussions are under way on how to consolidate and
preserve the results achieved in support of our Malian
partners, while seeking to maintain an environment
conducive to long-term United Nations engagement
with Mali and the wider region. However, challenges
will remain, given the tight timetable for the Mission’s
withdrawal, as well as the immediate cessation of its
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

substantive mandate under resolution 2690 (2023),
which has not allowed for a transition period as such.
In that context, it is important to recognize that some
tasks will not be able to be transferred effectively.
As MINUSMA enters its final chapter, I should
not conclude without expressing my gratitude to the
troop- and police-contributing countries for their
remarkable commitment. I pay tribute to all our Blue
Helmets, many of whom made the ultimate sacrifice for
the cause of peace and stability in Mali. MINUSMA
has made a tangible impact on the ground and provided
invaluable support to the authorities and the people
of Mali, in what has proved to be one of the most
challenging peacekeeping operations ever undertaken
by the United Nations.
MINUSMA is leaving Mali, but the United
Nations, through its agencies, funds and programmes,
will remain in the country. Their work has never been
more vital than it is today. I welcome the assurances
given by the Malian authorities of their commitment
to ensuring the safety of United Nations personnel. I
call on Member States to consider additional voluntary
contributions to the United Nations country team
and humanitarian actors to enable them to continue
providing assistance to people in need and supporting
Mali’s development efforts.
The President: I thank Mr. Wane for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Abouya.
Ms. Abouya (spoke in French): I extend my
warmest greetings to you, Madam President, and I
would like to express my gratitude for the invitation
and opportunity to speak to Council members today
on the topic of the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the current situation in Mali.
I am addressing the Council as someone involved
in peacebuilding and as the Acting Regional Director
of Search for Common Ground, a non-governmental
organization that was established some 40 years ago
with the goal of supporting peacebuilding efforts and
social cohesion. We make long-term commitments to
building healthy, safe and just societies in areas where
local populations face violent conflict.
My commitment to peace is rooted in my personal
experiences. I have repeatedly experienced and
suffered the consequences of political conflict in my
country of origin. The thoughts I want to share today

S/PV.9407

are based on the experience of my Malian colleagues
and partners, but the opinions are my own. I would like
to take a moment to acknowledge and salute the efforts
by all — members of the military, civilians, Malians,
international citizens — who have made sacrifices for
the peace and prosperity of Mali. We all have a duty
to honour their sacrifices in the fight for peace in
defence of human dignity and in ensuring the right of
every Malian to build a peaceful future. MINUSMA’s
withdrawal has now created an opportunity to reshape
approaches and responses to the conflict. It is time for
the United Nations and the Governments represented
here to redouble their efforts in support of the Malian
people. It will require careful planning and coordination
in order to continue to protect human life and dignity
and create conditions for lasting peace. To do that, we
would like to propose four elements that we believe
are essential.
First, any action taken must be based on a
commitment to ensuring that the Mission’s withdrawal
does not jeopardize the efforts of the Malian authorities
and MINUSMA to ensure peace and security.
Secondly, the United Nations and the international
community must demonstrate creativity and flexibility
in order to adapt a financing mechanism that can
ensure that basic services and economic development
resources remain available. That means that
MINUSMA’s financing for civilian and stabilization
projects should be maintained in the country through
mechanisms such as the Peacebuilding Fund and others
so that interventions can continue in support of local
communities, together with civil society both nationally
and internationally.
Thirdly, we must consider how the United Nations
and the international community can reinvest funding
allocated to MINUSMA to continue support for building
strong institutions that can ensure the rule of law.
Lastly, we recommend that civilian mediation
and conflict resolution efforts be strengthened in
order to establish frank dialogue, especially within
local communities.
As we enter a new era in international cooperation
on security in Mali, I am asking for the Council’s
ongoing support for the Malian people. Although it
may seem far away, this international body’s decisions
in the coming days will have a direct impact on the
lives of the Malian population. We must not lose sight
of the reason for our meeting today, which is to help

23-252835/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

the Malian people to lead prosperous lives in security.
Let us keep their needs and requests at the centre of
our discussions and support them in their pursuit of a
better future.
I once again thank the Security Council for
listening to me today, and I hope that the initiatives and
decisions taken today will lead to a lasting peace for
Mali and the Sahel.
The President: I thank Ms. Abouya for her briefing.
I would like to draw the attention of speakers
to paragraph 22 of the note by the President of the
Security Council on its working methods (S/2017/507),
which encourages all participants in Council meetings
to deliver their statements in five minutes or less, in
line with the Security Council’s commitment to making
more effective use of open meetings.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and Ms. Abouya for their briefings.
France takes note of the letter of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/611) on the withdrawal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). We pay tribute to the
work done by the women and men of peace in Mali, and
we pay homage to the memory of the peacekeepers who
lost their lives.
The Malian transitional authorities have pledged
to ensure the safe withdrawal of the Mission, with
no restrictions on its movements or supplies, in full
compliance with resolution 2690 (2023), and it is
imperative that they respect that commitment on the
ground. I recall that the status-of-forces agreement
remains in force until the last MINUSMA element has
left Mali.
I would also like to express our concern about the
Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali. The
clashes in Ber, involving mercenaries from the Wagner
Group, are a serious violation of the ceasefire. France
calls on the parties to avoid any escalation and resume
discussions under the aegis of international mediation.
The United Nations must remain fully committed to
supporting the agreement emanating from the Algiers
process, and France would like it to have every resource
necessary to that end.
6/18

28/08/2023

The Security Council must continue to monitor
the situation in Mali with extreme vigilance. We must
fully support the efforts of the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS) to ensure that the
political transition is completed within the agreed time
frame and allows for the democratic election of civilian
authorities. We understand the concern of the countries
in the region about the withdrawal of MINUSMA, as
the ECOWAS Heads of State have called for in-depth
reflection on its consequences.
Lastly and most important, we must remain attentive
to the impact of the withdrawal on the daily lives of
the Malian population, on access to humanitarian
assistance and on the protection of human rights.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): I thank Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Wane and Ms. Abouya for their
insightful briefings. I also welcome the participation of
the representative of Mali at this meeting.
We are at a critical juncture for the peace and
stability of Mali and the Sahel region. We are already
seeing the adverse impact of the hasty withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). The
deteriorating security situation around the Ber camp is
deeply concerning. The 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali is the only existing framework
to achieve durable peace and reconciliation and must
be upheld. Japan calls on all parties to refrain from any
actions that could jeopardize the Agreement.
Today I want to reiterate three points, as MINUSMA
withdraws from Mali.
First, concerning the orderly and safe withdrawal
of the Mission, Japan is deeply disturbed by attacks on
withdrawing MINUSMA convoys and the restrictions
imposed on MINUSMA, including on freedom of
movement and access to their imports and exports.
While recognizing the frequent consultations held
at various levels on the withdrawal process, Japan
reiterates its call on the Malian authorities to cooperate
fully with the United Nations and stresses the need to
respect all provisions of the status-of-forces agreement
until the final element of MINUSMA has departed
from Mali.
Secondly, with regard to the smooth and proper
transfer of MINUSMA’s tasks, long-term United
Nations engagement in Mali is essential, and Japan
commends ongoing efforts for the transfer. At the same
time, we are deeply concerned to learn that some tasks
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

performed by the Mission may not be handed over,
owing to the compressed timeline for the Mission’s
withdrawal. We call on the Malian authorities, the
Mission, the United Nations country team, the United
Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel and
other relevant stakeholders to closely coordinate and
collaborate further in the coming months.
Thirdly, with regard to the importance of adhering to
international obligations, Japan notes that MINUSMA’s
tasks will be transferred primarily to the transitional
Government. At the same time, the capacities of the
United Nations to deliver humanitarian aid and support
the protection of civilians and human rights will be
severely affected by the Mission’s rapid withdrawal.
In that connection, we underscore the obligation of the
Malian authorities and foreign security personnel to
comply with international law, including international
human rights law and international humanitarian law,
in all its operations.
The deteriorating security situation in Mali and
its effect on the region require closer attention by
the Security Council. The Council must continue its
engagement with the Malian authorities and regional
actors. Safeguarding and promoting the implementation
of the 2015 peace agreement and ensuring the return
to constitutional order by March 2024 are crucial.
Japan emphasizes the importance of the continued
involvement of the entire United Nations system,
including UNOWAS, and notes the call for the requisite
financial and resource arrangements.
I conclude by reaffirming Japan’s commitment
to engage constructively in the discussion and to
contribute to sustainable peace in Mali and beyond.
Mr. Agyeman (Ghana): I have the honour to deliver
this statement on behalf of the African members of the
Security Council (A3), namely, Gabon, Mozambique
and Ghana.
We welcome the multi-layered and integrated plan
of withdrawal articulated by the Secretary-General
for the transfer of the tasks of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) by 31 December and thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General El-Ghassim
Wane for his insightful briefing on the current situation.
We also thank Ms. Beatrice Abouya, the civil society
briefer, for her perspective. We further welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Mali
at this meeting.

S/PV.9407

As we very well know, the withdrawal of
MINUSMA from Mali is taking place within a very
short window of time and against a challenging and
dynamic backdrop. Incidents of terrorist attacks
against civilians and security personnel persist.
The implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process remains challenging. Misinformation and
disinformation campaigns continue to complicate efforts
to stabilize communities, protect civilians and provide
humanitarian support to vulnerable populations. We
also agree with the observation made by many that the
current situation in the Niger will further complicate
the security and humanitarian situation in the region
and the MINUSMA liquidation process.
We nonetheless remain confident in the United
Nations capacity to follow through on its objectives
for a safe, orderly and coordinated withdrawal of the
Mission, while preserving a United Nations long-term
engagement in the country and mitigating the risk
associated with the spillover effects of the crisis into
neighbouring countries. We appreciate the system-wide
priority that has been accorded to the drawdown and
withdrawal process. We encourage the full cooperation
of the Malian transitional authorities, as required under
the status-of-forces agreement and resolution 2690
(2023) in support of the withdrawal of the Mission.
In the furtherance of the objectives of the
withdrawal plan, the A3 would like to highlight four
key points.
First, we welcome the phased implementation
of the drawdown, which consolidates uniformed
personnel and equipment in key camps to be followed
by their repatriation. We commend the efforts already
made in repatriating approximately 1,096 uniformed
personnel as of today, and we stand in solidarity with
the four peacekeepers who have sustained injuries
during the course of the withdrawal process. Despite
the challenges in the theatre, we believe a withdrawal
by 31 December is still possible.
However, we note the growing tensions that have
emerged between the transitional Government of Mali
and one signatory movement the Coordination des
mouvements de l’Azawad, as well as the uneasiness of
several signatory movements. We urge the transitional
authorities to renew their engagement with the signatory
movements to preserve the ceasefire agreement and the
commitment to the peace process.

23-252837/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

In the light of the gaps that the withdrawal of
MINUSMA would create, we urge an early solution
for mechanisms for monitoring the ceasefire and
monitoring and reporting on human rights. We
emphasize that the stability, unity and integrity of Mali
depends on the transitional authorities’ capacity to
carry all significant segments of the population along
in an inclusive manner.
We also emphasize the important responsibility
of the international mediation mechanism to hold the
peace agreement in place by sustaining dialogue and
coordination between the transitional Government and
the signatory movements. That is essential in preserving
consensus and mitigating any adverse impact that
MINUSMA’s withdrawal may create on the further
implementation of the peace agreement. In that context,
we note the concerns regarding the continuation of the
measures decided by the Council for listing individuals
who impair the peace process in Mali. We are, however,
of the view that in the present challenging security and
political situation, the measures provide a necessary
safeguard for the peace agreement.
Secondly, the A3 notes the Malian transitional
authorities’ resolve to assume, after the withdrawal,
responsibility for tasks such as the political transition
and elections, support to the peace process, the
restoration and extension of State authority and support
to the stabilization of the centre regions, and the
protection of civilians and human rights.
We also note the transitional authority’s
determination to restore constitutional order, in
accordance with the timelines agreed with the
Economic Community of West African States, and we
underscore the need for the further strengthening of
national institutions. We welcome the United Nations
country team’s readiness to work with the transitional
Government to support its efforts, in line with the
United Nations Sustainable Development Cooperation
Framework 2020–2024, and look forward to the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
(UNOWAS) playing its the good offices role for the
peace process.
While recognizing the important role that UNOWAS
and the United Nations country team can play in
filling gaps, we note their need for adequate logistical,
operational and funding support. We particularly
encourage funding towards electoral support and the
United Nations Development Programme basket fund
to support the successful completion of the political
8/18

28/08/2023

transition and a return to constitutional order, which
would establish the basis for sustainable peace and
stability in Mali.
Thirdly, in noting the challenges that the withdrawal
of MINUSMA may pose for the protection of civilians,
even as the Malian authorities assume full charge of their
primary responsibility, the A3 re-echoes the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal for flexibility in the transfer of residual
funds, as well as an increase in donor funding, to better
support the authorities and the United Nations agencies
to contain the multidimensional challenges Mali faces.
We remain equally worried about the deteriorating
humanitarian situation arising from increasing incidents
of terrorist attacks which has increased the number of
people in need of humanitarian assistance to more than
5 million persons. Concerned by the widening funding
gap, we urge donors to help meet the $751.5 million
target required for the humanitarian response plan. We
also encourage support to relevant Malian institutions
to tackle other aggravating factors on the humanitarian
situation such as climate change.
Lastly, it is important, as we contemplate the
legacy of MINUSMA, to prioritize measures that
would sustain momentum in tackling the root causes
of the crisis in Mali, including the governance and
development deficits. We see value in enhancing
support for the work of the Peacebuilding Commission
at this critical time, including funding support to enable
it to empower critical agents of change, such as women
and youth, to contribute to national decision-making,
conflict prevention and peaceful elections, among
other areas. The role of civil society organizations also
continues to be essential in support of efforts to address
the political, security and humanitarian situation.
In conclusion, the A3 encourages the full
cooperation of the Malian transitional authorities in
authorizing and facilitating ground and air transport,
as well as customs clearance, for a smooth and timely
withdrawal of MINUSMA.
Gabon, Mozambique and Ghana reaffirm their
common support for the plan laid out by the SecretaryGeneral in the transfer of MINUSMA’s task and believe
that the timely provision of logistics and funding would
be a critical element for the successful execution of the
plan. We reaffirm also our respect for the sovereignty,
territorial integrity and unity of Mali and underscore
the need for all stakeholders to support the execution of
those essential tasks.
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for his
briefing, and I pay tribute to the courage of all United
Nations personnel in Mali, who continue to face
constant threats. I also thank Ms. Abouya for sharing
her valuable perspective with us today.
The complexity of the withdrawal of the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is unprecedented
and takes place amid a deteriorating context of
terrorist violence and human rights violations and
abuses, including an upward trend in conflict-related
sexual violence.

S/PV.9407

Finally, as we have said before in the Security
Council, the Russian mercenary group, the Wagner
Group, is directly linked to human rights atrocities in
Mali, including the systematic use of conflict-related
sexual violence. As illustrated by recent events in
Russia, they are part of the problem, not the solution, in
Mali and beyond.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I thank
Special Representative of the Secretary-General
Wane for his briefing. I also listened carefully to the
statement by the representative of the non-governmental
organization. We welcome the participation of the
Permanent Representative of Mali in today’s meeting.

The Council mandated MINUSMA to conduct
a safe and orderly withdrawal, with the objective of
completing the process by 31 December. We continue
to believe that the Council should stand ready to
revise the timetable if needed. A rushed withdrawal
that imperils the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali emanating from the Algiers
process and puts peacekeepers’ lives at risk will have
security implications for the whole region. The recent
ceasefire violations in Ber demonstrate the pressing
need for meaningful, structured dialogue among all
parties to the peace agreement prior to the handover of
MINUSMA sites, in particular in the Kidal region.

As pointed out by Special Representative Wane, the
political peace process in Mali is at a critical juncture.
The United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) is in the
process of withdrawing from Mali. The international
community should put the overall peace and stability of
Mali and the region first, help Mali address challenges
of all kinds and facilitate deeper cooperation between
the United Nations and Mali in the new context.

The United Nations continues to have a formal
and critical role in supporting the peace agreement in
Mali. We welcome the Secretary-General’s transition
plan, which is an important step to help guide efforts to
preserve the legacy of the Mission and its achievements
over the past decade.

Secretary-General Guterres recently submitted
a proposal to the Security Council for a plan on the
transfer of MINUSMA’s tasks . The United Nations
should continue to communicate fully with the Malian
authorities and all other relevant parties. Any relevant
plan should respect the will of Mali and be conducive to
maintaining the stability of the country. At present, as it
is preparing for its January elections, promoting political
reform and implementing the Peace Agreement, Mali is
facing many difficulties. The international community
should respect Mali’s sovereignty and ownership and
provide constructive support based on Mali’s actual
needs. China encourages regional organizations, such
as the Economic Community of West African States,
to strengthen communication with Mali, in order to
create synergies.

We call on the United Nations to redouble its efforts
to support meaningful consultations and mediation
among all parties to the peace agreement, and we
urge all parties to engage in dialogue in good faith. To
deliver the United Nations ongoing role in support of
the peace process, the United Kingdom supports the
continued presence of a United Nations entity dedicated
to supporting an inclusive peace process in Mali.
We strongly urge the transitional authorities to
engage with the United Nations proposals for ongoing
support for the benefit of the Malian people. The United
Nations should accelerate consultations with Mali on
a detailed strategy for the future of United Nations
support to the peace agreement and other key tasks,
including delivering on the political transition and the
protection and the promotion of human rights.

I would like to highlight the following points.
First, there is a need to continue to support the
political peace process in Mali.

Secondly, China has taken note of the fact that
MINUSMA is carrying out the withdrawal operation,
and the Secretariat is formulating a withdrawal plan.
The Mission’s camps are scattered across the country,
with a large number of personnel and equipment making
the withdrawal task a heavy one. MINUSMA and the
United Nations Secretariat should strictly implement

23-252839/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

the mandate given by the Security Council, strengthen
communication with the Malian Government and
troop-contributing countries, and refine the plans for
the handover of camps, withdrawal of personnel and
the liquidation of assets, with a view to implementing
them carefully.
Ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers
and United Nations assets is a top priority. The recent
attack on the MINUSMA convoy withdrawing from
the base at Ber resulted in injuries to a number of
peacekeepers. MINUSMA should take this lesson
seriously, adopt practical measures to improve its
security capacity and make every effort to ensure the
safe and orderly withdrawal of the Mission.
Thirdly, China commends the active counterterrorism efforts of the Malian authorities. At present,
the political situation in the Sahel region is volatile.
Terrorist and extremist forces are taking advantage
of the situation and threatening regional stability. The
countries in the region should resolve their conflicts and
differences and unite to meet the challenges. After the
withdrawal of MINUSMA, the international community
should not stand aside and do nothing with regard to
efforts undertaken by Mali and other countries in the
region to counter terrorism and instability. Instead,
it should continue to provide support, equipment and
logistics and funding in order to enhance the capacity
of the Malian authorities to combat terrorism and
protect civilians.
It is also necessary to continue support for the
other countries of West Africa and the Sahel region in
order to maintain the momentum in counter-terrorism
and security cooperation, revitalizing cooperation
mechanisms and maintaining common security. The
focus should be on addressing the root causes of the
conflict. The United Nations country team and the
United Nations Development Programme and other
agencies should, in accordance with their respective
mandates, provide greater support in conflict reduction,
development, food security and the protection of women
and children. International humanitarian agencies
and major donors should maintain the scale of their
assistance to Mali and avoid attaching any political
conditions to their assistance.
Ms. Dautllari (Albania): I thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane for
his comprehensive update on the ongoing withdrawal
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I commend
10/18

28/08/2023

the dedication shown by peacekeepers and personnel
who have worked very hard towards fostering peace
and stability in Mali over the past decade. We also
thank Ms. Beatrice Abouya for her briefing.
Albania takes note of the letter of the SecretaryGeneral outlining the plan for MINUSMA’s transfer of
tasks (S/2023/611) and is encouraged by the priority the
United Nations has shown in managing this complex
process. Allow me to focus on three key areas.
First, the importance of a safe and orderly
withdrawal of personnel and peacekeepers from Mali
cannot be understated. The volatile security situation,
compounded by the presence of terrorist groups,
presents further challenges for MINUSMA. Therefore,
the Malian transition Government’s unwavering
cooperation is required to facilitate a withdrawal by
31 December. We are concerned by the recent hostilities
in Ber and condemn the attacks against MINUSMA,
which pose a significant risk to the safety and security
of personnel. Albania stresses the need for coordinated
mechanisms with the transition Government for
the handover of tasks and sites and urges the full
cooperation of signatory armed groups.
Secondly, we are deeply concerned about the
fragility of the 2015 Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali. We urge parties to remain
committed to implementing the Agreement and
refrain from engaging in hostile activities, violating
the ceasefire. As the Secretary-General highlighted,
such tensions risk seriously undermining the entire
peace process.
As MINUSMA departs, many gaps will be created
in Mali. It is therefore crucial that the transition
Government focus on advancing the political
transition and making tangible gains so as to return to
constitutional order, within the timelines agreed with
the Economic Community of West African States,
while creating the conditions for an inclusive political
and civil space.
Thirdly, in the face of persistent human rights
violations and abuses in Mali, we call on the transition
Government to abide by its international obligations
to protect civilians and carry out security operations
in accordance with international humanitarian law. In
this regard, the partnership with the Wagner Group
raises serious concerns and will not bring any peace or
stability to Mali. Similarly, the humanitarian situation
is dire and will be further affected by the withdrawal of
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

MINUSMA. Humanitarian assistance and guaranteed
access remain imperative.
In conclusion, Albania commends the United
Nations for leading a swift withdrawal and stresses that
United Nations and Security Council engagement in
Mali remains critical. We call on the Malian authorities
to fully cooperate with MINUSMA to ensure an orderly
and safe withdrawal, while fully respecting the Status
of Forces Agreement until the final departure.
Ms. Gatt (Malta): I also thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Wane and
Ms. Abouya for their briefings.
Malta reiterates the importance of an orderly, safe
and effective withdrawal of MINUSMA in accordance
with resolution 2690 (2023), and we express our
support for the Secretary-General and the work on the
plan of transferring the Mission’s tasks. We commend
the swift actions already taken towards this end, while
underlining the critical need to ensure the safety and
security of United Nations personnel throughout the
entire withdrawal process. We further emphasize that,
until MINUSMA’s complete departure, its freedom
of movement in accordance with the Status of Forces
Agreement is not negotiable. Access to any imports
and exports required by the Mission for its withdrawal
should not be restricted in any way.
Malta remains deeply concerned about the vacuum
that may arise in the context of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, in particular the
impact that MINUSMA’s withdrawal will have on its
implementation. We call upon the Malian transition
Government and parties to the Agreement to revive
diplomatic efforts in a bid to avoid further confrontation.
We expect full cooperation from Mali in safeguarding
the Peace Agreement, while also welcoming discussions
between the Secretariat, the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS), international
mediation and regional organizations on the new
role of UNOWAS within the Agreement Monitoring
Committee. We also call on all parties to the Agreement
to respect the ongoing withdrawal process and refrain
from committing any acts that could jeopardize United
Nations personnel during this delicate stage. We
denounce the recent incidents in Ber earlier this month
and call for unity, peace and stability.
Malta strongly condemns all human rights
abuses and violations of international humanitarian
law. Preventing and responding to conflict-related

S/PV.9407

sexual violence and grave violations against children
must be given priority. We urge the Malian transition
Government to enhance protection for women and
children, especially in central and northern Mali and to
accelerate the implementation of the joint communiqué
and action plan to prevent and respond to conflictrelated sexual violence. We also call for the swift
adoption and implementation of a joint plan to prevent
all six grave violations against children.
We recognize and appreciate the efforts of the
United Nations country team and other United Nations
bodies in supporting the transfer of monitoring and
reporting tasks in relation to the protection of women
and children. At the same time, we underline the critical
need for the Malian authorities to work together with
the United Nations system to ensure the protection of
civilians and to monitor, report and evaluate the human
rights situation in the country.
We support UNOWAS and the United Nations
country team in taking on tasks previously under
MINUSMA’s mandate and acknowledge the need for
additional financing and resources to properly fulfil
those functions.
In conclusion, Malta reiterates its support to
MINUSMA and its dedicated personnel for their
steadfast commitment over the past 10 years. The
absence of MINUSMA in the country will require a
renewed approach and commitment by the transition
Government, including the restoration of constitutional
order by March 2024, which remains central in the
path towards stability and peace in the country and
the region.
Malta looks forward to further updates to the
Council in the coming months.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Special Representative of the
Secretary-General El-Ghassim Wane and Ms. Beatrice
Abouya for their briefings.
We carefully read the letter of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2023/611) regarding the modalities for
the drawdown the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA).
We thank the United Nations Secretariat and
MINUSMA staff for their efforts to implement the
decisions of the Security Council in close coordination
with Malian leadership. We note that the plan for
the withdrawal of peacekeepers provided in the

23-2528311/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

letter is indeed within the framework established by
the provisions of resolution 2690 (2023), which we
supported, guided by the fact that it took into account
the main concerns of the Malian side.
We stress the need for strict adherence to the
deadlines set out in this document for the withdrawal
of the main United Nations forces, which must be
completed by 31 December. The process of the
subsequent dismantling of MINUSMA’s infrastructure,
planned for the year and a half following the closure
of the Mission must be equally streamlined. We look
forward to further proposals from the SecretaryGeneral on optimizing Mission costs until its drawdown
is completed.
We understand that the Mission’s withdrawal is
taking place under difficult conditions, including due
to the actions of terrorist groups. We condemn the
attacks carried out against peacekeepers during this
period and wish a speedy recovery to the wounded
Burkinabe personnel.
At the same time, we note that, overall, the first
phase of the implementation of resolution 2690 (2023)
was completed without serious incident. We trust
that the second phase of the process, due to begin on
1 September, which involves a larger-scale movement
of Blue Helmets to the Gao and Bamako regions, will
proceed in a similarly orderly and organized manner.
We call on all Malian parties to refrain from
engaging in armed provocations or ramping up militant
rhetoric during this important period for Mali. We
recall that the United Nations peacekeeping Mission is
authorized to transfer its infrastructure exclusively to
the official authorities of the host country.
With regard to the question of the modalities for the
transfer of MINUSMA’s powers, in the context of the
Algiers Accord, to any United Nations entities, such as
the United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
we believe that any decision in that regard requires
securing the consent of the Malians themselves, first
and foremost.
We continue to see how Russian-Malian bilateral
cooperation, carried out at the request of Bamako and in
strict accordance with applicable norms of international
law, as well as Mali’s sovereign choice of international
security partners, are keeping a number of our former
Western partners up at night. They are suffering from a
clear relapse of neocolonial approaches and are unable
to put away their double standards.
12/18

28/08/2023

Of course, those countries could also effectively
help the Malian authorities themselves rather than doing
everything to discredit their efforts to ensure security
and combat terrorism. Unfortunately, these countries
do not know how to cooperate with the countries of
the Global South on an equal and respectful footing.
We should therefore pay no heed to their colonial
phantom pains.
Russia, for its part, will continue to provide
Mali and other interested African partners with
comprehensive assistance on a bilateral, equal and
mutually respectful basis.
Mrs. Alhefeiti (United Arab Emirates) (spoke in
Arabic): At the outset, I thank Special Representative
Mr. El-Ghassim Wane for his briefing on the latest
developments regarding the withdrawal from Mali
of the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), which we
believe is important to keep the Council informed of
the details of that process. I also thank Ms. Beatrice
Abouya for her valuable briefing and welcome the
participation of the Permanent Representative of Mali
in today’s meeting.
We appreciate the efforts of the United Nations
and its expeditious preparation of the withdrawal and
handover plan in cooperation with Mali, in line with
resolution 2690 (2023).
We believe that the full and effective
implementation of the withdrawal plan in the coming
period will be crucial to avoid any negative effects that
could impede the peace process in Mali or harm the
security and stability of the region and to pave the way
for determining the nature of the role that the United
Nations can play in future to meaningfully support
Mali after the withdrawal of MINUSMA.
In the context of our discussion today, I would like
to highlight three points.
First, ensuring the withdrawal of MINUSMA in
an orderly and safe manner depends intrinsically on
the continued cooperation and coordination among the
Malian authorities, the United Nations and all other
parties concerned. The United Arab Emirates stresses
the importance of continuing ongoing consultations
among all parties to ensure a smooth handover of tasks
and the removal of any obstacles that could hinder the
implementation process, thus contributing to protecting
the gains made by Malians, MINUSMA and other
international partners.
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

With the commencement of the withdrawal process
and gradual closure of MINUSMA camps and the
transfer of its functions to the Government of Mali, it
is important to ensure the safe delivery of MINUSMA
camps and equipment in accordance with United
Nations procedures and mutual obligations with Mali.
In that context, emerging concerns must be addressed in
order to avoid any security incidents such as those that
preceded the withdrawal of MINUSMA from the camp
in Ber. We stress the need to pursue and strengthen
proactive risk planning in order to ensure the safety of
peacekeepers and civilians.
In a related context, the seriousness of misleading
and wrong information must not be ignored and should
be addressed through the strengthening of the Mission’s
strategic communications with the actors concerned
and its continued communication with local population.
Secondly, focus must remain on the protection and
safety of civilians, as the Mission’s withdrawal comes
at a time when civilians in Mali and the Sahel region,
as a whole, are suffering from threats of violence
from terrorist groups and other security challenges.
Therefore, their protection must remain one of the main
priorities of all parties concerned, and we trust that the
Malian authorities will do their utmost in that regard.
MINUSMA’s withdrawal also coincides with
growing humanitarian needs. According to the Office
for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, such
needs have increased by 17 per cent since last year.
We are therefore encouraged that the United Nations
team will remain in Mali to continue supporting local
communities. In that connection, the United Arab
Emirates supports the efforts of the United Nations
humanitarian and development teams to restructure
their presence in Mali.
Thirdly, reiterated commitment to dialogue is
essential for the implementation of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which remains
essential for achieving the desired stability in Mali.
The United Arab Emirates therefore urges all parties to
reaffirm their commitment to resuming a meaningful
dialogue as the most effective way to resolve
differences and de-escalate tensions. It also provides
an opportunity to build confidence and contributes to
the revival of the Local Follow-up Committee of the
Transition in Mali and other mechanisms responsible
for ensuring the full implementation of the agreement.
In that regard, we reaffirm our support for international
mediation efforts.

S/PV.9407

For its part, the United Arab Emirates continues
to call for progress in the political transition, including
the upcoming electoral processes agreed with the
Economic Community of West African States. We look
forward to the role that the United Nations Office for
West Africa and the Sahel will play in supporting the
political process in Mali.
In conclusion, the United Arab Emirates affirms its
support for all regional and international efforts aimed
at helping Mali achieve peace and stability.
Mr. Montalvo Sosa (Ecuador) (spoke in Spanish): I
thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) and Ms. Beatrice Abouya, Acting
Regional Director of Search for Common Ground, for
their briefings.
As we have heard this morning, the SecretaryGeneral’s letter (S/2023/611) is clear: the withdrawal of
MINUSMA, requested by the transitional Government,
will leave gaps in important areas of the work that the
Mission had been carrying out, especially with regard
to the implementation of the Agreement on Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali.
In that regard, my delegation would like to highlight
three points.
First, we must ensure that increased financial
support is provided to the United Nations country
team and regional offices, which will be assuming a
significant part of the Mission’s responsibilities. One
of the most important of those responsibilities, which
will clearly require the support of the transitional
Government, will be to ensure the political and
electoral transition process. That will fall to the United
Nations Development Programme, which will ensure
the continuity of the process. In that context, we are
pleased to see that the plan for the Mission’s withdrawal
contains options that would work to that effect.
Secondly, many of MINUSMA’s functions will
have to be assumed by the transitional Government
in a comprehensive manner. The most important of
those functions is the protection of civilians, which is
being and should be carried out within the framework
of international law, human rights and international
humanitarian law. Compliance with those norms is
essential. We call for the continuation of humanitarian
efforts, especially demining activities.

23-2528313/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

Thirdly, it is essential for the United Nations
Office for West Africa and the Sahel to replace the
role of MINUSMA with regard to issues of conflictprevention policy and mediation in order to ensure the
continuity of the peace agreement among all the actors
concerned. In that regard, we call on Algeria, as leader
of the international mediation process, as well as the
African Union and the Economic Community of West
African States, to provide the necessary support for
the parties to engage in a constructive dialogue aimed
at the full implementation of the peace agreement, in
particular respect for the ceasefire during MINUSMA’s
withdrawal, in order to prevent attacks such as the one
that occurred on 13 August in the area of Ber, which
forced the early departure of the Mission owing to the
lack of security.
Ecuador joins others in urging the transitional
Government to honour and respect the status-of-forces
agreement that remains in force until the last element
of MINUSMA leaves Mali and to ensure an orderly and
safe withdrawal in which the freedom of movement of
personnel and goods is permitted at all stages of the
Mission’s withdrawal. At this juncture, MINUSMA’s
strategic communications are increasingly important as
a means for combating disinformation and safeguarding
its personnel.
Finally, I call for the flow of humanitarian aid
necessary to nearly 6 million people not to stop. In
addition, it is vital to strengthen efforts in preventing
and responding to sexual violence and protecting
children in armed conflict. The people of Mali need
our support today more than ever.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I thank Special
Representative El-Ghassim Wane for his comprehensive
briefing. It is critical for the Security Council to be kept
fully updated on the situation in Mali as the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA) transfers its tasks and
prepares to leave the country. I also thank Ms. Abouya
for her briefing. I recognize the presence of the
delegation of Mali at today’s meeting.
I also thank the Secretary-General for his letter
(S/2023/611) on the main aspects of the transfer of
tasks of MINUSMA to the Government of Mali. The
document is very helpful, as it addresses issues key not
only to the safe removal of the Mission’s personnel and
equipment, but also to the stabilization of Mali.
14/18

28/08/2023

We deplore the acts of violence against MINUSMA
personnel during its withdrawal from the Ber camp
earlier in August. Let us be clear on this point — any
act committed against a peacekeeper is an act that hurts
the entire United Nations and everything it stands for,
and those responsible must be held accountable.
Brazil welcomes the engagement with the Malian
authorities aimed at ensuring that proper support
continues to be provided to the country in its political
transition and its efforts towards the conclusion of the
peace process. The successful implementation of both
tracks is essential for ensuring the full control of the
country’s territory by Malian authorities and their
capacity to help to ensure MINUSMA’s safe drawdown
and withdrawal.
Brazil also reiterates its support to the mediation
process led by Algeria and urges all Malian
political forces to engage in dialogue and resume
the implementation of the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation in Mali. We also express our
appreciation for the strategy outlined for strengthening
the good offices and mediation mandates of the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel,
the Economic Community of West African States
and the African Union. We believe that bilateral and
regional arrangements play a crucial role in performing
preventive diplomacy and conflict resolution.
Brazil is concerned about the worsening
humanitarian situation in Mali. No less than
8.8 million people are expected to need assistance this
year, according to the Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. It is imperative that all those
concerned allow for and support unimpeded and safe
humanitarian assistance to them. We are particularly
concerned about the conditions of vulnerable groups,
especially women and children. MINUSMA’s
withdrawal should not lead to diminished assistance for
those people. Brazil hopes that the transfer of tasks by
MINUSMA will be conducted in a safe manner, with
full cooperation with and by the Malian authorities, in
accordance with the agreed plan.
Mr. Hauri (Switzerland) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral El-Ghassim Wane and Ms. Beatrice Abouya
for their briefings.
The withdrawal of the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali (MINUSMA) is of an unprecedented scope and
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

complexity, and we appreciate the priority that the
United Nations has given to its planning, which involves
various components of the United Nations system. We
support the objectives identified by the SecretaryGeneral, such as ensuring the safety and security of
personnel, safeguarding the Mission’s achievements
and preserving an environment conducive to fulfilling
the United Nations long-term efforts in Mali. The
withdrawal plan is ambitious, and the stakes for Mali
are high.
I would like to highlight three points.
First, the safety and security of MINUSMA
personnel must be ensured. The events in Ber a few
weeks ago and other cases in which MINUSMA was
directly attacked have demonstrated the extent of the
Mission personnel’s vulnerability and the threats they
face. Unfortunately, the risks to personnel are expected
to increase — and even more so as the disinformation
campaigns against MINUSMA are adopting new
narratives. We therefore welcome the measures
presented by the Secretary-General with regard to
strategic communication. Beyond MINUSMA’s
withdrawal, we support maintaining a dedicated guard
unit that is adequately equipped and trained to respond
to the risks that the personnel in charge of the Mission’s
closure phase could face. We are counting on the support
of the Malian Armed Forces to protect the surroundings
of the remaining United Nations infrastructure, and
that includes ensuring the safety of the guard unit.
Secondly, the implementation of the Agreement on
Peace and Reconciliation in Mali remains more crucial
and urgent than ever. In that context, we are concerned
about the rise in tensions between the transitional
Government and the Coordination des mouvements
de l’Azawad related to the imminent withdrawal of
MINUSMA. Nine years of work, dialogue and efforts
towards national reconciliation are at stake — first and
foremost for the Malian people, but also for the region
and the entire international community. Switzerland
shares
the
Secretary-General’s
analysis
that
confidence-building measures are essential to getting
the peace process back on track. We also stress that any
violation of the ceasefire could hamper a resumption of
the peace process. In order to support the international
mediation efforts to implement the Agreement on Peace
and Reconciliation, the question arises of the relevance of
setting up a support mechanism with adequate resources
and preferably a permanent presence on the ground.
Any consideration of the matter should be coordinated

S/PV.9407

with the Malian authorities, the other signatories to
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation and those
involved in the international mediation.
Thirdly, the discussions on the transfer and
resumption of MINUSMA’s multiple tasks should lead
to concrete proposals by the end of the year. We urge all
the parties to do their best to reach an agreement. The
Secretary-General has already made some concrete
suggestions. For example, Switzerland supports the
transfer of political tasks to the United Nations Office
for West Africa and the Sahel (UNOWAS) and is ready
to contribute to discussions on the subject. We are also
aware that certain activities previously carried out by
MINUSMA cannot be transferred, which will have
consequences for the protection of civilians and the
supply of humanitarian aid, among other things. We
welcome all measures taken to minimize the impact
of MINUSMA’s withdrawal on the population and to
better respond to humanitarian needs. We also note that
none of the organizations mentioned in the SecretaryGeneral’s letter (S/2023/611), including UNOWAS, the
United Nations country team and the Office for the
Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, have resources
adequate to taking on additional tasks, and budget
adjustments would therefore be necessary.
In conclusion, I would like to thank MINUSMA
and all its staff, as well as the Secretariat in New York,
for their commitment and efforts since 1 July to ensure
a safe and orderly withdrawal. The most important and
difficult tasks still lie ahead. We call on all actors to
cooperate with MINUSMA so that its withdrawal can
be implemented according to plan and in complete
safety and security.
Finally, we hope that the Council can provide
the necessary support and guidance as the process
continues, based on the Secretary-General’s information
on important developments.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
Let me start by thanking Special Representative
Wane for his briefing and for his leadership during an
extremely challenging time for Mali and for the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I also thank Ms. Abouya
for her briefing and recommendations in support of the
Malian people and welcome the participation in this
meeting of the Permanent Representative of Mali.

23-2528315/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

As many of us feared, the transition Government’s
decision to close MINUSMA has already triggered
renewed violence on the ground. We are alarmed by a
resumption of hostilities in northern Mali, including
violations of the ceasefire during the clashes on 11 and
12 August at the Ber camp and by subsequent attacks
on a MINUSMA convoy on 13 August. In addition,
MINUSMA’s withdrawal limits the ability of the
international community to protect civilians from
the predations of the Wagner Group, whose activities
contribute to greater insecurity in the country.
We are deeply grateful to the men and women of
MINUSMA and to the troop- and police-contributing
countries for their commitment to peace in Mali in
the face of grave danger. We strongly condemn the
senseless attacks on peacekeepers, which threaten to
reverse years of progress toward peace and stability
and undo so many of the remarkable gains made by the
United Nations and by Malians. Let me be clear. If war
were to break out, it would again unleash unspeakable,
unthinkable devastation on the Malian people, who
have already endured so much needless suffering.
The Malian people deserve peace. Further instability
would open the doors to Jama’a Nusrat ul-Islam wa
al-Muslimin and the Islamic State — Sahel Province to
spread their access and influence. It would be a recipe
for disaster. The Malian transition Government and
signatory armed groups, along with the United Nations
and the international community, must demonstrate
an urgent and revitalized commitment to the Algiers
accords. That agreement continues to represent the best
opportunity for lasting peace and stability in Mali, plain
and simple. To that end, we call on all the signatory
parties to immediately renew their cooperation with the
international mediation.
The United States welcomes the Secretary-General’s
plan outlining the transfer of some of MINUSMA’s
tasks, and we strongly urge the United Nations to
provide concrete recommendations for transferring
Mission tasks associated with the Algiers accords to
avoid significant delays in their implementation. The
establishment of a dedicated component within the
United Nations Office for West Africa and the Sahel
may be the most prudent way to ensure continuity
in that regard. In the light of this month’s dangerous
events surrounding MINUSMA’s forced withdrawal at
Ber, MINUSMA should remain engaged with all parties
on the Algiers accords while drawdown activities
continue. The United States also urges the parties to
settle their disputes through dialogue and engage
16/18

28/08/2023

with MINUSMA on an agreement for the safe and
peaceful transfer of its camps and bases to the Malian
authorities. As the situation grows increasingly volatile,
those transfers must prioritize the safety and security
of peacekeepers. All parties must refrain from any
action that jeopardizes MINUSMA’s safe and orderly
withdrawal or endangers United Nations personnel. I
also want to remind the transition authorities that the
status-of-forces agreement and its provisions ensuring
MINUSMA’s freedom of movement throughout Mali
remain in full effect until the Mission’s final elements
have departed, which will extend beyond 31 December.
The transitional Government has so far cooperated
with the Mission’s withdrawal, which is notable despite
the challenges it has already endured, but it must
continue to do so. I will say once again how regrettable
the decision to end MINUSMA’s presence in Mali
was, but that is water under the bridge. Mali’s leaders
now have an opportunity to build on MINUSMA’s
important legacy and recommit to dialogue to settle
differences rather than violence. We urge all Malians
and all Malian leaders to choose the path of peace and
stability and to choose a future for the people of Mali.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Mali.
Mr. Konfourou (Mali) (spoke in French): I
would like to begin by expressing my thanks for this
opportunity to share with the Council the observations
of the Government of Mali on the Secretary-General’s
progress report (S/2023/611) on the withdrawal of
the United Nations Multidimensional Integrated
Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). I would
also like to thank Mr. El-Ghassim Wane, Head of
MINUSMA, for his presentation of the report.
The Government of Mali is delighted that the
Security Council acceded to the request we made in June
and since then has been working in close cooperation
with MINUSMA for its coordinated, secure and
orderly withdrawal, in accordance with the deadline
of 31 December decided by the Council. Accordingly,
since the adoption of resolution 2690 (2023) on
30 June, the Government of Mali has intensified its
consultations with MINUSMA at both the technical
and political levels, with a view to facilitating and
expediting the process of withdrawing the Mission
from Malian territory.
23-25283

28/08/2023

The situation in Mali

S/PV.9407

At this point I feel compelled to express the
Government of Mali’s surprise at the statements in the
report about flight restrictions and import limitations
imposed on MINUSMA. The communication
channels and working groups set up at all levels of
decision-making and the direct contacts currently under
way have considerably strengthened the framework
for exchange between the Malian Administration
and MINUSMA. Those assertions are all the more
surprising given that they are factually unfounded
and objectively contrary to the constructive spirit of
cooperation that the Government has consistently
shown towards MINUSMA and all missions dispatched
by Headquarters in New York. The visits of UnderSecretaries-General Atul Khare, Jean-Pierre Lacroix
and Gilles Michaud, which we must commend, are a
perfect illustration of that.

deaths in our ranks, for which the Government of Mali
extends its condolences on behalf of the country. At
least 72 terrorist fighters were also neutralized. That
again shows the determination of the Malian Armed
Forces to assume their sovereign mission of defending
the nation’s territory and protecting the population and
its property.

With regard to our expectations, I would like to
take this opportunity to remind the Council that the
Government of Mali looks forward to receiving detailed
information concerning the strength of the Mission and
the provisional plan for the gradual closure of various
MINUSMA services. Along the same lines, I would
like to stress that, contrary to some parts of the report,
the Government of Mali has very calmly assessed
MINUSMA’s withdrawal and prepared the measures
necessary to address any possible related security
vacuum. Indeed, I would like to recall that an objective
analysis of the consequences of the withdrawal preceded
Mali’s carefully considered decision to request the
Mission’s withdrawal. Steps already taken in advance
are continuing and have shown, among others, that
the Malian Armed Forces are ready to address any
situation, including the early handover of camps, as
was the case for Ber on 13 August.

It is important to note that our defence and security
forces have been attacked by armed terrorist groups
and that they have not violated the Agreement, much
less the ceasefire, and have no intention of doing so.
However, if our forces are attacked or are prevented
from carrying out their mission, they will be forced to
respond forcefully. The Government intends to continue
its efforts to restore State authority throughout the
nation’s territory in order to ensure the safety of people
and property and provide basic social services to the
Malian people.

Mali’s determination, which has ensured that the
Malian army will take over all camps that will be
vacated by MINUSMA, obviously does not constitute
an act of belligerence or a breach of the peace process.
On the contrary, it is part of the regular process of the
Mission’s handover of its holdings in compliance with
the relevant legal framework, in particular the Algiers
process agreement and all Security Council resolutions
that recognize the sovereignty, unity and territorial
integrity of Mali.

In addition, the withdrawal of MINUSMA, the
mandate of which was poorly adapted to the Malian
context, as has been highlighted repeatedly by several
members of the Organization, is the result of a strong
call from the Malian people. In that regard, the
Government welcomes the implementation of the first
phase of MINUSMA’s withdrawal, during which four
camps were handed over.

I would note that the Government reiterates its
commitment to the detailed and diligent implementation
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in collaboration with the signatory movements that
wish to do so, with a view to restoring lasting peace
and stability in the country, for the benefit of our
population. As I already informed the Council, today
the Minister for Reconciliation, Peace and National
Cohesion, tasked with peace and reconciliation in Mali,
talked to representatives of the signatory movements
and asked them to return to the negotiating table to
overcome the current challenges through dialogue. In
that communiqué, he also reaffirmed the commitment of
the Malian Government to peace and reconciliation and
to respect for the ceasefire agreement of 23 May 2014.

While the transfer of camps at Ogossogou,
Goundam and Ménaka was peaceful, the Government
deplores the incidents that have marred the return of
Ber, during which armed terrorist groups took hostile
action to prevent the Malian Armed Forces from
occupying the camp. That incident resulted in six

I can assure the Council that we denounce the
recent collusion between the armed groups and
terrorist organizations and recall that several Security
Council resolutions have requested all armed groups
to renounce violence and sever all ties with terrorist
organizations and transnational organized crime.

23-2528317/18

S/PV.9407

The situation in Mali

Furthermore, the Government attaches considerable
importance to addressing the environmental aspects of
MINUSMA’s withdrawal and encourages the Mission
to continue, and even strengthen, measures to ensure
that the Mission’s environmental footprint is reduced,
in particular through joint environmental assessment
visits related to clean-up efforts.
In that regard, we request in particular that the
containers of contaminated sand left at Ber be moved
to a safe place and properly treated, in accordance
with United Nations standards and the applicable
national legislation. In addition, given the concerns
raised about human rights monitoring and reporting in
Mali, I recall that MINUSMA’s withdrawal in no way
diminishes the determination and commitment of the
Malian authorities as it pertains to respect for and the
protection of human rights, which are a valuable part
of our glorious history and a key value of our society.
The second phase of the transfer of MINUSMA
installations to the Government of Mali, which will
begin on 1 September, must be carried out according
to the agreed timetable. Insofar as we are open to
peacefully discussing and resolving specific issues that
may arise, we are also committed to strict compliance
with the deadlines agreed for the transfer of the Tessalit,
Aguelhok and Kidal camps to the Malian State. I
would like to recall that the Government of Mali does
not envisage extending the deadline for MINUSMA’s
departure beyond 31 December, as set out in resolution
2690 (2023).
MINUSMA’s withdrawal does not mean the end
of cooperation between the Republic of Mali and the
United Nations. Mali remains a full-fledged member of
the United Nations and, as such, the Government intends
to continue its cooperation with the programmes, funds
and agencies of the United Nations system already
present in Mali, including by continuing to ensure their
safety, as those bodies carry out remarkable work on
the ground.
Concerning the future role of the United Nations
in the peace process in Mali and in accordance with
the vision of His Excellency Colonel Assimi Goïta,
President of the Transition and Head of State, who
intends to strengthen national ownership of the process,

18/18

28/08/2023

the Government of Mali wishes to prioritize direct
intra-Malian dialogue. It can allow our people to find
within it the momentum and dynamic compromises
necessary for social cohesion and national reconciliation.
In that constructive spirit, Mali wishes to give
confidence-building measures another chance. In that
regard, I reiterate the request of the Government of
Mali to lift the sanctions regime, in accordance with
the letter dated 15 August addressed to the President of
the Security Council (S/2023/605, annex).
After more than 10 years of crisis, with particularly
disastrous consequences for our population, the people
of Mali want to put an end to the conflict. That is
why they are requiring the Government to prioritize
sustainable domestic solutions. They are sceptical of
external recommendations, which have, at times, been
made in good faith and at other times come with various
agendas, and which have maintained or prolonged the
crisis instead of resolving it over the long term.
Before concluding, I reiterate the commitment of the
Government of Mali, which has already been expressed
during visits by United Nations Secretariat officials, to
successfully completing the liquidation phase, which
we would like to see reduced to a bare minimum. As
MINUSMA withdraws from Mali, I am pleased to
commend the efforts and, at times, the sacrifices that
have been made by United Nations personnel in helping
Mali to achieve peace and stability.
I pay tribute to the memory of all the victims of
the Malian crisis, civilians and soldiers alike, Malians
and foreigners — all those who lost their lives in Mali.
I assure the Council that the Government will spare no
effort to identify and bring to justice the perpetrators
of criminal acts against our civilians, forces and United
Nations personnel. I extend my sincere gratitude to all
of Mali’s friends, bilateral and multilateral, for their
considerable support for our efforts to end the crisis
and pursue development.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers. I now invite Council members
to informal consultations to continue our discussion on
the subject.
The meeting rose at 11.40 a.m.

23-25283
