S/2002/205

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
27 February 2002
Original: English

Report of the Security Council mission to Ethiopia
and Eritrea
21-25 February 2002
I. Introduction
1.
In accordance with Security Council resolution 1369 (2001) and the Council’s
presidential statement of 12 February 2002, a Security Council mission visited
Ethiopia and Eritrea from 21 to 25 February 2002. The terms of reference for the
mission is contained in annex I to the present report. The mission comprised all 15
members of the Council under the leadership of Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby of
Norway. The list of participants is contained in annex II to the present report.
2.
Issues addressed in the meetings held with Prime Minister of Ethiopia, Meles
Zenawi, in Addis Ababa on 22 February, and with the President of Eritrea, Isaias
Afwerki, in Asmara on 24 February, are covered in section II below.
3.
In addition, the mission held meetings with the Secretary-General of the
Organization of African Unity (OAU), Amara Essy, in Addis Ababa; with
representatives of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) and
of troop-contributing countries; and other members of the diplomatic community,
the United Nations country teams, religious leaders and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) in the two capitals. The mission held a ceremonial crossing
from one country to the other at the Mereb River Bridge and visited the Temporary
Security Zone. Certain issues specific to these meetings and activities are covered in
section III below. The complete programme of the mission is contained in annex III
to the present report.
4.
The mission’s follow-up recommendations to the Security Council, as well as
certain observations related to the international community at large, are set out in
section IV below.
5.
The mission extends its appreciation to the two Governments for the warm
welcome and hospitality it was afforded both in Addis Ababa and Asmara and for
their flexibility in supporting the practical arrangements for the mission, including
the crossing of the Mereb River Bridge and the visit to the Temporary Security
Zone. The mission also expresses its appreciation to the Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, Legwaila Joseph Legwaila, and to the United Nations
Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) for having effectively facilitated the
mission’s programme and for making practical arrangements on the ground. The
02-26304 (E) 270202

*0226304*

S/2002/205

mission extends its appreciation to the Government of China for the warm
hospitality offered to it on 23 February. The mission also thanks the Government of
Norway for providing air transport to and from the mission area, and expresses its
gratitude to the captain and crew.

II. Issues raised with the parties
6.
As stated above, the mission met with Prime Minister Meles Zenawi in Addis
Ababa on 22 February and with President Isaias Afwerki in Asmara on 24 February.
While the present report does not attempt to summarize the views of the parties, who
speak for themselves, the members of the mission will take the exchange of views
with each of the two leaders fully into account during the Security Council’s
deliberations regarding the renewal of UNMEE’s mandate. Members of the Council
will also be aware of the public statements made by the two leaders after their
meetings with the mission.
Overall status of the peace process
7.
The mission congratulated the two leaders on the progress made in the peace
process and conveyed its satisfaction that a final legal settlement of the border
issues was about to be reached in accordance with the Algiers Agreements (see
S/2000/601, and annex, S/2000/1183-A/55/686, annex). The mission welcomed
recent statements by both sides, reaffirming that the decision by the Boundary
Commission is final and binding. The international community attaches the highest
importance to this decision and praises the resolution by peaceful means of the
border conflict. The commitments of both parties in this regard represent a pivotal
measure of their dedication to the peace process.
8.
The mission commended both parties for having chosen to resolve their
differences through an international conflict-solving mechanism. It also commended
the parties for having agreed to give the United Nations such a central role in
implementing the decision of the Boundary Commission. The mission assured the
parties that the Security Council is strongly committed to doing its part to assist
them in the implementation of the delimitation decision.
9.
The mission expressed its unwavering support for the peace process and
emphasized the overall objective of reconciliation, reconstruction and development
for the mutual benefit of the peoples of both countries. To this end, important
challenges lie ahead. Close cooperation between the parties and the United Nations
must continue.
10. At this stage, UNMEE’s contribution, in cooperation with both parties, towards
improving the situation of the people, especially in the Temporary Security Zone,
are strongly commended by the mission. The mission underlines its strong support
for UNMEE and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General, and invites the
parties to continue the close cooperation with UNMEE under his able leadership.
The mission is encouraged by the progress made thus far. In the crucial period
ahead, it will be particularly important that the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General has easy accessibility to both sides in order to discuss the further
steps to be taken.

2

S/2002/205

11. The mission further welcomed the increasingly constructive tone of the public
statements made by the parties over the last few months. In order to enhance popular
understanding of UNMEE’s role, especially among those living in the Temporary
Security Zone, the mission also encouraged the leaders to make arrangements for
UNMEE radio broadcasts.
12. The mission noted with satisfaction that the situation on the ground, and inside
the Temporary Security Zone in particular, remains calm. In this connection, the
mission noted the small number of incidents to date and commended the parties on
their observance of the zone.
Implementation of the decision of the Boundary Commission
13. The mission underlined its expectation that all necessary steps for the
implementation of the Boundary Commission’s delimitation determination will
commence immediately following the Commission’s announcement, which is
expected in the latter part of March 2002.
14. The mission discussed with the parties the various steps related to the
implementation of the decision of the Boundary Commission with a view to
ensuring an expeditious process while maintaining stability in all areas that will be
affected by the decision.
15. The mission urged the parties to extend their full cooperation to UNMEE in its
efforts to reach a common understanding on effective modalities and procedures for
the implementation phase. The mission emphasized that it would be crucial during
this period for the parties to maintain open communications with the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General. The mission informed the leaders of its
expectation that the Security Council will prepare a resolution in support of the
process. That resolution, scheduled for consideration in mid-March 2002, would
renew the mandate of UNMEE and provide an overall framework for the
implementation phase.
16. The mission welcomed the parties’ agreement to the establishment of field
offices for the Boundary Commission in Addis Ababa and Asmara, and encouraged
their further close cooperation in this regard to facilitate early commencement of the
required aerial photographing (while climatic conditions are favourable) and
subsequent steps for the border demarcation.
17. The mission emphasized that, in order to facilitate the implementation phase,
the Security Council supported a further development of the institutional framework
for the peace process. This could be done through appropriate strengthening of the
Military Coordination Commission, for example, by establishing sector-level
committees. In addition, a more wide-ranging mechanism aimed at implementationrelated consultation and problem-solving should probably be considered. A role for
the guarantors, witnesses and facilitators of the Algiers Agreements could be
envisaged in this regard.
18. The mission recalled that, in accordance with article 14 of the Agreement on
Cessation of Hostilities (S/2000/601, annex), the security arrangements are to
remain in effect. Accordingly, arrangements for the separation of the forces, as
achieved by the establishment of the Temporary Security Zone, will continue to be
of key importance. Until the border demarcation has been completed, UNMEE will
continue to discharge its mandate.

3

S/2002/205

19. The mission further emphasized that transfer of territory and civil authority
should take place in an orderly manner, without any unilateral actions. In this
regard, the mission recalled that, through article 4.16 of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement (S/2000/1183-A/55/686, annex), the parties requested the United Nations
to facilitate resolution of problems that may arise due to the transfer of territorial
control, including the consequences for individuals residing in previously disputed
territory. In order to maintain stability, both parties should refrain from taking
unilateral action with regard to the issues of transfer of territory or civil authority.
20. The mission urged the parties to refrain from any actions that could have
destabilizing effects, including population movements and movements of troops and
militia, until modalities and procedures are agreed upon. These important issues
should be addressed through dialogue, within the framework to be established by the
United Nations, through the good offices of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, in discussion with the parties.
21. The mission emphasized that demining is an essential prerequisite to border
demarcation. It discussed with the parties and with UNMEE the requirements that
need to be met in order to facilitate the demarcation. Recalling that, in accordance
with the Algiers Agreements, the primary responsibility lies with the parties, the
mission urged them to cooperate fully with the view to ensure expeditious demining
as required for demarcation.
Confidence-building
22. The mission discussed with the parties the need for broad-based confidencebuilding measures and reconciliation efforts at all levels within and between the two
countries, and emphasized the important role of women in this regard. The mission
acknowledged with appreciation the recent progress in the dialogue among religious
leaders. The mission noted the particular importance of promoting cross-border
contacts at the local level aimed at resolving localized disputes and rebuilding
community relations. It further emphasized that sustainable reintegration of
refugees, internally displaced persons and demobilized soldiers as well as
rehabilitation activities are important in building a basis for reconciliation between
the two countries and their peoples.
23. The mission strongly urged both parties to release and return all prisoners of
war and civilian detainees at the earliest opportunity under the auspices of the
International Committee of the Red Cross in accordance with the Geneva
Conventions and the Algiers Agreements.
Other outstanding issues
24. The mission notes the prior notification procedure introduced by Eritrea
allowing UNMEE to visit locations north of the Temporary Security Zone and
expresses the expectation that, notwithstanding those arrangements, full freedom of
movement will be provided for UNMEE to monitor the redeployed forces of Eritrea,
to disclose the number, strength and disposition of its militia and police inside the
Temporary Security Zone and to conclude the status-of-forces agreement with the
Secretary-General.

4

S/2002/205

25. The mission notes the mine information recently provided by Ethiopia and
expresses its expectation that the further clarifications sought by the UNMEE Mine
Action Coordination Centre will be provided at the earliest opportunity.
26. The mission expresses its disappointment at the continuing failure by the
parties to establish a direct high-altitude flight route for UNMEE between Addis
Ababa and Asmara. The resolution of this issue would be a boost for UNMEE’s
activities and contribute to a more cost-effective use of United Nations resources.
The lack of a direct flight route has so far cost the Organization more than $1.4
million.

III. Discussions with other actors and the visit to the Temporary
Security Zone
27. At the outset of its visit, the mission received an update on the situation in the
mission area from the Special Representative of the Secretary-General and from the
Force Commander, Major General Patrick Cammaert. The Special Representative of
the Secretary-General also outlined the main issues that he anticipated on the road
ahead.
28. In meetings with the diplomatic community in each capital, the mission
explained its anticipated approach with the parties. It acknowledged the key roles
played by OAU, Algeria, the European Union and the United States of America in
facilitating the Algiers Agreements and encouraged their continued political support
in the peace process. The mission received useful insights and ideas from those with
firsthand experience in the region.
29. In a discussion with the Secretary-General of OAU, Amara Essy, he
reconfirmed the position of OAU that the Algiers Agreements were the cornerstone
of a successful settlement of the dispute between Ethiopia and Eritrea. The mission
agreed with the Secretary-General of OAU on the importance of continuing to work
closely together in support of the peace process. In the context of cooperation, the
mission and the OAU Secretary-General also discussed other regional issues,
including the situation in Madagascar and the Great Lakes region.
30. While in each capital, the mission held meetings with religious leaders. This
happened in the immediate aftermath of a highly successful joint meeting of
religious leaders of the two countries, held in Addis Ababa and Asmara. The
mission received perspectives on this unique confidence-building measure and
related efforts to further the reconciliation and healing process among the two
peoples. The mission welcomed these activities and noted with satisfaction the
positive effect of the joint meetings in bringing the two peoples together. It
encouraged the spiritual leaders to continue and build upon their efforts in
furtherance of peace and normalization of people-to-people relations.
31. At its meetings with the United Nations country teams, the World Bank, and
non-governmental organizations in each country, the mission heard a comprehensive
assessment of the humanitarian and developmental activities in Eritrea and Ethiopia.
During the briefing and the discussion which followed, speakers emphasized that
UNMEE’s initiative to establish a system for cooperation with the humanitarian and
development community was a model of partnership. The mission learned that the
quick impact projects had been well-received by the local population. In addition to

5

S/2002/205

the inherent value of these projects, they were extremely useful in developing good
relations between UNMEE and the communities in which it operates. The mission
was also gratified to learn that the two United Nations country teams have
established a system for joint work to address the humanitarian and emergency
needs of the population in the two countries.
32. In addition to hearing the strategic overviews in each capital, the mission, in
its visit to the Temporary Security Zone, was able to see firsthand the complexity of
challenges facing UNMEE, United Nations agencies, funds and programmes and
their partners in addressing the issues of peacekeeping, emergency assistance,
rehabilitation and recovery. While in the Temporary Security Zone, the mission
visited the town of Senafe, where it was introduced to the Mine Risk Education
Project. It also visited a nearby camp of some 5,000 internally displaced persons.
The human dimension of the crisis, as well as the beginnings of recovery, had a
profound impact on the members of the mission. It was apparent that the needs are
ongoing and will continue to require urgent attention.
33. The mission received an operational briefing on the situation in the central
sector of the Temporary Security Zone at the Indian Battalion’s base at Camp Dunn.
In addition to an update from the Battalion Commander, the briefing included the
humanitarian activities of the country team as well as those of the Mine Action
Coordination Centre.
34. The mission strongly supports the activities of the United Nations country
teams, including their contingency planning for moving from crisis management and
assistance to peace-building and development.

IV. Observations and recommendations
35. The upcoming consideration of UNMEE’s mandate renewal by 15 March 2002
should reflect relevant elements referred in the above sections. In addition, the
following elements should be reflected in order to clarify various tasks based on the
Algiers Agreements that are of a generic character in relation to the Boundary
Commission’s decision, that is, elements that will have validity irrespective of the
specifics of the decision:
(a) The Boundary Commission should, in accordance with the Algiers
Agreements, be encouraged to proceed immediately upon announcement of its
delimitation decision with the necessary technical arrangements to establish an
aerial photo map to be used in the demarcation process;
(b) Recognizing that demining of access routes to the border areas is under
way under the coordination of the United Nations Mine Action Coordination Centre,
the parties are, in accordance with the Algiers Agreements, encouraged to continue
their cooperation in the intensification of this work in the period ahead, with the
view to expediting the process for the benefit of all the people;
(c) Once the Boundary Commission has located the individual boundary
pillars on the aerial photo map, all demining required for demarcation should move
forward without delay. The Secretary-General should be invited to submit
recommendations at an early stage, taking into account the decision of the Boundary
Commission, the contributions of the parties, the capacity of UNMEE and the
resources available in the United Nations Trust Fund in Support of the Delimitation

6

S/2002/205

and Demarcation of the Ethiopia/Eritrea Border. In this regard, the mission notes
with appreciation the recent contributions to the Trust Fund and invites further
donors to come forward with contributions;
(d) In the light of the above and other relevant recommendations, the
Security Council should consider how UNMEE can play an appropriate role in the
demarcation process;
(e) The Boundary Commission should be encouraged to proceed with
physical demarcation on the ground immediately as stretches of the border are
declared mine-free.
36. Furthermore, the mission would like to draw to the attention of the
international community the following issues:
(a) The mission appeals to the guarantors, the facilitators and the witnesses
of the peace process, OAU and the friends of Eritrea and Ethiopia to continue to
intensify their contacts with the authorities of both countries, in order to promote a
constructive dialogue with the aim of opening a new page in the history of their
relations;
(b) The mission notes with satisfaction that collaboration between the
humanitarian agencies and their NGO partners with UNMEE was very close and
productive. It contributed significantly to the transformation of the war-affected
areas in both countries and should be encouraged and expanded;
(c) The mission welcomes the efforts of the NGO community in both
countries aimed at development, reconstruction and rehabilitation. It would like to
acknowledge the contribution of NGOs to the confidence-building process. In this
regard, it commends Norwegian Church Aid for its efforts to facilitate the meeting
between the religious leaders of Eritrea and Ethiopia;
(d) The donor community responded significantly to last year’s humanitarian
needs as assessed by the United Nations in both countries. This year, the needs are
equally stringent, particularly in the light of the forthcoming decision of the
Boundary Commission. The mission therefore encourages urgent contributions to
the Consolidated Appeals process for 2002 in both countries in order to face the
challenges that lie ahead. The Security Council strongly appeals to donors to be
generous;
(e) In the same vein, the mission was gratified with the success of UNMEE’s
quick impact projects and urges the donor community to respond generously to the
United Nations Trust Fund to Support the Peace Process established for that
purpose;
(f) The mission appreciates the good working relationship between the
various developmental and humanitarian players in the context of the UNMEE
mandate and beyond. It also expresses hope that the situation will soon see their
combined efforts transformed from an emergency response in a crisis situation into
medium and long-term development programmes that can help restore economic,
social and political stability in the countries. The mission believes that well-targeted
cross-border programmes and exchanges could also be contemplated in support of
the peace process.
37.

Finally, the mission notes with appreciation the following observations:

7

S/2002/205

(a) The Members of the mission were most impressed with the dedication
and professionalism of UNMEE personnel from the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General downwards. At this crucial time, it is important that UNMEE
should be operational to the fullest of its capacity. The mission accordingly hopes
the Secretary-General will take action to appoint a new Deputy Special
Representative in Asmara soon;
(b) The Members of the mission were deeply moved by the expression of
sincere gratitude they received from the local population in the Temporary Security
Zone, resulting partly from the credibility and trust that UNMEE has been able to
establish through its contribution to the peace process, various projects carried out
in cooperation with the humanitarian community, as well as direct support and
assistance, within its mandate, to people in need;
(c) While inspired by the symbolism of the crossing at the Mereb River
Bridge, which serves as both a physical as well as a metaphorical link between the
two countries, the mission would strongly encourage the parties to continue to
search for mutually agreeable ways of building trust through increased official as
well as grass-roots contact with each other, with a view to moving towards political
and economic cooperation.

8

S/2002/205

Annex I
Terms of reference for the Security Council mission to
Ethiopia and Eritrea
1.
The Security Council is sending a mission to Ethiopia and Eritrea in support of
the peace process between the two neighbouring countries and the efforts to
implement the Algiers Agreements and relevant Council resolutions. The mission
will visit Addis Ababa, Asmara and the Temporary Security Zone. It will spend one
day in each location.
2.
The Security Council recognizes that the upcoming border delimitation
determination by the Boundary Commission, which is final and binding, represents a
key step in the peace process between the two countries. The Council stresses that,
in accordance with article 4.15 of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (see
A/55/686-S/2000/1183), the parties have committed themselves to accepting fully
the determination of the Commission. The mission will relay to the parties the
monumental importance that the international community attaches to their
embracing the Commission’s determination as the ultimate measure of their
commitment to the peace process. The mission will discuss with the parties
measures to implement all aspects of the Commission’s determination.
3.
The mission will also address elements related to the consideration of the
renewal of the mandate of the United Nations Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea
(UNMEE) by 15 March 2002, particularly related to outstanding issues, in
accordance with the statement by the President of the Security Council issued on 16
January 2002 (S/PRST/2002/1), as well as concrete ways and means for UNMEE to
assist in the physical demarcation process, including through mine clearance.
4.
The Security Council emphasizes the need for broad-based confidencebuilding measures and reconciliation efforts at all levels within and between the two
countries. The mission will encourage initiatives in that regard, such as the release
of all prisoners of war and civilian internees and the dialogue between religious
leaders. The mission will strongly urge the parties to support and initiate further
reconciliation measures.
5.
The mission will address the humanitarian situation resulting from the conflict
in the two countries, including reintegration of refugees and internally displaced
persons, the situation for women and their role in post-conflict rehabilitation, the
demobilization of soldiers, and the status of rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts.
6.
The mission will stress that the overall objective of the peace process is to
normalize the relations between the two neighbouring countries.
7.
The mission will praise the leaders for their leadership in guiding the peace
process forward, and will reiterate the international community’s unwavering
commitment to contribute to the completion of the peace process.
8.
The mission will report back to the Council, at which time it will make
recommendations for further actions by the Council and the Secretary-General. In
that connection, an open meeting of the Council will be convened in early March
2002.

9

S/2002/205

Annex II
List of participants in the Security Council mission to
Ethiopia and Eritrea

10

1.

Ambassador Ole Peter Kolby (Norway), head of mission.

2.

Ambassador Stefan Tafrov (Bulgaria).

3.

Mr. Ferdinand Ngoh Ngoh, Minister (Cameroon).

4.

Mr. Chen Xu, Minister Counsellor (China).

5.

Ambassador Alfonso Valdivieso (Colombia).

6.

Madame Emmanuelle d’Achon, Political Counsellor (France).

7.

Ambassador François Lonseny Fall (Guinea).

8.

Ambassador Gerard Corr (Ireland).

9.

Ambassador Jagdish Koonjul (Mauritius).

10.

Ms. Maria Angelica Arce de Jeannet, Minister (Mexico).

11.

Ambassador Gennady Gatilov, First Deputy Permanent Representative
(Russian Federation).

12.

Ambassador Kishore Mahbubani (Singapore).

13.

Mr. Fayssal Mekdad, Minister Counsellor (Syrian Arab Republic).

14.

Ambassador Stewart Eldon, CMG, OBE (United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland).

15.

Ambassador Richard Williamson, Alternate Representative for Special
Political Affairs (United States of America).

S/2002/205

Annex III
Programme for the Security Council mission to Ethiopia
and Eritrea
21-25 February 2002
Thursday, 21 February
22.25

Arrival at Bole Airport, Addis Ababa
Reception delegation at airport to include:
Representative(s) of the Government of Ethiopia
Representative(s) of the United Nations Mission
in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE)
Representative of the United Nations country
team
Representative of the Economic Commission
for Africa (ECA)
Representative(s) of the Organization of African
Unity (OAU)
United Nations/OAU liaison
Ambassadors of Guarantor (Facilitator) countries
Ambassadors of countries participating in the
Security Council mission
Press
Welcome by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General and his team

Friday, 22 February
7.45

Departure for ECA

8.00

Briefing by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General

ECA

10.00

Meeting with the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the European Union Ambassadors,
the Guarantors of the peace process, the troopcontributing countries and Friends of UNMEE

ECA

12.00

Meeting with representatives of OAU

13.30

Lunch free for bilateral meetings

15.00

Meeting with the Prime Minister of Ethiopia,
Meles Zenawi

11

S/2002/205

16.00

Meeting with United Nations country teams,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), ECA and
Head of the United Nations Office (Addis Ababa)

ECA

17.15

Meeting with religious leaders

ECA

19.00

Dinner to be hosted by Government of Ethiopia

Sheraton
Hotel

Saturday, 23 February
5.15

Departure for Airport

6.00
6.50

Depart Addis Ababa
Arrival Mekelle Airport

Norwegian
aircraft

7.20
8.00

Depart Mekelle
Arrive Axum

Helicopters

8.30

Visit to Axum Ruins

By road

10.00
10.20

Depart Axum
Arrival Rama/Mereb River Bridge

Helicopters
(Ethiopian side)

10.30

Mereb Bridge ceremony
Short welcome address by the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General
Address by the Chairman of the Security
Council mission
Brief press conference by the Chairperson of the
Security Council mission

11.30

Refreshments on the Mereb Bridge

12.00
12.30

Departure from Mereb River Bridge
Helicopters
(pick-up from Eritrean side of Bridge)
Arrival at Senafe (Camp Dunn)

12.45

Sector Command briefing at Camp Dunn
Short briefing by Resident Coordinator/
Humanitarian Coordinator
Short briefing by UNMEE Mine Action Coordination
Centre

13.30

Lunch to be arranged by the Indian Battalion

15.00

Tour of Senafe and visit to camps for internally
displaced persons

By road

17.00
17.30

Depart Senafe (Camp Dunn)
Arrive Asmara

Helicopters

Met at Airport by:
Representatives of the Eritrean Government
Representatives of UNMEE

12

S/2002/205

Representatives of the United Nations
country team
Representative(s) of OAU
Ambassadors of Guarantor/Facilitator countries
Ambassadors of countries participating in the
Security Council mission
Press
Departure for hotel
19.30

Buffet dinner hosted by Ambassador Chen Zhanfu
of China

Chinese
Embassy

Sunday, 24 February
9.00

Meeting with the United Nations country team and
NGOs

Confederation
of Eritrean
Workers Hall

Lunch for bilateral meetings
15.00

Meeting with the five permanent members of the
Security Council, the European Union Ambassadors,
the Guarantors of the Peace Process, the troopcontributing countries and Friends of UNMEE

UNMEE

16.30

Meeting with religious leaders

Eritrean
Orthodox
Church offices

18.00

Meeting with the President of Eritrea,
Isaias Afwerki

Den Den Club

18.45

Press conference at UNMEE via videoconferencing

UNMEE

19.30

Reception hosted by the Government of Eritrea

Intercontinental
Hotel

Monday, 25 February
8.00

Wrap-up meeting with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General

UNMEE

Departure for Airport
9.30

Departure for New York
Farewell by

Eritrean Government officials
UNMEE officials
Members of the diplomatic community

13
