S/PV.8838

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-sixth year

8838th meeting

Wednesday, 18 August 2021, 10.10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jaishankar. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(India)

Members:

China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Estonia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Niger. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Tunisia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Viet Nam . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Dai Bing
Ms. Liimets
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Byrne Nason
Mr. Kimani
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Mr. Aougi
Mr. Kvalheim
Mr. Nebenzia
Ms. King
Mr. Ladeb
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield
Mr. Dang

Agenda
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Protecting the protectors: technology and peacekeeping
Letter dated 26 July 2021 from the Permanent Representative of India to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/681)

In accordance with the procedure set out in the letter by the President of the Security Council
addressed to Permanent Representatives of Security Council members dated 7 May 2020
(S/2020/372), which was agreed in light of the extraordinary circumstances caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic, this official record of the Security Council will be supplemented by a
compilation of annexes (S/2021/732) containing the statements submitted by interested nonmembers of the Council.

21-22850 (E)
*2122850*

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
United Nations peacekeeping operations
Protecting the protectors: technology and
peacekeeping
Letter dated 26 July 2021 from the Permanent
Representative of India to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2021/681)
The President: The Security Council will now
begin its consideration of the item on its agenda.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2021/681, which contains the text of a letter
dated 26 July 2021 from the Permanent Representative of
India addressed to the Secretary-General, transmitting
a concept note on the item under consideration.
The Council has before it the text of a statement by
the President on behalf of the Council on the subject of
today’s meeting. I thank the Council members for their
valuable contributions to this statement.
In accordance with the understanding reached
among the members of the Council, I shall take it
that the members of the Security Council agree to the
statement, which will be issued as a document of the
Security Council under the symbol S/PRST/2021/17.
I now wish to warmly welcome the SecretaryGeneral, His Excellency Mr. António Guterres, and
give him the floor.
The Secretary-General: I thank the Government of
India for convening today’s open debate on technology
and peacekeeping.
Over recent decades, conflicts have become more
intractable and protracted. Actors have multiplied
and diversified, the tools of warfare are increasingly
sophisticated, and the growing internationalization of
civil wars has made their resolution even more complex.
The devastating effects of the climate crisis on the lands
and resources of peoples around the world, combined
with growing socioeconomic vulnerabilities, are
converging with and fuelling conflicts, causing further
suffering. These shifts in conflict are accompanied
by a broader societal transformation propelled by
new technology.
2/18

18/08/2021

Digital technology in particular represents one of
the greatest opportunities, but also one of the greatest
challenges, of our time. As I stress in my road map for
digital cooperation, the international community must
come together better to govern the digital space for
good, while addressing its many challenges, and the
good is plain to see.
Digital technologies play a central role in
connecting communities, advancing health care and
education, and enabling mobilization and change.
Digital technologies have allowed parts of the global
economy and communities connected to the Internet
to continue functioning during the coronavirus
disease pandemic. And in the realm of peacekeeping,
tools reliant on digital technologies, such as longrange cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles and ground
surveillance radars, help peacekeepers protect civilians
and themselves.
New technologies have great potential if managed
responsibly to enable safer, harm-free and more
effective operations. But new technologies also pose
unfamiliar and profound threats, as seen most clearly in
the online proliferation of violent extremist ideologies,
increasingly prevalent cyberattacks and deadly
vaccine misinformation.
Emerging technologies are also blurring the lines
between war and peace. States and non-State actors are
carrying out malicious acts that fall below commonly
understood thresholds for the use of force, yet may still
have a devastating impact. Anonymous actors are able
to target such critical infrastructure as power stations,
hospitals, Government facilities and the information
technology systems crucial to running our societies.
The clandestine use of these technologies risk
unintended escalation, including full blown conflicts.
Technology advances are also modifying the ways in
which conventional weapons are being used. More
accurate long-range rockets and missiles are allowing
both States and non-State armed groups to carry out
targeted strikes at great distances, including against
populated areas.
We are also seeing the increased use of autonomous
weapons systems. On this rapidly emerging issue,
Governments must work together to ensure that
sufficient human control and judgment is retained in
the use of force.
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

In short, new technologies are changing the scale
and speed of attack, as well as the character and nature
of violence and destruction in war, with an indelible
impact on civilian populations. These developments
create new and urgent challenges for peace operations,
which are experiencing these challenges first hand.
The United Nations has adapted and innovated
throughout its 75 years. The concept of peacekeeping is
itself the product of the art of the possible. But United
Nations peacekeeping was conceived in an analog world.
It is now essential that it fully embrace the digital world
in which we live to improve the Organization’s agility,
foresight and responsiveness to conflicts and to be able
to address the challenges of today and tomorrow.
A shift in peacekeeping culture and a systemic
change are required for this to happen. That is why we
have developed a strategy for the digital transformation
of United Nations peacekeeping operations. This
strategy seeks to use the opportunities offered by digital
technologies to peacekeeping missions to mitigate the
risks they pose and promote their responsible use. The
strategy takes forward the vision of my second term, a
renewed United Nations that is nimble, dynamic and
evolving to anticipate and address complex issues.
Digital transformation in peacekeeping will
contribute to one of the central objectives of the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, which is to further
data-driven and technology-enabled peacekeeping.
It will be one of the most complex undertakings for
United Nations peacekeeping in the coming years. But
the need is critical, and the benefits will be profound.

S/PV. 8838

Fourthly, we must ensure the responsible use of
digital technologies by peace operations by developing
clear principles and undertaking human rights due
diligence wherever there is a potential for harm.
The digital transformation is already permeating
our peacekeeping operations. The Unite Aware
platform promises an integrated approach to situational
awareness that could be used across the civilian,
military and police components. The United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali is using machine learning to analyse radio data
to detect hate speech, serving as an automated earlywarning system for unrest. A social media monitoring
tool used by the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo relies on artificial intelligence to identify
perceptions of the Mission to improve service. The
Smart Camp initiative will offer more integrated,
efficient and greener peace operations.
However, in order to achieve the vision of the
digital transformation strategy over the coming three
years, we need the active engagement and support
of Member States. We are looking for assistance in
capacity-building and training, equipment provision and
financial contributions. The upcoming United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference in the Republic
of Korea can further the digital transformation process,
and the Partnership for Technology in Peacekeeping
initiative provides another such opportunity. Ultimately,
bringing about culture change and transformation that
will have a real impact on the ground will require
engagement not only from State actors but also civil
society, the technology sector and academia.

The digital transformation strategy for United
Nations peacekeeping focuses on four objectives. First,
we must drive technology innovation at Headquarters
and in the field. Secondly, we must maximize
the potential of current and new technologies to
augment the capacity of missions to carry out their
mandates effectively. That includes transforming
information-gathering and early-warning capabilities
to better protect civilians. It is essential that troop- and
police-contributors in front-line roles have access to
the most up-to-date technology.

Together, we can rise to the challenge of the
digital transformation of United Nations peacekeeping,
and I thank the Security Council for its engagement
and support.

Thirdly, peace operations should be able to
detect, analyse and address threats against civilians,
peacekeepers and humanitarian and political missions
in a timely and integrated manner.

Since deploying for the first time in 1948, United
Nations peacekeeping missions continue to operate in
a variety of challenging settings. That could involve
armed groups, non-State actors or terrorists. Because

The President: I thank the Secretary-General for
his briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
Minister for External Affairs of India.
Let me begin by thanking the Secretary-General,
Mr. António Guterres, for his briefing.

21-228503/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the nature of peacekeeping missions and their attendant
threats have become more complex, it is vital that our
capabilities to secure peacekeepers keep pace. We owe
it to them to ensure that our protective efforts meet the
highest standards.
Twenty-first-century peacekeeping must be
anchored in a strong ecosystem of technology
and innovation that can facilitate United Nations
peacekeeping operations in implementing their
mandates in complex environments. After all, it helps
them to adapt to changing conflict dynamics and take
advantage of increased efficiencies. That is also in line
with the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of
UN Peacekeeping, which seeks to advance the use of
technology across the Action for Peacekeeping themes,
including performance, safety and security, politics,
protection and peacebuilding.
Limited resources make the execution of
peacekeeping mandates difficult even otherwise.
When such mandates are expanded in an ad hoc
fashion, the challenge becomes more complex. In
recent years, peacekeepers have experienced a greater
level of asymmetric threats, ranging from landmines
to improvised explosive devices. We cannot remain
indifferent to that prospect. To execute their mandates,
peacekeeping missions must be able to move fast to
acquire and validate information from a wide range
of openly available sources to enhance situational
awareness, augment security, aid operational
planning and support decision-making. United
Nations peacekeeping simply cannot afford to cede
the information advantage to those actors determined
to undermine prospects for peace by using modern
technology to aid their violent cause. Let me therefore
propose a four-point framework that would lay out a
possible architecture for securing United Nations
peacekeepers to meet contemporary threats.
First, we must focus on operationally proven, costeffective, widely available, reliable and field-serviceable
technologies. Those must also prioritize mobility, both
in the sense of the agile manoeuvrability of mission
assets and in the sense of the use of mobile digital or
information-technology platforms. Where deployed,
technologies should be environment-friendly through
the use of renewables and fuel efficiency and the use of
environmentally friendly construction materials.
Secondly, we need a sound information and
intelligence foundation. Only that will ensure early
4/18

18/08/2021

warning and mobilizing a coherent and early response. A
reliable, high-fidelity means to collect, use, process and
share information and data will create advantages from
the very start for peacekeeping missions. The precise
positioning and overhead visualization of mission
environments are critically important to providing
intelligence and to enhancing the safety and security of
mission personnel. It therefore gives me great pleasure
to announce that India is supporting the United Nations
in the roll-out of the Unite Aware platform across select
peacekeeping missions. That initiative is based on
the expectation that an entire peacekeeping operation
can be visualized, coordinated and monitored on a
real-time basis. We should ensure that any attack on a
peacekeeper or a civilian is predictable, preventable or
responded to immediately.
Thirdly, we must contribute to ensuring that
technological improvements are continuous and are
available on the ground in the gear that peacekeepers
carry and the weapons and tools that they use to enhance
their mobility, performance, endurance, range and loadcarrying capabilities, while guaranteeing their safety
and security. That also includes the strengthening of
communication within missions and enhancing the
overall capacity to take informed decisions at a tactical
or operational level.
Fourthly, the consistent training and capacitybuilding of peacekeepers in the area of technology needs
attention and investment. It is with that in mind that
India is committed to long-term engagement with the
United Nations C4ISR Academy for Peace Operations
in Entebbe, Uganda, to meet the training needs, link
it with the available technological capability and
shape future requirements. I am pleased to announce
that we have signed a memorandum of understanding
between the Government of India and the United
Nations in support of the Partnership for Technology
in Peacekeeping initiative and the United Nations
C4ISR Academy for Peace Operations. We would
welcome other Member States taking an active interest
in that evolving paradigm. Political will, strengthened
partnerships and shifts in organizational culture are
required to take it forward.
Maximum transparency should remain a principle of
the use of peacekeeping technology, in particular when
used to enable information-gathering and -sharing.
Peacekeeping requires continuous review, adaptation
and transparent engagement with all stakeholders, as
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

well as strong procedural safeguards and effective
oversight mechanisms.
Peacekeeping continues to play a crucial role in
India’s vision of ensuring international peace and
security. Providing greater clarity, direction and
professionalism in our United Nations peacekeeping
operations is at the heart of the vision.
India has been a pioneer in United Nations
peacekeeping, deploying more than a quarter of a
million troops over the years in as many as 49 United
Nations peacekeeping missions. Serving under the
Blue Flag, over the years 174 gallant Indian soldiers
have made the supreme sacrifice, the largest number
among troop-contributing countries. In keeping with
this tradition, today we have more than 5,000 personnel
deployed across nine missions.
As a reflection of our deep commitment to
protecting the protectors, the Government of India
provided 200,000 doses of coronavirus disease vaccines
for United Nations peacekeeping personnel worldwide
in March this year. We are pleased that, as the outcomes
of our discussions, today the Security Council adopted
resolution 2589 (2021), on accountability of crimes
against United Nations peacekeepers, as well as
presidential statement S/PRST/2021/17, on technology
for peacekeeping, the first such Security Council
document on this topic. It is the Council that sends
peacekeepers across continents to keep the peace and
implement the mandate that it decides. It is therefore
the duty of this organ to also ensure that we provide
them with the means to implement that mandate.
We have shown today, both in the roll-out of
the Unite Aware platform, as well as the actionable
elements of training incorporated in the memorandum
of understanding, that India believes in walking the
talk when it comes to the safety and security of United
Nations peacekeepers. We hope that, in our discussions
today, we get an equally strong reaffirmation of the
intent of the United Nations.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia.
Ms. Liimets (Estonia): At the outset, allow me to
thank India for convening this high-level open debate
and leading the negotiations on the corresponding
presidential statement (S/PRST/2021/17). I would also
like to congratulate India on the successful adoption

S/PV. 8838

of the resolution on protecting peacekeepers (resolution
2589 (2021)). In addition, I thank the Secretary-General
for his insightful intervention.
As was already highlighted, the integration
of relevant existing and new technologies into
peacekeeping missions can enhance mandate
implementation, including the protection of civilians.
It can also strengthen the safety and security of
peacekeepers, which is urgently needed given the
high number of peacekeeping fatalities. In short,
peacekeeping missions simply cannot afford to lag
behind in the use of modern technologies.
Estonia believes that special focus should be
given to gender-responsive technologies that are
driven by the practical needs of end users. The use
of environmentally responsible solutions, including
renewable energy, in United Nations peacekeeping
operations is equally important.
There are practical steps that need to be taken in
order to support better use of innovations in ongoing
peacekeeping missions. In that regard, I would like to
highlight three observations.
First, it is crucial that we become better at
tapping into our collective knowledge regarding new
technologies and best practices. On that note, I would
like to commend the Secretary-General for his ongoing
initiatives, including the Unite Aware platform, that
seek to connect the technological and innovative
capacities of Member States with the specific needs
of peacekeeping missions. Estonia encourages further
cooperation in that area.
Secondly, all knowledge of new technologies and
best practices is of little use unless they are actually
integrated into peacekeeping missions. Therefore, it
is crucial to ensure that the necessary political, legal
and financial frameworks be in place in order to
allow innovations to be adopted swiftly. Estonia also
welcomes the development of the strategy for the digital
transformation of United Nations peacekeeping. We look
forward to its release and subsequent implementation.
Thirdly, we must also become better at carrying
out regular reviews to ensure that the technologies used
in peacekeeping missions are indeed the best ones out
there. Peacekeeping missions take place in a constantly
changing environment; and technology is evolving
quickly. Peacekeeping missions therefore need to
develop continuously to keep up with those changes.

21-228505/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Peacekeeping has often been referred to as the
flagship enterprise of the United Nations. The Security
Council must spare no effort in driving innovation
that enables that flagship to continue to evolve with
the changing realities. It is crucial for the millions of
people whom peacekeeping serves and for the hundreds
of thousands of people who serve in peacekeeping.
To conclude, I reiterate Estonia’s full support for
the responsible use of technology that would enhance
the ability of peacekeepers to do their noble job
more effectively.
The President: I now call on the Permanent
Representative of the United States of America and
member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): I thank you, Mr. President, for bringing this
important issue before the Security Council. I also wish
to thank the Secretary-General for his briefing.
Today’s peacekeepers work day and night under
some of the world’s most severe circumstances to
address threats to international peace and security. We
thank them for their service. They deserve the most
advanced, cutting-edge technology to help them do
their difficult job better. The right technology helps
keep peacekeepers safe, and it helps them keep the
communities they serve safe too. It is therefore our
duty to ensure that they have the technology and use it
appropriately. After all, we all share the responsibility
of ensuring the safety and security of peacekeepers as
they, in turn, protect civilians.
It is a top priority of the Secretary-General’s Action
for Peacekeeping (A4P) initiative, and it is a top priority
for us too. The A4P Plus initiative further emphasizes
the need to ensure the well-being of peacekeeping
personnel, including by providing reliable medical
support for all peacekeepers. We therefore deeply
appreciate the Secretariat’s efforts to improve
emergency medical care practices using technology.
We have supported those priorities through our own
capacity-building partnerships for years, working with
troop-contributing countries and providing them with
the technology and equipment they need to enhance
their medical capabilities and save lives.
The right technology can also increase mission
efficiency and effectiveness. Peacekeeping missions
predominantly operate in areas with unreliable power,
or without electricity grids altogether. Missions look
6/18

18/08/2021

for autonomous power supply options and rely heavily
on diesel generators to overcome that challenge. In fact,
more than 90 per cent of the total consumed electricity
by peacekeeping missions is supplied by diesel
generators. That diesel costs a great deal — a large
share of total mission cost. It accounts for the majority
of United Nations greenhouse-gas emissions, and it
leaves missions vulnerable to supply chain disruptions.
It is time to disrupt that reliance on diesel.
The United Nations environmental strategy for
peace operations provides a framework for reducing
the environmental footprint of United Nations field
operations and for deploying missions that achieve
maximum efficiency at a minimum cost. We are excited
to see the vast improvements in data collection and
analysis that phase 1 delivered, and we look forward
to seeing the results of phase 2 efforts to reduce the
reliance of our peacekeeping missions on fossil fuels
and increase their use of renewable energy technologies.
We continue to seek innovative solutions to today’s
peacekeeping challenges and attempt to scale those
solutions across missions. We must take a phased and
gradual approach. Our troop- and police-contributing
country (TCCs/PCCs) partners need time to develop,
learn, deploy and sustain new capabilities. Procuring
and sustaining new equipment requires additional
training, different maintenance and spare parts,
resources and patience. Contingent-owned equipment
guidelines and reimbursement rates will also need
to ensure TCCs/PCCs are compensated for their
investments in technological solutions. Wherever we
encounter capability gaps, we should work through
the light coordination mechanism to share information
and identify potential capacity-building partnerships to
close those gaps.
Finally, we must work together to ensure that
innovative technologies are used responsibly. Military
intelligence,
surveillance
and
reconnaissance,
including unmanned aircraft systems and camp
security technologies, offer promising solutions to
peacekeeping operations. However, they must be used
in line with United Nations doctrine and policy. We
need to give due respect for safeguarding information
gathered in accordance with international human
rights law and international humanitarian law. To those
ends, we welcome the Secretary-General’s efforts to
launch a new digital transformation strategy for United
Nations peacekeeping. We look forward to supporting
its implementation.
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We are eager to discuss all of this further,
in particular how we can enhance peacekeeping
medical capabilities, at the upcoming United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference. We welcome
the fact that the Republic of Korea, as ministerial host,
intends to focus on this theme.
Technology can be used as either a tool for good
or a weapon for harm. It can take lives — or, more
important, it can save lives. Together let us make sure
that we deploy technology rightly and justly to protect
the protectors and empower them to better serve so
many of the world’s most vulnerable people.
Mr. Ladeb (Tunisia) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I thank India for organizing this important
meeting. We welcome Mr. Jaishankar, Minister of
External Affairs of India, as President of the Security
Council. I also thank His Excellency Secretary-General
Antonio Guterres for his briefing and for his efforts in
the area of technology and peacekeeping
With the continuation of conflicts and hotbeds
of tension in many regions of the world and the
accompanying challenges and threats to international
peace and security, there is an urgent need for
peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations undertaken
by United Nations missions. Although such missions
usually carry out their tasks in difficult and perilous
conditions, recent years have witnessed the emergence
of new challenges and difficulties related to the nature
of the conflicts themselves, which have become more
violent and complex owing to the development of
weapons, as well as more geographically widespread
and longer in duration, in addition to the multiplicity
and overlap of the parties involved. Those conflicts
have wide range of humanitarian and security effects,
political, economic and social repercussions, in addition
to other natural factors and health pandemics, climate
change, the growing role of terrorist organizations,
armed groups and organized crime activities, with their
involvement in one way or another in existing conflicts
and crises.
All of that has been reflected in peacekeeping
and peacebuilding missions, which have multiple
responsibilities and tasks and are increasingly operating
in more hostile environments, facing greater risks
and challenges at various levels, including providing
the necessary protection for the staff, assets and
headquarters of the missions, especially in the light of
the significant increase in operations targeting them.

S/PV. 8838

In the light of the increasing and diversification of
traditional and emerging threats and serious challenges
to international peace and security, and to the lives of
millions in conflict areas, it is not possible to confront
all this with traditional means that do not necessarily
ensure that United Nations missions can carry out
their tasks with the required efficiency. Therefore, it
has become more urgent than ever for a new approach
based on enabling the missions to use all effective and
efficient means of confronting the challenges, at the
forefront of which is the use of modern technologies,
through the adoption of a clear strategy to include them
in peacekeeping and peacebuilding operations.
In that context, missions need to develop means
for their analytical and field work by using artificial
intelligence applications to analyse information related
to conflicts, as well as to adopt satellite mapping and
GPS data to determine the areas of presence of displaced
people and refugees, determine ways to reach them
and identify their needs, in addition to documenting
violations of human rights, monitoring the movements
of the parties to the conflict, tracking armed groups
and monitoring the smuggling of weapons and fighters
through digital mapping and social media.
There is also the need to empower United Nations
missions with modern technologies to enhance the
security and protection of their personnel, such as by
providing them with the means to detect improvised
explosive devises as well as with technological means
for crisis management and combating misinformation,
especially in the context of the coronavirus disease
pandemic and the dangers of terrorism. There is also
the need to use drones to reach areas of conflict that are
difficult to access or that pose a high degree of risk to
the lives of peacekeepers.
The more difficult the mandates of the United
Nations peace missions have become, the more the need
for missions is emphasized, and the more important
their role has become in providing protection, meeting
the humanitarian needs of millions of civilians,
maintaining ceasefires, supporting political settlement
processes and consolidating the elements of security
and stability. Missions represent hope for the people
they serve and reflect the collective international will
to maintain peace, security and stability. They therefore
need support, assistance and modern technologies,
especially since many parties involved in undermining
international peace and security, such as terrorist
organizations, use such technologies and rely heavily

21-228507/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

on them in their subversive activities, financing,
propaganda and recruitment operations.
In that context, we renew our support for the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and for the digitization strategy for peacekeeping
operations and all the efforts made by the Secretariat
to improve working methods and protection for United
Nations missions, in order to enhance their performance
and ability to face challenges and effectively deal with
risks and difficulties. In that regard, we also stress the
importance of the contributions and efforts of Member
States and the role of the Security Council in this field,
in line with resolution 2518 (2020).
In conclusion, we commend the initiative of
launching the Unite Aware platform to enhance the
safety of peacekeepers using modern technology,
and we support the presidential statement on the
topic of today’s meeting (S/PRST/2021/17). We also
reiterate Tunisia’s commitment to continue its active
contribution to international peace and security efforts.
That commitment is one of our most important priorities
since our engagement in international peace missions
began, in the 1960s.
Mr. Dai Bing (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
welcome Minister for External Affairs Jaishankar,
who is presiding over today’s open debate. I also thank
Secretary-General Guterres for his briefing.
United Nations peacekeeping operations play a
major role in maintaining international peace and
security and promoting political processes, monitoring
the implementation of ceasefires and protecting
vulnerable groups. As the shape and nature of conflicts
and disputes evolve, peacekeeping operations are faced
with increasingly complex risks and challenges. The use
of technologies of all kinds contributes to the capacity
and efficiency of peacekeeping operations and helps
reduce the safety risks to peacekeeping personnel.
China
welcomes
presidential
statement
S/PRST/2021/17, on peacekeeping and technology,
which was just adopted by the Security Council, and
supports the full use of technologies to continuously
improve the capacities of peacekeeping operations to
implement their mandates. China would like to make
the following observations.
First, the use of new technologies must focus on
improving the safety of peacekeeping personnel.
Peacekeeping operations can fully use technological
8/18

18/08/2021

tools to improve information-gathering and analysis,
early warning, emergency response, emergency
relief and other capacities and reduce safety risks for
peacekeepers. Improvised explosive devices (IEDs)
have become a major cause of injuries and fatalities
among peacekeeping personnel. When the Secretariat
prepares the report of the independent strategic review
of peacekeeping operations’ responses to IEDs, as
requested in presidential statement S/PRST/2021/11,
adopted by the Council in May, it should fully consider
ways to use technology to prevent and mitigate the
threat of IEDs.
Secondly, the use of new technologies in
peacekeeping
operations
should
respect
the
sovereignty and will of host countries. While using
technology of all kinds to conduct reconnaissance and
surveillance, peacekeeping missions should conduct
prior consultations with host countries to ensure that
the relevant technology is used in full respect for
their sovereignty, upholds the purposes and principles
of the Charter of the United Nations, including
non-interference in their internal affairs, and follows
the guiding principles of peacekeeping. Peacekeeping
missions should use the relevant technologies, based on
needs on the ground and in accordance with Council
mandates, while refraining from harming the national,
public and information security of host countries.
China proposed a global initiative on data security last
year, which can serve as a reference for regulating the
use of technology in peacekeeping, while enhancing
data security.
Thirdly, the use of new technologies in peacekeeping
operations needs the relevant support and guarantees
to facilitate the effective use of new technological
equipment in such operations. The list of contingentowned equipment of troop- and police-contributing
countries (TCCs/PCCs) should be updated in a timely
manner. Cost effectiveness should also be taken
fully into consideration to ensure proper planning.
All Member States should pay their peacekeeping
contributions in full and on time. Reimbursement
for the equipment and personnel of TCCs and PCCs
should be provided in a timely manner to ensure that
peacekeeping operations can make full use of new
technologies. To improve peacekeepers’ capacities in
using new technologies, the Security Council, TCCs,
PCCs and the Secretariat should improve coordination,
provide more tailored training for peacekeepers and
compile lessons and best practices quickly.
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

China is the largest TCC for peacekeeping operations
among the permanent members of the Council and
attaches great importance to the use of technologies in
the area of peacekeeping. We have responded positively
to the tripartite cooperation mechanism championed
by the United Nations and provide support on the
use of new technologies to other TCCs and regional
organizations in their peacekeeping operations.
The China-United Nations Peace and Development
Trust Fund has implemented projects that use
technologies to improve peacekeeping, camp security
and operational capacities, such as projects to build
smart camps and improve data-sharing. Resolution 2518
(2020), adopted last year by the Council, and presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/11, adopted in May, include
specific recommendations and requirements on the use
of technologies to improve the safety of peacekeepers.
China stands ready to work with other Council
members and the international community to contribute
to the continuous improvement of peacekeeping
operations and the safety of peacekeepers.
Mr. Kimani (Kenya): I thank His Excellency
Mr. António Guterres for his insightful briefing on this
important subject.
As our contribution to international peace and
security, Kenya has participated in United Nations
peacekeeping missions around the world for many years.
Our peacekeeping story is similar to that of other troopand police-contributing countries represented here. It
is a story of continuing commitment to humankind,
peace and political stability and to the prosperity of all
peoples of the world.
The core mandate of the Security Council is to
pursue and maintain international peace and security.
That is driven most visibly by our peacekeepers,
the gallant men and women who are deployed in
increasingly deteriorating and complex political
and security environments that are characterized by
frequent targeted attacks, including through the use of
landmines, explosive remnants of war and improvised
explosive devices (IEDs). We salute them and honour
the memory of those who have had to pay the ultimate
price in the line of duty. We thank India for today’s
ceremony to remind us of the solemn duty we have to
our peacekeepers.
Kenya is committed to working with the members
of the Security Council and other stakeholders in

S/PV. 8838

championing the protection of peacekeepers. In that
regard, we commend the Secretary-General for his
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative, whose priorities
include accountability to peacekeepers by ensuring
their safety and security.
As the world is changing, so is the peacekeeping
environment. One of the most revolutionary agents
of change globally is the exponential advancement in
technology. Its use has become an indispensable tool in
all facets of life, including in peacekeeping. I support
the statements that have been made noting that it is not
only a challenge and a threat but also an opportunity.
However, technology has emerged as a tool in the
hands of terrorists and insurgents, who are increasingly
using the most modern technologies, including drones
and even elementary artificial intelligence, to plan
and carry out their attacks. Those groups also employ
Internet-based solutions and platforms for unfettered
communication and the dissemination of information
that endangers both peacekeepers and civilians.
Kenya welcomes the efforts by United Nations
departments to enhance the use of technology for
peacekeeping operations. We are particularly delighted
by the launch of the Unite Aware platform and others
aimed at enhancing the situational awareness of
peacekeepers. I therefore thank India for partnering
with the Department of Operational Support to ensure
the success of the project.
Allow me to underscore six points that are pertinent
to the employment of technology in the protection
of peacekeepers.
First, we need technology to be fully integrated
into mission mandates. The Security Council should
ensure that approved personnel have the strength
and equipment, including the requisite technological
enablers with corresponding budget provisions. That
technology should include counter-IED and explosive
ordnance disposal equipment and the ability to exploit
the electromagnetic spectrum for the benefit of
peacekeeping missions. In addition, there should be a
capability for the detection of inflammatory and violent
speech on social media that endangers civilians in the
theatre and peacekeepers alike. Social media companies
should be pushed to respond to the needs of missions.
There is much work under way with regard to pushing
social media companies to be more responsive to hate
or inflammatory speech online, and that should be
extended to the areas where we dispatch peacekeepers.

21-228509/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

Secondly, troop- and police-contributing countries
should be encouraged to deploy with essential
equipment, for which the United Nations should be
ready to reimburse accordingly. Countries that have the
means to support such operations gratis, through the
Secretariat, are encouraged to do so.
Thirdly, with diverse forces coming together for
peacekeeping operations, there can be significant
interoperability challenges and duplication among units.
It is therefore important to set standards that should
be strictly adhered to by all missions. The possibility
of sharing technology solutions and equipment across
missions should also be explored. Such sharing would
come with the added advantage of cost effectiveness
and developing a common operating infrastructure on
which future operations can seamlessly build.
Fourthly, we need to gain and maintain the trust of
host nations by ensuring that the information collected
using modern technology is utilized only to protect the
United Nations mandate, its personnel and installations,
as well as civilians. The Council should emphasize the
responsible use of technology by avoiding unnecessary
deployments and ensuring strict adherence to the
principles of impartiality and neutrality.
Fifthly, while focusing on technology, we must be
reminded that the basic foundations of armed conflict
remain the same. Peacekeepers must therefore be
properly grounded on the physical, moral and conceptual
foundations of conflict in the environments in which
they operate. Technology comes into the picture as an
enabler of the mandate.
Finally, and this is an obvious appeal, which I think
bears repeating, the most devastating technologies
remain guns and the ammunition they use. We need
to help missions assist countries in their disarmament
efforts to prevent guns and ammunition from getting
into the hands of illicit actors who are engaged in
hostile operations when we dispatch peacekeepers.
Let me conclude by reiterating Kenya’s commitment
to the advancement of international peace and
security through well-facilitated and well-equipped
peacekeepers for sustainable stability and prosperity.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for convening today’s debate. I would
also like to thank the Secretary-General for his remarks
on the subject.
10/18

18/08/2021

Without peacekeepers, there is no peacekeeping.
They are our most valuable asset for protecting
civilians, championing the rule of law and ultimately
paving the way to durable peace.
Yet, sadly, peacekeepers continue to pay the ultimate
price as they conduct their vital work implementing the
mandates we set. So far this year, 83 peacekeepers have
lost their lives in the service of the United Nations. It
is therefore fitting that this morning we pay tribute
to their service. We must work collectively to ensure
peacekeepers’ safety and security, both for their
protection and so that they are better empowered to
deliver their mandates.
Technology and innovation supported by thorough
training can enhance the safety and security of all
United Nations personnel. That is why the United
Kingdom is proud to partner with India in support of
such initiatives as Unite Aware, which is a technology
platform that improves peacekeepers’ situational
awareness and information analysis, which are vital
elements in keeping them safe. Technologies such
as these, alongside developments in peacekeeping
intelligence, help protect our peacekeepers and support
their ability to protect civilians. They contribute to the
overall effectiveness of each mission. They provide real
operational benefits.
We have seen this on the ground through the
recent United Kingdom deployment to the United
Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization
Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). United Kingdom
troops have gathered intelligence to support mission
planning and improve mission performance. Recently,
United Kingdom personnel led a cordon-and-search
operation to seize weapons and equipment hidden by
terrorists threatening local communities — the first for
MINUSMA in some time.
But technology is, of course, only one part of the
challenge of mitigating risks to peacekeepers. We must
also ensure that all peacekeepers receive training in
basic military skills and in skills specific to their tasks.
Maintaining and improving the knowledge and skills
of peacekeepers will have an invaluable impact on
casualty reduction.
Comprehensive and mission-specific training
is key to understanding and tackling threats.
Peacekeepers with the right skills and training and
the appropriate equipment are more able to effectively
defend themselves against attack. Further, through
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

our partnerships with other countries that contribute
personnel, the United Kingdom provides training in
a range of vital areas, including counter-improvisedexplosive-device training, peacekeeping intelligence
and public-order management.
I would now like to highlight the benefits of
technology for the environment, including within
United Nations operations. Climate change remains
the biggest collective challenge of our generation. To
protect the generations of the future, we must look at
all options to curb emissions. In 2020, United Nations
peace operations accounted for 42 per cent of the United
Nations system’s carbon footprint. As we have already
heard today, we must do better if we are to meet the
Secretary-General’s climate-action plan targets, and
that starts with United Nations action.
For example, the overwhelming majority of
MINUSMA’s energy requirements are met through
diesel. The mission anticipated using 55.8 million litres
of fuel in the last financial year, which is a 13 per cent
increase over the year before. It is therefore time to look
at using such alternative renewable-energy sources as
solar. The fact that Mali and many sub-Saharan African
countries with large United Nations missions are
already feeling the impacts of climate change should
give us an even greater sense of urgency.
There is an opportunity in this context. Through
the effective use of technology, peacekeeping, the
safety and security of peacekeepers and the health
of our planet can be improved. We should seize this
opportunity together.
Mr. Aougi (Niger) (spoke in French): In recent
years, United Nations peace operations have been taking
place in difficult and dangerous terrain, in settings
marked by frequent deadly terrorist attacks against
peacekeepers, civilian populations and the armed forces
of host countries. In this particular context, the use of
technology in peacekeeping appears to be indispensable
as a performance multiplier, especially with the
constraints linked to the coronavirus pandemic. That is
why I would like to thank India for having included this
important topic on the Council’s agenda. I also thank
the Secretary-General for his briefing.
The importance of the digital transformation of
peace operations is no longer in question, as is revealed
by the increasing number of deaths and injuries in
missions. This grim situation calls for a permanent
adaptation of peacekeeper equipment, as hostile forces

S/PV. 8838

use sophisticated equipment to achieve their goals. Faced
with the expansion of hostile forces regularly equipping
themselves with new technologies that strengthen their
capacity to cause harm, “the Blue Helmets cannot win
today’s fights with yesterday’s technologies”, as His
Excellency Mr. Cho Hyun, Permanent Representative
of the Republic of Korea, so rightly noted in the 17 June
2021 webinar on the United Nations strategy on the
digital transformation of peacekeeping operations.
Given the realities on the ground that challenge the
Secretariat, the Security Council, troop- and financescontributing countries and all peacekeeping partners,
the Niger strongly encourages the use of technology
in these operations. Technology facilitates carrying
operations out, which assists in the implementation of
mandates in complex theatres and in responding to the
events taking place there. In brief, technology improves
the performance of missions, facilitates the rapid and
effective implementation of stabilization actions, the
safety and security of Blue Helmets, and the protection
of civilians, without which the effective implementation
of mandates would be incomplete.
The digital transformation of peacekeeping
operations could facilitate a better knowledge of
their environment and the situation on the ground,
notably through rapidly obtaining information using
sophisticated equipment. The use of new technological
innovations has the potential to significantly improve
the range, coverage and accuracy of observations in the
field and help bridge the gap between mandates and
capabilities. It will reduce crime in conflict settings
and thereby increase the protection of civilians and the
safety and security of peacekeepers. Accordingly, the
use of new technologies can compensate for the lack
of adequate resources that missions often experience,
enabling them to be more active in the effective
fulfilment of their mandates. However, the quest for
performance must not overshadow the need to ensure
that the use of new technologies respects international
law and the privacy of local populations. The rules
for these technologies’ use must be clearly stated and
defined in order to avoid pitfalls.
In conclusion, if we want to achieve the goal of
the digital transformation of peacekeeping operations,
we will necessarily have to develop better cooperation
around this issue, so as to facilitate access to state-ofthe-art equipment for all troop-contributing countries
and avoid delays both in deployments and in the
execution of missions. This vision could not be achieved

21-2285011/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

without supporting troop-contributing countries in
strengthening their capacity to use new technologies to
better respond to emergency situations.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I thank the President for convening today’s
extremely important debate. I thank the SecretaryGeneral of the United Nations for his briefing.
I would like to address three points. First, the
potential of technology must be further exploited for
more effective peacekeeping. Missions are facing
increasingly complex and volatile environments.
France condemns the attacks by armed groups that have
caused numerous civilian casualties in recent days in
Mali, the Central African Republic or the Democratic
Republic of Congo. The attackers’ methods are evolving
with the increasing use of improvised explosive devices
and mines. Local armed forces and peacekeepers
continue to be targeted. France pays tribute to all those
who fell in the name of peace.
Peacekeeping must therefore adapt its ways
of working. For missions, the potential offered by
technologies is threefold: to strengthen the protection
of civilians; to enhance mission performance; and to
contribute to protecting the protectors, the peacekeepers.
By refining analysis and early-warning mechanisms,
technologies make missions more responsive. By
enabling economies of scale and rationalizing resources,
they increase mission efficiency. By modernizing the
defence of camps or equipping them with sustainable
energy, which reduces the frequency of logistical
convoys, they make the action of the Blue Helmets
more secure.
Secondly, the technological tool must be adapted to
the needs of the field and the peacekeepers. Technology
is, of course, only a means to peacekeeping. Thought
needs to be given to the appropriate level of technology
to be implemented so that it meets specific operational
needs. In that regard, the Unite Aware platform is an
excellent example, allowing peacekeepers to stay
informed in real time of developments on the ground.
Exploiting technology also means improving
equipment and capabilities. I am thinking of the potential
of drones, intelligent anti-rocket propelled grenade
systems and tools to protect against cyberattacks.
Naturally, that requires human and financial resources.
Mastering the new technologies requires prior
appropriate training of peacekeepers, which is primarily
12/18

18/08/2021

the responsibility of troop-contributing countries. The
information gathered by technology will be useful only
if we are able to process it. Methods and best practices
must be shared among contingents and operations. By
way of an example, in Mali, lessons learned in detecting
and combating improvised explosive devices would
gain from being shared, to the advantage of our mission.
Finally, and this is my last point, technology must
be used in a responsible manner to achieve political
solutions. It must be used to implement mandates in full
compliance with peacekeeping principles, international
humanitarian law and the protection of human rights.
We must also promote the digital inclusion of all,
especially women and young people. The potential
of digital technology must be harnessed to create
more early warning and rapid response networks, as
is the case in the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali. Technology
cannot be used to achieve sustainable peace unless it is
people-centred.
Finally, new technologies can be used more for
environmental protection. I am thinking in particular
of the deployment of energy-efficient equipment or the
emission reductions made possible through digitization.
We must progress in that direction.
Much remains to be done. The Strategy for the
Digital Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping,
which has just been finalized, must maximize the
potential of such technologies, in addition to the
operations already carried out by the Blue Helmets,
which must continue. It is also in line with the priorities
of the Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping
Plus initiative, which France fully supports.
The potential of technologies will also be on the agenda
of the Seoul Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference next
December, where we will continue the discussions
begun today and our commitments in the service
of peace.
Mr. Dang (Viet Nam): I thank the Indian
presidency for organizing this open debate and you,
Mr. Minister, for presiding over our discussion today.
We also thank the Secretary-General for his insightful
and comprehensive briefing.
Over the years, peacekeeping has become one of the
most important United Nations tools in the maintenance
of peace and security. It has evolved to address complex
situations and take up challenging mandates, facilitating
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

the cessation of armed conflicts, the implementation of
ceasefires and political agreements, the protection of
civilians and the delivery of humanitarian assistance.
However, peacekeepers are facing more and
more challenges. Peacekeeping must therefore be
equipped with the proper tools to enable our men
and women in the field to effectively carry out
their mandate and to protect them from the various
threats. The differences that technology can make to
peacekeeping have become increasingly evident. We
see great potential in using technology as an enabler
to enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers
and the effectiveness of mandate implementation.
Yet, at the same time, the application of technology
should be driven by the practical needs of a concrete
mission and task. Further possibilities could be realized
through further research, training and the application
of technology at the field level and at United Nations
Headquarters. It should also be continuous — before,
during and after deployment — to ensure sustainability
and progressiveness.
Peacekeepers must be properly prepared and
equipped and afforded the best protection, including
through ensured assets, the ownership and use of
technologies and participation opportunity in an
equitable manner.
In that connection, we applaud the effort
undertaken by troop- and police-contributing
countries and the Secretariat to encourage the use of
technology. We also take note of the recent adoption of
the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of United
Nations Peacekeeping, with the aim of harnessing the
potential of digital technology and the better delivery
of peacekeeping mandates.
However, we recognize the possible risks often
associated with the use of technology, such as
misinformation, disinformation, the irresponsible
management and use of data, et cetera. Nevertheless,
we should not shy away from exploring the significant
possibilities offered by technology. Instead, its
application should be carried out and managed in a
careful manner in order to ensure its practicability,
efficiency and confidentiality. The selection of
technology should also align with the technology,
capacity-building and training of each troop- and
police-contributing country, as well as the specific
contact of each peacekeeping mission.

S/PV. 8838

Viet Nam wishes to reaffirm its support to United
Nations peacekeeping, as well as efforts aimed at
enhancing the safety and security of peacekeepers
and mandate implementation. With that in mind,
we encourage Member States to continue to engage
in dialogue and cooperation, including through
engagement with the Secretariat, the Security Council
and other relevant United Nations forums in order to
find effective measures for the use of existing and
new technology in peacekeeping, while respecting
the principles of peacekeeping, international law and
the sovereignty of States. We look forward to further
engaging with all partners in that regard.
Mr. Kvalheim (Norway): Let me therefore start by
thanking India and you, Your Excellency, for arranging
this debate and for presenting the presidential statement
on how we can move forward on this important issue
(S/PRST/2021/17). As technological advances continue
at a breathtaking pace, it is most timely that the Security
Council meets to discuss the role of technology for
United Nations peacekeeping.
We need to make sure that peace operations are set
up in the best way possible, including when it comes to
the use of relevant technologies. Norway fully agrees
with the focus given to technology as a cross-cutting
issue in the preparations for the Seoul Peacekeeping
Ministerial Conference. We are convinced that such a
focus will help to ensure that further progress can be
made in the current implementation phase of the Action
for Peacekeeping Plus initiative.
Norway welcomes the Strategy for the Digital
Transformation of United Nations Peacekeeping. As
the Secretary-General himself emphasized, it is an
important contribution to his vision statement in which
he identified digital transformation as an imperative
for the next five years. Norway fully concurs with
the emphasis placed on the use of technology to
enhance the safety and security of peacekeepers, and
strengthening the capacity to protect civilians is a key
Norwegian priority.
We will therefore provide funding to a project
undertaken by the Department of Peace Operations that
is using data and technology to enhance performance on
the protection of civilians by United Nations operations.
That includes the Situational Awareness Geospace
Enterprise database and the Unite Aware platform.
Norway is a strong believer in the importance of
making active use of technology to enhance political

21-2285013/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

processes. Political process is conducive to the
establishment of a protective environment, to the benefit
of peacekeepers and civilians alike. Equally importantly,
an inclusive political process is vital in laying the
groundwork for lasting peace. Digital technologies can
play a key role in that regard through the facilitation
of an analytical, gender-responsive, forward-looking
understanding of conflict environments.
However, one cannot simply assume that the
active use of digital and other technologies will change
everything for the better. Norway therefore welcomes
the guiding principles for the digital transformation
strategy, which include a do-no-harm approach,
inclusion and transparency, and sustainability and
scalability. Those principles are equally relevant
regarding the use of other technologies. In that regard,
it is critical that the digital dignity of affected people be
preserved by protecting their personal data.
To move forward, we need to ensure that discussions
on the use of technology are integrated into all aspects
of the peacekeeping planning process. Moreover, the
use of the various technologies should continuously be
evaluated and adapted as missions progress and lessons
are learned. We also need to engage in partnership and
cooperation, not only within the United Nations and
among Member States, but also with those who develop
new technologies, such as think tanks, the private
sector, academia and non-governmental organizations.
The questions we should ask include the following.
Which technologies have the greatest potential to
enhance the implementation of peacekeeping mandates?
What are the main obstacles regarding the use of new
technologies in United Nations peace operations?
What risks do their use pose? How can we strengthen
protection, safeguard against those risks and ensure
that their use is in accordance with international law,
including obligations under international human rights
law and international humanitarian law?
In conclusion, peacekeeping operations are one
of the world community’s most effective tools for the
promotion and maintenance of international peace
and security. It is our responsibility to enable them to
optimize their effectiveness and ensure that they can
deliver on their mandated task.
Ms. King (Saint Vincent and the Grenadines):
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines welcomes today’s
discussion and we thank the Secretary-General for
his remarks.
14/18

18/08/2021

Peacekeepers are deployed under the most hostile
conditions, where they face immense threats to their
own security, as well as that of the communities they
are mandated to protect. Against that backdrop, we must
redouble our efforts to keep them safe as we honour
them for their selfless commitments and sacrifices.
To that end, we commend today’s adoption of the
presidential statement on peacekeeping and technology
(S/PRST/2021/17) and congratulate the Republic of
India on its leadership on this important issue.
A wide array of health, socioeconomic, political,
security and environmental hazards threaten stability
in conflict-affected countries. Those interconnecting
challenges — which include the coronavirus disease
(COVID-19) pandemic, the climate crisis and
asymmetric threats posed by terrorists, armed groups
and organized criminals — undermine the effectiveness
of peace operations and place at risk the lives of their
uniformed and civilian personnel.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines condemns in
the strongest terms recent hostilities that targeted
peacekeepers in northern Mali and aggressions against
the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
compound. Those incidents provide a striking reminder
that all attacks against United Nations personnel and
infrastructure, wheresoever and by whomsoever
committed, must be promptly investigated and
those found responsible held to account. Under no
circumstance should impunity for attacks against
peacekeepers be tolerated.
It is widely accepted that innovative technologies
serve as force multipliers in mission settings by
improving surveillance through information gathering
and peacekeeping intelligence; by increasing
situational awareness and strengthening force
protection; by enhancing strategic communications,
including capacities for monitoring and countering
disinformation, misinformation and hate speech; and
by supporting decision-making and mandate delivery
at the strategic, operational and tactical levels.
We must strive to ensure that those competencies are
made widely available to each peacekeeping operation.
In that regard, it is crucial that all stakeholders,
including troop- and police-contributing countries,
Member States and the Secretariat work closely together
to provide each mission with adequate resources as well
as clear, focused and actionable mandates to ensure that
peacekeepers are able to discharge their duties safely
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

and efficiently. Enhanced triangular cooperation is
essential to implementing resolutions 2436 (2018) and
2518 (2020), as well as other relevant outcomes that
address peacekeeping performance and bolster the
safety and security of peacekeepers.
It is imperative that modern technologies that
assist with explosive ordnance detection, management
and disposal be made available to all mission settings
whenever possible and transferred to host countries that
grapple with the residual risks of improvised explosive
devices (IEDs) and other remnants of war. IEDs have
claimed the lives of far too many uniformed and
civilian personnel. It is also crucial that peacekeepers
be provided with safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines
to protect them and the host communities in which they
are deployed.
To conclude, my delegation commends all efforts to
modernize peacekeeping through measures such as the
Secretary-General’s Action for Peacekeeping initiative
and the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of
United Nations Peacekeeping. We also welcome
all efforts to increase the use of renewable energy
technology in United Nations peacekeeping missions.
Those technologies improve climate compliance,
enhance mission efficiency and bolster the safety and
security of United Nations personnel.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines encourages
the further integration of modern technology into
peacekeeping and emphasizes that those technologies
must always be reliable, gender-responsive and
environmentally friendly, while meeting the practical
requirements of peacekeepers in the field. They must
also, in every circumstance, fulfil the national needs
and priorities of the host countries in which they
are deployed.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome your personal participation, Sir,
in today’s events. We highly appreciate your country’s
contribution to United Nations peacekeeping efforts.
India is not only one of the biggest troop contributors to
peacekeeping operations, but also actively participates
in discussions at the United Nations aimed at improving
the performance of peacekeepers and their working
conditions. It therefore comes as no surprise that those
issues have taken centre stage during India’s presidency
of the Council.
We are grateful to you, Sir, for raising such
important issues as ensuring the safety and security

S/PV. 8838

of Blue Helmets and the use of new technologies in
peacekeeping. We supported the initiative to prepare
the two respective documents and value the work done
by your country’s delegation. As a result, we have
before us genuinely balanced documents that take
into account the interests of all Council members.
For that reason, Russia co-sponsored resolution
2589 (2021), on accountability for crimes committed
against peacekeepers.
The Blue Helmets do their noble duty in extremely
complex and dangerous circumstances, risking their
lives on a daily basis, and their contribution to the
business of peace is invaluable. Therefore, crimes
committed against peacekeepers, the investigation of
such crimes and accountability for those responsible
require our special attention. We need to create
mechanisms that allow us to ensure the administration
of justice in a swift and unprejudiced way in all
such cases.
In that regard, of particular importance is
cooperation from the host country, troop- and
police-contributing countries and the Secretariat,
which all need to work in harmony and good faith and
with the necessary level of transparency. It is our view
that the resolution adopted today has removed some of
the existing gaps in that area.
As for the need to equip peacekeepers with modern
equipment, that is undeniable. We live in a rapidly
changing world, owing to technology, and, of course,
new technologies in peacekeeping are a critical issue,
many aspects of which have yet to be discussed by
Member States with a view to developing shared
approaches. The Secretariat should closely follow such
discussions and incorporate their results into its work.
At this stage, Member States have decided that the use
of new technologies by the Blue Helmets and other
United Nations personnel must be aimed at ensuring
the safety and security of civilians and peacekeepers
themselves.
The future lies in cutting-edge technology, but where
there is opportunity, there is also risk. The introduction
and use of information and digital technologies by
peacekeepers must not undermine the sovereignty of the
host State or its neighbours, or violate the privacy of its
citizens. The issue is particularly sensitive with regard
to the United Nations — an organization with a unique
reputation for justice and impartiality, and whose main
task is to selflessly help those most in need.

21-2285015/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We thank the Secretary-General for the assessments
that he made in his briefing. Against the backdrop of
adapting the United Nations system to new challenges
and the diversification of international mechanisms and
instruments for the prevention and resolution of crises,
United Nations peacekeeping will undoubtedly remain
one of the most effective instruments for resolving
conflicts and providing assistance in State-building at
the initial post-crisis stage.
At the same time, there are often situations in
which peacekeeping operations have been deployed
for decades without any guarantee of tangible progress
in resolving or eradicating the root causes of conflict.
We must therefore reflect on the effectiveness of
mandates and the appropriateness of expanding them
to the detriment of the responsibility of States for their
own internal political processes. An equally important
role is played by the quality of interactions with the
authorities of the host country.
In this context, we are convinced that the
effectiveness of peacekeeping efforts does not
always depend on technological equipment, gender
representation or the number of advisers on all kinds
of issues that are not core to the peacekeeping activity.
It should not be forgotten that overcoming political
tensions is the alpha and omega of United Nations
effectiveness and its peacekeeping operations.
The history of conflicts in various regions of the
world has demonstrated that quality and painstaking
political and mediation efforts, together with respect
for the sovereignty of States, help eradicate the root
causes of conflicts, rather than merely treat the
symptoms. Facilitating a political settlement must be
the top priority in peacekeeping. Otherwise, although
there may be a temporary remission, crises run the risk
of returning.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): We welcome you, Sir, to the Security Council
and acknowledge the presence of the Secretary-General
and the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Estonia. Mexico
is grateful for the convening of this open debate and the
briefing by the Secretary-General.
The complexity of today’s armed conflicts and their
multidimensional nature demand truly comprehensive
solutions. That is why the availability and effective
use of technologies are imperative in the context of
twenty-first century peacekeeping. In the context of
rapid technological change, we have the potential to
16/18

18/08/2021

resolve operational and tactical challenges, including
improving effective deployment, supporting mandate
implementation and strengthening the security of
personnel in the field and communities of the host
country. They can also play a critical role in earlywarning mechanisms, enabling us to prevent serious
humanitarian crises, mass atrocities and other human
rights violations.
We Member States must support United Nations
efforts to strengthen technological capabilities that
respond to needs on the ground. We urge the Department
of Peace Operations and the Department of Field
Support to strengthen engagement with Member States
to identify challenges and opportunities. We also take
note of the Strategy for the Digital Transformation of
United Nations Peacekeeping, which is in line with the
Secretary-General’s road map for digital cooperation
(A/74/821), in which we appreciate the collaborative
work among various entities of the United Nations
system. In that regard, I note the adoption yesterday by
the General Assembly of resolution 75/316, on the impact
of rapid technological change on the achievement of the
Sustainable Development Goals and targets, submitted
by my country, Mexico, in which the leadership role
that the United Nations must assume in matters of
technology, science and innovation is emphasized.
The lessons learned from the pandemic show
us that remote information-sharing can also benefit
from the involvement of other United Nations entities,
funds and programmes, humanitarian actors in the
field and civil society representatives. Those aspects
must be considered in adjusting the mandates of
peace operations, while taking into account the
recommendations of the Special Committee on
Peacekeeping Operations, known as the C-34, and of
troop- and personnel-contributing countries.
Mexico believes that the upcoming United Nations
Peacekeeping Ministerial Conference, to be held in
Seoul in December, will provide the opportunity to
delve into the cross-cutting issues of technologies and
the development of medical capabilities. My country
also reiterates its support for the commitments of the
Action for Peacekeeping Plus initiative with regard to
the use of technology to improve the early detection of
threats. We support the call for peacekeeping operations
to be able to rely on new technologies providing
them with timely, routine and emergency medical
assistance. We also note that the use of social media
as part of a concerted strategic information operation
21-22850

18/08/2021

United Nations peacekeeping operations

can strengthen relationships between missions and the
communities in which they operate.
As my country recognizes that constant training
and capacity-building are essential to ensuring the
security of peacekeepers, the Mexican Joint Training
Centre for Peace Operations provides training that uses
technological elements in the learning process, such as
laboratories and simulators that replicate the complex
conditions faced by deployed personnel. Mexico also
supports technological innovations to reduce the
environmental footprint of peace operations.
I will conclude by stressing that it is imperative
for peacekeeping missions to periodically review their
management and analysis practices, based on the use of
technology, as a way to fulfil their mandate and respond
to changing environments. We also urge the relevant
entities of the United Nations system to maintain the
dialogue and cooperation necessary to contribute
to the digital transformation of peacekeeping, with
a view to strengthening multilateralism. I also take
this opportunity to extend my appreciation to the
delegation of India for leading negotiations on the
adoption of resolution 2589 (2021) and presidential
statement S/PRST/2021/17 on the subject bringing us
together today.
Ms. Byrne Nason (Ireland): I am delighted to
welcome you among us in the Chamber, Mr. Minister.
I want to thank India most sincerely for organizing
this important discussion and welcome the adoption of
presidential statement S/PRST/2021/17 on this issue.
Ireland shares with India a deep and long-standing
commitment to peacekeeping. Indeed, Irish and Indian
troops today proudly serve side by side in the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon and the United
Nations Disengagement Observer Force in the noble
service of humankind.
For all peacekeeping nations, the safety and security
of our peacekeepers are paramount. When lives are
lost, there can be no impunity for those responsible. For
that reason, we also very much welcome the adoption
today of resolution 2589 (2021), on addressing impunity
for crimes against peacekeepers, which we are pleased
to co-sponsor.
As others have said today, the risks our peacekeepers
face are wide-ranging and constantly evolving — from
improvised explosive devices to complex attacks to
drone technology. Effectively addressing those threats

S/PV. 8838

requires the consideration of the safety and security
of peacekeepers throughout the mission cycle, from
inception to transition. Indeed, we now know that the
period of reconfiguration and transition of peacekeeping
missions heightens the risk of threats to both
peacekeepers and civilians. Ensuring that transitions
are properly managed, coordinated and organized helps
to significantly reduce those risks. That is a priority for
Ireland on the Security Council and we look forward
to hosting a ministerial-level meeting on that subject
during our upcoming presidency in September.
We have learned through bitter experience that
technologies can be used to destabilize or exacerbate
conflict. However, we also know that technologies
can also offer valuable assistance in equipping and
resourcing peacekeepers in peacekeeping operations
and in fulfilling mission mandates. How we harness
and manage new technologies is crucial.
As pointed out, enhancing situational awareness
and early-warning mechanisms in missions, which can
improve decision-making for the protection of United
Nations personnel and the protection of civilians, is
essential. Technology can also play an important role
as a force multiplier. It has the potential to offer United
Nations peacekeepers greater situational awareness
and improved data analysis, thereby improving the
safety and security of missions, while also increasing
their effectiveness. That is also true particularly
with regard to the protection of civilians. The United
Nations Investigative Team to Promote Accountability
for Crimes Committed by Da’esh/Islamic State in Iraq
and the Levant is a good example of how innovative
technologies can be used effectively. We therefore
welcome the Strategy for the Digital Transformation
of United Nations Peacekeeping, which supports the
use of technology across the Action for Peacekeeping
themes, including performance, safety and security,
politics, protection and peacebuilding.
In order to maximize the opportunities of
technology, peacekeeping missions need to be
adequately resourced. Training must also be designed to
leverage the capabilities of technology. While gaps can
arise in the levels of equipment and training available
to peacekeepers, it is imperative that, at a minimum,
all troop-contributing countries have equal access to
self-protection technologies that support their critical
safety and security. That includes through improving
situational awareness and early warning, including
through artificial intelligence.

21-2285017/18

S/PV.8838

United Nations peacekeeping operations

We recognize the particular importance of unarmed,
unmanned aerial vehicles, while emphasizing that their
use must always be in compliance with international
law and respect the core principles and values of the
United Nations.
It is clear that our much valued peacekeepers
should not be playing catch-up when it comes to new
technologies. Armed groups are becoming ever more
innovative in their use of emerging technology. In
response, we must share valuable insights and we need
to be equally innovative in how we mitigate the threat.
That includes examining how armed groups exploit
the accessibility of information and technology. Here,
effective export controls are crucial.
Recognizing the growing importance of technologies
and their risks to international peace and security
means that we must stay ahead of the curve through
innovations in multilateral diplomacy and digital
development to achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals. To do that, we need greater cooperation and
engagement with regional organizations, the private
sector and civil society in order to responsibly develop
and use technologies.

18/18

18/08/2021

We need to ensure, literally, that no one is left
behind as technology advances. In particular, we
need technology that is gender-transformative, not
gender-blind. The correct use of technology to support
peacekeepers can be an enabling factor in support of
improving the proportion of women peacekeepers — an
aim I know we all, around the table, share.
As a country with a long-standing record of
contributing to peacekeeping missions, Ireland is
committed to continuing to share its experience and
help build capacity with others to develop and use
critical technology to ensure the safety and security of
our peacekeepers.
The President: Before closing, I would like to again
thank all participants who joined us today. I would also
like to thank the delegations of member States that have
so far submitted written statements on the subject of
today’s discussion. We look forward to receiving more
of them. Those received by the end of the day will form
part of the compilation of written statements.
The meeting rose at 11.45 a.m.

21-22850
