A/65/PV.108

United Nations

General Assembly

Official Records

Sixty-sixth session

108th plenary meeting
Thursday, 14 July 2011, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Deiss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Switzerland)

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Agenda item 114
Admission of new Members to the United Nations
Application for admission (A/65/900)
Letter from the President of the Security
Council (A/65/905)
Draft resolution (A/65/L.84)
The President (spoke in French): I should like to
invite the General Assembly to consider the positive
recommendation by the Security Council on the
application for admission to membership in the United
Nations of the Republic of South Sudan.
The Security Council has recommended the
admission of the Republic of South Sudan to
membership in the United Nations, as stated in
document A/65/905. In this connection, a draft
resolution has been issued as document A/65/L.84.
I now give the floor to the representative of South
Africa to introduce draft resolution A/65/L.84.
Mr. Radebe (South Africa): I wish to express
South Africa’s
gratitude
to
the
Permanent
Representative
of
Rwanda,
His
Excellency
Mr. Eugène-Richard Gasana, Chair of the Group of
African States for the month of July, for affording my
delegation the singular honour of introducing this
historic draft resolution on behalf of African Member
States.

On 9 July 2011, the world witnessed the birth of a
new State of Africa, the Republic of South Sudan.
After decades of war that caused millions of deaths, in
2005 the people of the Sudan made a historic
breakthrough when they agreed on a plan to resolve
their differences and begin a journey towards lasting
peace. That agreement was enshrined in the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, entered into between
the Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Sudan People’s Liberation Movement. One of the key
pillars of the Agreement was the right to a referendum
on the self-determination and independence of South
Sudan.
The General Assembly’s adoption of resolution
1514 (XV), on 14 December 1960, was a significant
milestone in the struggle for decolonization, selfdetermination and independence. The resolution served
as an inspiration to the majority of people on the
African continent and elsewhere in their struggle
against colonialism, oppression and apartheid.
The founding fathers and mothers of Africa
agreed in the founding documents of the Organization
of African Unity and the Constitutive Act of its
successor, the African Union, to maintain colonial
borders inherited after independence, given the
sensitivities and complexities of that colonial
inheritance. It was for that reason that the African
Union, immediately following the 9 January
referendum on self-determination by the people of
southern Sudan, adopted a solemn declaration in which
it recognized the exceptional challenges inherited from
the colonial past, as well as the unique nature of the

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

11-41470 (E)

*1141470*

A/65/PV.108

national question confronting the people of the Sudan.
In that regard, African heads of State and Government
acknowledge that the Sudan represents an exceptional
case that does not negate the sacrosanct principle of
respect for colonial borders.

Jamaica,
Kazakhstan,
Kyrgyzstan,
Mexico,
Montenegro, the Netherlands, Panama, Peru, Poland,
the Republic of Korea, Romania, the Russian
Federation, Singapore, Switzerland, Timor-Leste,
Trinidad and Tobago, Turkey and Ukraine.

I stand here before the General Assembly with the
distinct honour to introduce, on behalf of the Group of
African States, the draft resolution on the admission of
the Republic of South Sudan to membership in the
United Nations, comfortable in the knowledge that this
act in no way creates a precedent for secessionist
tendencies. It was for this reason that the Republic of
the Sudan was the first country to recognize the
independence and sovereignty of its new neighbour, the
Republic of South Sudan. Draft resolution A/65/L.84
has the unanimous and full support of the African
States Members of the United Nations, as well as of the
African Union.

The President (spoke in French): May I take it
that the General Assembly accepts the recommendation
of the Security Council and adopts draft resolution
A/65/L.84 by acclamation?

As Africans, we continue to be grateful for the
role that multilateral organizations in general, and the
United Nations in particular, have played in our quest
for independence, freedom and self-determination. We
reaffirm our collective faith in and commitment to the
fundamental principles of the United Nations Charter.
With the support of the entire continent and all
peace-loving people across the world, we present for
the Assembly’s consideration the draft resolution
contained in document A/65/L.84, on the admission of
the Republic of South Sudan for membership in the
United Nations. History has bestowed on all of us here
the rare and distinct honour of witnessing the
admission of the Republic of South Sudan as the
193rd Member State of the United Nations.
The President (spoke in French): The General
Assembly will now take a decision on draft resolution
A/65/L.84, entitled “Admission of the Republic of
South Sudan to membership in the United Nations”. I
give the floor to the representative of the Secretariat.
Mr. Nakano (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that, since the submission of the draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed in
document A/65/L.84, the following countries have also
become sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan,
Andorra,
Argentina,
Armenia,
the
Bahamas,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Canada, China, Costa Rica,
Cuba, the Czech Republic, Ecuador, France, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guyana, Honduras, Iceland, India, Ireland,

2

Draft resolution A/65/L.84
(resolution 65/308).

was

adopted

The President (spoke in French): I therefore
declare the Republic of South Sudan admitted to
membership of the United Nations.
I request the Chief of Protocol to escort the
delegation of the Republic of South Sudan to its place
in the General Assembly Hall.
The delegation of the Republic of South Sudan
was escorted to its place in the General Assembly
Hall.
The President (spoke in French): It is a great
honour for me to welcome, on behalf of the General
Assembly, the Republic of South Sudan as a new
Member of the United Nations. This is a historic and
joyous moment not only for Africa, but also for the
community of nations. Today, we welcome among us
this young country, whose independence was formally
declared in Juba, its capital, last Saturday. That is
remarkable.
The independence of South Sudan is in fact the
culmination of a process launched several years ago.
The negotiation and implementation of the 2005
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as well as the
referendum that was held in January, are examples of
the peaceful settlement of a conflict situation and a
model of peace and cooperation for the good of
peoples. I pay tribute to the Sudan for having accepted
the outcome of the referendum and, moreover, for
having been the first country to recognize that young
nation.
The United Nations backed the process leading to
independence, and is ready to build on that success and
to continue to support the Sudan and South Sudan in
their effort to find a peaceful solution to outstanding
issues and to live in peace and harmony.

11-41470

A/65/PV.108

Today, we welcome South Sudan to the
community of nations, equal to all other Member States
and with the same rights and responsibilities. The
universality of the United Nations and the values
enshrined in its Charter are thereby enhanced. I am
confident that South Sudan will help to promote the
objectives of security, peace, prosperity, friendship and
cooperation among peoples, as advocated by the
United Nations. That is for the good of the people of
South Sudan, the region and the entire African
continent.
I wish the people and the Government of the
Republic of South Sudan peace, prosperity and
success. I congratulate them on their recent
independence, and wish them a warm welcome as the
193rd Member State in the community of the United
Nations.
I now give the floor to the Secretary-General, His
Excellency Mr. Ban Ki-moon.
The Secretary-General: At this moment, in this
place, the world gathers to say in one voice, “Welcome
South Sudan. Welcome to the community of nations”.
Just days ago, I was honoured to attend the
independence ceremony in Juba. I felt the energy, the
potential and the pure joy of the world’s newest nation.
In my eyes, the rising flag symbolized the rising hopes
of the people of South Sudan — all those who endured
the long civil war, all those who lost so many loved
ones, all those who left their homes and fled their
communities, and all those who held fast to hope.
Now they have reached an important milestone,
but the journey continues. Yes, the task ahead is great,
but so, too, is the country’s potential, with its abundant
natural resources, its arable land, the waters of the Nile
and, of course, its proud and hard-working people. We
pledge to help South Sudan shape its future as we help
the region consolidate its gains. Together, we salute the
leaders of both the Sudan and South Sudan. They
showed courage and commitment in bringing about a
successful referendum that expressed the democratic
will of the people.
Matters of borders, the sharing of resources and
migration should be dealt with as soon as possible. It is
imperative that they resolve their outstanding
differences with the same pragmatism and leadership
they have each shown so far. The well-being and future
prosperity of each depends on the other. South and

11-41470

North share a common destiny. They must see a future
as true partners, not as rivals.
The United Nations, the African Union,
international non-governmental organizations and
individual Member States have been strong and close
allies in helping the North and South work towards
peace, development and human rights. Our continuing
commitment will be essential as we go forward.
Together, let us stay true to the cause of peace, justice
and opportunity for all. Together, let us say to the
citizens of our newest Member State, “You now sit
with us. We stand with you”.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Secretary-General for his statement.
I now give the floor to the Permanent
Representative of Rwanda, who will speak on behalf of
the African States.
Mr. Gasana (Rwanda): It is a great honour and a
privilege for me to speak on behalf of the African
States at this historic moment for the United Nations
and for Africa. I congratulate the Republic of South
Sudan on the proclamation of its independence on
Saturday and on its admission today as the 193rd State
Member of the United Nations.
The people of South Sudan have demonstrated
courage and resilience over decades of civil war and
bloody struggle, and I commend them for the sense of
responsibility they showed last January in massively
and peacefully participating in the referendum for their
self-determination.
This is a lesson for the United Nations and for its
Members. No matter how many years a conflict may
last, no matter how much sorrow and bitterness it may
cause, ultimately, with courage and determination,
“there should be laughter after pain, there should be
sunshine after rain”, to quote a popular rock ballad.
After decades of pain, with two and half million people
martyred for independence, we are now celebrating the
birth of a nation — sunshine for a people and a smile
for younger generations.
This resounding success would not have been
achieved without the remarkable leadership of two
heads of State, two remarkable statesmen: President
Salva Kiir Mayardit of South Sudan and President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir of the Sudan. They have
demonstrated over the years that they are men of
commitment, men of peace and men of honour. Against

3

A/65/PV.108

all odds, they managed to put an end to one of the
longest civil wars on our continent and steered the
peace process, from the signing of the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement (CPA) in 2005 to the successful
organization of a transparent referendum in 2011.
As we commemorate those who lost their lives in
the Sudanese civil war, I cannot fail today to pay
tribute to the leaders of Anyanya I and of the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement, particularly Gordon
Muortat Mayen and John Garang, who, wherever they
may be, are surely more than happy at this successful
outcome to their struggle.
We are today celebrating the admission of the
fifty-fourth African State to membership of the United
Nations. While we rejoice at the victory of freedom
and dignity over war, we cannot forget that the
Republic of South Sudan is a new State that is facing
enormous challenges. The scars of the civil war are
still palpable, and the community of nations has the
duty to support this newborn State in the process of
securing and consolidating peace, creating a
democratic State and achieving development by
reducing poverty, building infrastructures and putting
the country on the right track to prosperity.
The South Sudanese, I believe, demonstrably
have the leadership, strength of will and resources to
rapidly move forward and to secure the heroic ideals
they have fought for decades to achieve. They have
added to the annals of history the notion of
independence through a negotiated and democratic
referendum.
In that respect, we express the hope that the
Republic of South Sudan, together with its sister
country the Republic of the Sudan, will soon settle the
issues that are outstanding in connection with the
implementation of the CPA. Those issues include a
cessation of hostilities and a political settlement in
Southern Kordofan, the final status of Abyei in
accordance with the CPA, the demarcation of the
North-South boundary, and political consultation on
Blue Nile. We further encourage the two Governments
and the two peoples, united by the same Nile streaming
through their land, to smoothly address other postsecession arrangements, such as the issue of
nationality, free movement of people, and the
establishment of and respect for agreements on oil and
petroleum resources.

4

Let me conclude by expressing our sincere
appreciation to Mr. Ban Ki-moon, the SecretaryGeneral, for his personal involvement in the Sudan
peace process since his appointment and for his
wisdom in choosing the right men in the right places.
Indeed, this historic event could not have been
celebrated without the tireless efforts of Haile
Menkerios, his Special Representative for the Sudan,
and of former President Benjamin Mkapa of Tanzania,
Chair of his panel on the referendums in the Sudan.
This is one of the reasons for the unanimous
endorsement by the African Group of the SecretaryGeneral’s candidature for a second term.
Similarly, allow me to voice our gratitude to
another son of Africa, former President Thabo Mbeki
of South Africa, for the tremendous work he has done
at the helm of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel to support and facilitate both
parties in their negotiations aimed at the full and just
resolution of the remaining CPA-related issues — a
prerequisite for a lasting peace.
Finally, we extend our heartfelt appreciation once
again to President Mayardit as he leads the new
Republic in building a democratic, just and prosperous
society. We, Africa, will stand by him.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to His Excellency Mr. Talaibek Kydyrov,
Permanent Representative of Kyrgyzstan, who will
speak on behalf of the Group of Asian States.
Mr. Kydyrov (Kyrgyzstan): I have the great
honour, on behalf of the Asian Group and in my
capacity as Chair of the Group for the month of July, to
welcome the adoption of resolution 65/308, entitled
“Admission of the Republic of South Sudan to
membership in the United Nations”, submitted by the
delegation of the Republic of Rwanda in its capacity as
Chair of the African Group.
The Member States of the Asian Group welcome
the establishment of the Republic of South Sudan on
9 July 2011, when it proclaimed its independence, and
reaffirm their strong commitment to the sovereignty,
independence, territorial integrity and national unity of
the Republic of South Sudan.
The Asian Group recognizes the vital role of the
United Nations in supporting the Republic of South
Sudan in its efforts to consolidate peace and prevent a
return to violence and, therefore, in developing at the

11-41470

A/65/PV.108

earliest a strategy in support of national peacebuilding
priorities, in order to lay the foundation for sustainable
peace and development.
In view of that, the Asian Group welcomes
resolution 1996 (2011), adopted by the Security
Council at its 6576th meeting, on 8 July, and the
establishment, as of 9 July, of the United Nations
Mission in the Republic of South Sudan (UNMISS) for
an initial period of one year to help the new nation in
its long-term State-building and development.
The Group also welcomes the appointment by the
Secretary-General of his Special Representative for the
Republic of South Sudan, and expresses its confidence
that the Secretary-General, through his Special
Representative, will coordinate all activities of the
United Nations system in the Republic of South Sudan,
and support a coherent international approach to a
stable peace and economic development in the
Republic of South Sudan.
We welcome the strong commitment of both the
Government of the Republic of the Sudan and the
Republic of South Sudan to peaceful coexistence in
order to achieve stability and mutual prosperity, and to
engaging in dialogue to resolve the outstanding issues.
The Asian Group expresses its appreciation to the
African Union and subregional organizations for their
active engagement in consolidating peace and security,
both in the Sudan and in South Sudan, and encourages
them to continue these efforts.
The Asian Group welcomes the recommendation
of the Security Council in its resolution 1999 (2011),
adopted on 13 July, that the Republic of South Sudan
be admitted to membership of the United Nations. On
behalf of the Asian Group, I have the honour to express
our strong and full support for the adoption of
resolution 65/308, which we believe will bring longterm stability to both countries and the region as a
whole.
In conclusion, let me express our sincere
congratulations to the people and the country of South
Sudan for this historic event and wish them real
prosperity and a better future.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Estonia, who
will speak on behalf of the Eastern European States.

11-41470

Mr. Kolga (Estonia): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of Eastern European States to
welcome the Republic of South Sudan as the
193rd State Member of the United Nations.
As we all know, the journey of South Sudan to
this Hall has been neither easy nor short. The presence
of the delegation of South Sudan here today, headed by
Vice-President Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, is
therefore all the more appreciated at this historic
moment. The referendum in January was a clear sign
that the people of South Sudan are united in their
dream for self-determination. Almost 99 per cent of
those who expressed themselves voted for sovereignty.
This weekend, we saw the dream come true, with
people in Juba celebrating when independence was
officially declared and President Salva Kiir sworn into
office.
South Sudan stands at the end of one era today,
but only at the beginning of an even more important
one, which is transition to a fully functional,
responsible and prosperous nation State. The members
of the Group of Eastern European States are prepared
to work in close cooperation with South Sudan on this
road.
We would also like to take this opportunity to
commend the Government of the Sudan for its
constructiveness throughout the referendum process
and to count on its continued cooperation in the future.
We would like to call on both sides to engage in
resolving all the outstanding issues related to the full
implementation of the Comprehensive Peace
Agreement in an expedited manner.
Last but not least, once again we would sincerely
like to congratulate the people and the Government of
South Sudan and to wish them a warm welcome to the
family of sovereign nations.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Brazil, who
will speak on behalf of the Latin American and
Caribbean States.
Mrs. Viotti (Brazil): On behalf of the Group of
Latin American and Caribbean States, I have the
honour to express our warmest welcome to the
Republic of South Sudan as the 193rd Member of the
United Nations. We extend our greetings at this historic
meeting to His Excellency Mr. Riek Machar Teny-

5

A/65/PV.108

Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic of South
Sudan.

peace and prosperity to the Government and people of
the Republic of South Sudan.

This is a fine moment for all Sudanese, for the
African continent and for the United Nations. The
admission of South Sudan to the Organization is the
culmination of a long process to bring peace and
stability to all Sudanese. The peoples of the Sudan,
both North and South, and their leadership are to be
commended for this successful outcome. As we
congratulate them, we also encourage them to fulfil the
vision of two States living side by side in peace and
security and working together for the development of
their societies.

The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of Luxembourg,
who will speak on behalf of the Group of Western
European and other States.

The fact that the Government of the Sudan was
the first to recognize the independence of South Sudan
bodes well for a future of cooperation and mutual
respect, which we all want to support and to help usher
in. We are encouraged by the commitment and desire
of both parties to the resolution of the pending issues
of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA). We
appreciate the important role played by the African
Union throughout the process that led to the CPA and
during its implementation. We will continue to support
the efforts of the African Union High-Level
Implementation Panel, under the leadership of former
President Thabo Mbeki, to assist the two States in
resolving outstanding issues.
We also praise the tireless efforts of the United
Nations, and in particular of the Security Council, in
helping the Sudanese people in their journey. We must
continue to do so.
In welcoming the Republic of South Sudan to the
United Nations, the Latin American and Caribbean
States renew their historical and cultural bonds with
Africa and their commitment to, and solidarity with,
the continent’s economic, social and political
development.
We note with great satisfaction the solemn
commitment of the Republic of South Sudan to abiding
by and fulfilling the obligations contained in the
Charter of the United Nations. We stand ready to
cooperate closely with the Government and people of
South Sudan in all areas of United Nations activity.
They can count on our solidarity and our full support.
On behalf of the Group of Latin American and
Caribbean States, I express our best wishes for success,

6

Ms. Lucas (Luxembourg) (spoke in French): It is
a special honour for me to welcome, on behalf of the
Group of Western European and other States, the
Republic of South Sudan as the 193rd Member of the
United Nations.
This is a truly historic moment and the beginning
of a new chapter in the long history of South Sudan,
whose people have taken the democratic decision to
assume their independence and to take their place in
the family of sovereign nations. The peaceful
referendum for South Sudan’s independence and the
declaration of independence on 9 July 2011, witnessed
by numerous dignitaries from all over the world, were
the culmination of a process to settle a long-standing
conflict and to achieve peace in South Sudan, in
conformity with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement,
signed in 2005.
As we witness the birth of a new State, we also
see the challenges ahead. We encourage South Sudan’s
leaders to embrace pluralism and diversity and to lay
the foundation for a democratic, fair and inclusive
society based on the rule of law and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms. We encourage the
Governments and the peoples of the Republic of South
Sudan and of the Republic of the Sudan in their efforts
to address post-independence issues. We trust that the
authorities of the two countries will swiftly reach
good-neighbourly agreements, for the benefit of their
peoples and the wider region.
The Group of Western European and other States
looks forward to South Sudan playing an active and
constructive role in the work of the United Nations. We
pledge to continue working closely with the Republic
of South Sudan with a view to achieving durable peace,
prosperity, and justice and to meeting the needs and
expectations of its people.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of the United States of
America, who will speak on behalf of the host country.
Ms. Rice (United States of America): On
Saturday, I had the privilege of standing in Juba and

11-41470

A/65/PV.108

watching as the huge, beautiful flag of the Republic of
South Sudan was raised for the first time. The crowd
roared, and in that wave of joy one could hear a new
nation claiming its voice.
Today, that same flag will fly proudly among 192
others. South Sudan will take its rightful place among
the community of sovereign nations. On behalf of the
United States, the host country to the Organization, and
the American people, I warmly welcome the Republic
of South Sudan as the newest Member of the United
Nations.
This historic and hopeful day was reached only
after great suffering and almost unimaginable loss. The
independence of the world’s newest country is a
testament to the people of South Sudan. It is also an
inspiration to all who yearn for freedom. May the
memory of South Sudan’s own struggle for liberty
always serve as a reminder to us to insist on the
universal rights of all people, to remember those still in
shackles, to lift up the hungry and the desperate and to
bring hope to the broken places of the world.
South Sudan’s statehood is new, but its friendship
is not. The bonds between the American people and the
people of South Sudan go back many decades. The
United States will remain a steadfast friend as South
Sudan works to pursue peace, strengthen its democracy
and provide opportunity and prosperity for all of its
citizens. We look forward to working alongside South
Sudan as it shoulders the rights and the responsibilities
of a full and sovereign member of the community of
nations.
At the United Nations in September 2010,
President Obama said, “After the darkness of war,
there can be a new day of peace and progress”. Today,
like Saturday, is such a day for the people of South
Sudan. We will support them as they work for an
enduring peace rooted in coexistence between two
viable States. We will stand by them as they forge the
conditions for lasting democracy, prosperity and
justice. And we will partner with them as they seek to
meet the high hopes of their citizens that have been
raised along with their flag.
On behalf of the United States of America, let me
say again, congratulations, and welcome.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Permanent Representative of the Sudan.

11-41470

Mr. Osman (Sudan) (spoke in Arabic): As the
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the
Sudan, I should like once again to congratulate the
Republic of South Sudan and to reaffirm, as we did on
8 July — the day before the proclamation of the
independence of the Republic of South Sudan — our
recognition of that country. I said yesterday that we are
members of the same family. We in the north are called
the Republic of the Sudan; the name of the new State is
the Republic of South Sudan. We have Sudan in
common. We are all Sudanese and will remain
Sudanese, as I said yesterday.
While we are the same family, that family has
grown and now has two homes — one in the north and
one in the south. It is to that end that we have worked.
I have a very clear message of solidarity, cooperation
and coordination for the well-being of our two peoples
to convey to the international community. Our two
peoples have much in common — their history, blood,
culture and society. These will remain the bases of our
cooperation with the Republic of South Sudan.
We have turned a new page of our history, and we
extend our hand to all. This issue has cast a long
shadow over our relations with many States, but as this
new page turns, we and our brothers in South Sudan
have put bitterness and the wounds of war behind us.
We look forward to the future and to excellent relations
with all the countries that have been affected, in
particular the larger States.
We know that we are living in an era of
globalization, in which all interests are interrelated. We
will respect the interests of other parties, in the hope
that they will respect ours, including our diversity and
the diversity of opinions, which should in no way
affect the situation.
As President Al-Bashir has said, we will make
every possible effort to provide whatever assistance we
can to the new State of the Republic of South Sudan.
We are its closest neighbour in our mother continent,
not just geographically but also in terms of our feelings
and spirit.
I would like to conclude by saying that this
outcome would not have been possible without the
contributions of leaders on both sides — President
Omer Hassan Al-Bashir in the North and, in the South,
the late John Garang de Mabior, President Salva Kiir
Mayardit, Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Deng Alor

7

A/65/PV.108

Kuol, David Deng Athorbei, Ezekiel Lol Gatkuoth and
others. I pay tribute to them all.
Address by Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon,
Vice-President of the Republic of South Sudan
The President (spoke in French): The Assembly
will now hear an address by His Excellency Mr. Riek
Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the Republic
of South Sudan.
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President
of the Republic of South Sudan, was escorted to
the rostrum.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I have the great pleasure to
welcome to the United Nations His Excellency
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President of the
Republic of South Sudan, and to invite him to address
the General Assembly.
Mr. Machar Teny-Dhurgon (South Sudan): I am
both honoured and humbled to stand here today to
convey the profound gratitude of the people and
Government of the Republic of South Sudan to the
members of the General Assembly, who have just voted
in favour of South Sudan’s accession to membership of
the United Nations. We are particularly grateful to the
Republic of Rwanda for proposing, on behalf of Group
of African States, the resolution that the Assembly has
just adopted, as well as to the Republic of South Africa
for introducing the resolution.
As a new Member of the United Nations, the
Republic of South Sudan undertakes to respect all of its
obligations under the Charter of the United Nations. I
pledge to the Assembly today that the Republic of
South Sudan will be a responsible member of the
international community and will respect all of its
obligations under international law. We are working to
accede as quickly as possible to all relevant
international conventions and treaties, not least those
related to human rights.
As we celebrate this moment, we also honour the
memory of our citizens who are no longer with us, not
least my comrade John Garang de Mabior. Twentyeight years ago, Mr. Garang, alongside other brave and
resolute leaders of the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement and Sudan People’s Liberation Army,
launched a valiant struggle for liberation. That struggle

8

cost our people millions of lives and untold suffering.
Their sacrifices will not be forgotten.
Eventually, in 2005, the struggle culminated in
the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement
(CPA). I would like to take this opportunity to express
our sincere appreciation to all those who contributed to
the negotiation and signing of the CPA, including the
United States, Kenya, Ethiopia, the United Kingdom,
Norway and many others, including, of course, the
United Nations itself.
The Agreement provided for a self-determination
referendum to take place. That referendum was duly
held beginning on 9 January 2011, and was conducted
according to the highest international standards. More
than 98 per cent of the votes were cast in favour of
separation. On 9 July, the Republic of South Sudan
declared its independence and was duly recognized as a
sovereign State.
We are deeply aware that we would not have been
able to reach this point without the commitment end
support of our many friends. We say thank you from
the bottom of our hearts to all of the countries and
multilateral and non-governmental organizations, and
those who fund them, which helped us during our long
journey and were committed to securing peace and
security in our country. We pay tribute to the member
countries of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the IGAD Partners Forum, the
African Union and its High-Level Implementation
Panel, the European Union, the Arab League of States
and the United Nations for their steadfast support and
guidance to all of the Sudanese people in their long
search for permanent peace.
The
Comprehensive
Peace
Agreement
implementation process has involved many challenges.
We are grateful to President Thabo Mbeki, Prime
Minister Meles Zenawi and the Governments of the
United States, Norway and the United Kingdom,
among others, for their work in support of the process.
We also thank Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon for his
constant focus on the full implementation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement. We express our
appreciation to the members of the Security Council
for recently adopting a resolution mandating a new
peace consolidation mission in South Sudan. And we
thank the General Assembly for its willingness to
support and supplement the work of that mission
through the specialized agencies of the United Nations.

11-41470

A/65/PV.108

Those efforts are an important example of unity
and collaboration among all peoples in the pursuit of
peace. They also demonstrate the importance of
respecting the right of all peoples to selfdetermination. On behalf of the people of South Sudan
and on my own behalf, there are no words sufficient to
express the depth of our gratitude. Through their
persistence and dedication, they have helped to bring
an end to one of Africa’s longest civil wars. Their
continued efforts and unyielding support will be crucial
to sustain the peace.
I would also like to pay tribute today to Field
Marshal Omer Hassan Al-Bashir, President of the
Republic the Sudan, for his wisdom in signing the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, for proceeding with
its implementation — in particular the holding of the
self-determination referendum — and for courageously
accepting the outcome of the referendum vote. We also
applaud and welcome the Republic of the Sudan’s
decision to be the first State to recognize the
sovereignty and independence of the Republic of South
Sudan.
It is our deepest and most sincere wish to resolve
all outstanding matters between the North and the
South swiftly and peacefully. We do not harbour
bitterness towards our former compatriots. We remain
partners in peace and committed to the principles of
good neighbourliness. We will work out our differences
through dialogue and in a spirit of cooperation. In
particular, we must agree on mechanisms for continued
cooperation, the demarcation and mutually beneficial
management of the common border and the final status
of Abyei.
We will continue to work together with the
Republic of the Sudan to seek justice for the people of
Darfur, Southern Kordofan and Blue Nile. Our
fundamental hope and desire is to see peaceful
coexistence between the
two neighbouring States of
the Sudan and South Sudan. Both States must be viable
and stable. We will strive to build a future in which our
two countries can work cooperatively in peace with
one another and be mutually supportive.
After many years of war, we want our new
country to be a force for peace in our region. We shall
live in peace with all our neighbours. To them, I say
that the Republic of South Sudan will be a partner in
all human endeavours that promote security, justice,

11-41470

liberty, common peace and prosperity. Let us all work
together towards such ends.
With that in mind, we urge our brothers in
Ethiopia and Eritrea to resolve their differences
peacefully and amicably. We appeal to our brothers and
sisters in Somalia to seek lasting peace. We salute all
those who work to build democracy and the rule of law
from the ground up. We encourage all countries of the
region to come together to eradicate the scourge of the
Lord’s Resistance Army. We will also join our regional
partners and the rest of the world in the fight against
terrorism.
While we work to foster peace in our region, we
must also build a strong and viable nation at home. We
have made a solemn commitment to democracy,
pluralism, inclusiveness, the rule of law, and the
freedoms of thought, belief and expression. We will
embrace tolerance and unity. We will be patriotic
regardless of our cultural and ethnic backgrounds. Our
diversity will be a source of pride and strength and the
basis upon which we protect everyone’s right to think
and speak freely.
We must not allow the threat of instability to
deter us. President Salva Kiir Mayardit has reiterated
his declaration of amnesty to all those who have taken
up arms for whatever reason, so that they can join us in
the work of building our new nation. We want a
peaceful nation. We know that that means including all
voices in our Government.
The Transitional Constitution, signed by
President Kiir on 9 July, will be the starting point for
an extensive consultation process to produce a
permanent constitution for the Republic of South
Sudan. It must be a constitution that fulfils the
aspirations of all our people. Those consultations and
the enactment of the permanent constitution will take
place under a broad-based Government, to be
appointed in the near future. Our Government will
prioritize the public interest. Transparency and
accountability will be central.
We have a daunting agenda in front of us. We
must first fulfil our responsibility to provide security
and extend the rule of law. We must also transform our
rural areas. Agriculture will be a major area of
investment and the basis on which we diversify our
economy. We must provide free universal basic
education to all our children. We must extend primary
health care across the whole of South Sudan. We must

9

A/65/PV.108

build our physical infrastructure, with a focus on roads.
We must build our institutions in a culture of
transparency. We must enhance the role of women and
their purpose in society. And we must enable internal
reconciliation and unity.
When we started our journey, we could hardly
imagine that the road would lead us to this point,
however much we hoped. Now, we must move forward
together to fulfil our people’s aspirations. We aspire to
a South Sudan where children go to school without
fear. We aspire to a South Sudan where every house is
provided with electricity and water. We aspire to a
country where everybody has access to health care and
where every family has enough food on the table. We
aspire to a South Sudan where all our sons and
daughters live in brotherhood and sisterhood and where
our nation lives at peace with our neighbours and the
world.
That is our aspiration. Our task from this moment
forward is to make it a reality. To our partners and
friends, we are grateful for their continued help in that
endeavour, which is both welcome and needed. We
very much appreciate their dedication to date and their

10

renewed commitment to continue with their support.
We can assure them that their investments will be
protected, their efforts respected and their advice
heeded.
We now dedicate ourselves wholeheartedly to
building a better future for our children. With the help
and support of the international community together
here today, we are confident of our success.
The President (spoke in French): On behalf of
the General Assembly, I wish to thank the VicePresident of the Republic of South Sudan for the
statement that he has just made.
Mr. Riek Machar Teny-Dhurgon, Vice-President
of the Republic of South Sudan, was escorted
from the rostrum.
The President (spoke in French): To mark this
historic moment, I should like to inform Member States
that the flag of the Republic of South Sudan will be
raised at a ceremony that will take place in front of the
delegates’ entrance immediately following the
adjournment of this meeting.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

11-41470
