20th

United Nations
r
f
t

GENERAL

PLENARY MEETING

ASSEMBLY

Tuesday, 14 June 1988.
at 10.20 a.m.

FIFTEENTH SPECIAL SESSION

Official Records

NEW YORK

President: Mr. Peter FLORIN
(German Democratic Republic).

reached in 1978. Instead, we faced the irony of a
situation where the arms race, instead of slowing
down, had actually intensified during the intervening
four years.

AGENDA ITEM 8

6. Although the international political climate
seems to be more favourable as we embark upon this
special session, we :llso have a much longer way to
travel on the road to disarmament than in the past.
Global military expenditure, which was estimated at
$400 billion annually in 1978, grew to $600 billion in
1982 and stands at an astounding level of $1,000
billion today. The total number of strategic warheads
in the nuclear arsenals of both super-Powers has
increased by more than 7,000 since 1978, in spite of
the Treaty on the Limitation of Strategic Offensive
Arms, which was signed in June 1979. The arms race
is now on the verge of being extended to outer space.
The sky is the limit when it comes to the arms race.
But as rational beings we realize thdt we cannot
continue on what appears ultimately as a suicidal
course. We must now turn back.

General debate (continued)
1. Sir Satcam BOOLELL (Mauritius): I take this
opportunity to convey to you, Mr. President, my
delegation's warmest congratulations on your election to preside over this very important special
session. Your outstanding qualities and long and rich
experience will be very valuable to us during the days
to come when we start our arduous negotiations on
the final document. Your election is also a deserving
tribute to your country, which has made and continues to make notable contributions to the process
of disarmament.
2. My delegation also wishes to pay a tribute to Mr.
Mansur Ahmed of Pakistan, who presided over the
work of the Preparatory Committee. We thank him
for charting the way ahead. The report of the
Preparatory Committee [A/S-15/1] gives us a good
basis for the final document that we hope to adopt at
the end of the month.

7. Since the beginning of the disarmament process,
we have always accorded the utmost priority to
nuclear disarmament. We must continue to focus
principally on this vital issue, notwithstanding the
suggestion that too much emphasis on nuclear arms
could divert our attention from the important question of conventional arms, which absorb 80 per cent
of global military expenditure. As we all know, a
nuclear weapon is not simply a bigger and more
powerful conventional weapon; its nature is such that
an all-out nuclear exchange would result in incalculable long-term disastrous effects on the environment
and the Earth's atmosphere, leaving any survivors
with only the prospect of slow and certain extinction.
In this nuclear age, a global confrontation would
spare no one. There would be no distinction between
combatants and non-combatants, neutral and participating nations. All mankind would ultimately suffer
catastrophic consequences. We welcome the recent
proclamations by both super-Powers that a nuclear
war cannot be won and therefore must never be
fought.

3. Many speakers who have preceded me during
this debate have stressed the crucial importance of
the question of disarmament in this nuclear era. They
have all expressed a sense of the deep obligation
upon all of us to stop and reverse the arms race, for,
if we fail today, there might not be a tomorrow.
4. The international political context in which this
special session, the third to be devoted to disarmament, is taking place gives us cause for cautious
optimism. Relations between the two super-Powers
in the field of security have reached a watershed.
Their strategic nuclear confrontation is now placed
on a new footing. For the first time in the history of
the disarmament process, we have witnessed the
conclusion of a treaty which actually eliminates a
whole class of nuclear weapons, rather than merely
regulating their growth. We are also encouraged by
important progress made on measures to eliminate
other types of w~apons of mass destruction.

8. Before we turn back, we must first stop. We
should stop the production of all types of nuclear
weapons and put a halt to the development of new
ones. In this context, a treaty to prohibit all nuclearweapon tests must be negotiated and concluded
urgently to facilitate the aim of ending qualitative
and quantitative improvements of nuclear weapons.
We also view the conclusion of such a comprehensive
test-ban treaty as a necessary complement to the
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons
[resolution 2373 (XXIi), annex]. In the absence of
such a treaty, it requires a certain leap in logic to
prevent the spread of nuclear weapons to the nuclear

5. Ten years ago, when we met for the first special
session on disarmament, we were all filled with hope
and high expectations as we adopted what was
universally hailed as a landmark document. Four
years later, alas, when we met again in a climate of
international political tensions, the old ghosts of the
cold-war era came back to haunt us as we struggled
unsuccessfully to advance the areas of agreement
387

A/S-15/PV.20

I

I

388

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

"have-nots" while the nuclear "haves" continue to
increase and improve their stockpiles. We nevertheless recognize the inherent danger of enlarging the
"nuclear club," and we fully support universal adherence to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons.
9. We also call for the conclusion of other treaties
on the elimination of other weapons of mass destruction, particularly of chemical weapons. The use of
chemical weapons in warfare is a throw-back to
earlier and barbaric times in mankind's history. It is
a profound and cruel irony that in our supposedly
more civilized era, when we have developed more
humane methods of animal slaughter, we should be
considering the use of "that hellish poison" against
our own fellow human beings.
10. In the field of disarmament, the regional approach is probably one of the best paths to follow.
Regional peace and stability reduce the risk of superPower confrontation by proxy and would also help
reduce the demand for conventional arms. Therefore
we support the call for the establishment of nuclearweapon-free zones in various parts of the world by
the mutual consent of all the countries concerned in
each region.
11. The establishment of zones of peace in various
regions of the world, as noted in the Final Document
of the first special session on disarmament [resolution
S-JO/2], can also contribute to facilitating the disarmament process by strengthening the security of
the regional States and international peace and
security as a whole. In this context, we deeply deplore
the attitude of certain States, members of the Ad Hoc
Committee on the Indian Ocean, which continue to
let their strategic and security interests dictate the
work of that Committee. While discussions in the Ad
Hoc Committee have dragged on for more than a
decade, the militarization of the region has continued
to grow, to the dismay of the littoral and hinterland
States. This spcsial session must call for the implementation of the Declaration on the Indian Ocean as
a Zone of Peace [resolution 2832 (XXV!)] without
any further delay.

12. One of the most important results of the
International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development, held in New
York from 24 August to 11 September 1987, was to
rDoI"r'\nn~··7t:ll th.o

1'"-'\.;V611JL..""

1.11'-'

;t"\l""rA':lC';no

111""I,",U0311.10

f 1"\l1ttino Pr11J !I 1
U.I."""" n
V.l
1-'U"".&&&O ..... '1 ...." '.4a

rAII3"Qnf"J3
... ""1"" ....

emphasis on military and non-military threats to
national and international security. We must now
lend the same sense of urgency to defusing the "debt
bomb" dS we do to stopping the ticking of the nuclear
bomb. We in the developing world are confronted
with the profound paradox that nowadays an average
of $200 is spent annually for each person on Earth on
means of death, when millions of our brothers and
sisters have only that amount or less a year to survive
on.
13. It has been estimated that more than 150 armed
conflicts have been fought since the end of the
Second World War and that more than 20 million
persons, most of them in developing countries, have
died from those conflicts. All those conflicts have
been fought with conventional weapons, for the most
part acquired from the major industrialized arms

suppliers. We recognize that it is the sovereign right
of any country to acquire the necessary means of selfdefence. But it is also true that the supplier countries
do little to discourage the sale of arms abroad. Both
super-Powers use arms sales as a key element in
attaining their respective foreign-policy objectives.
The profit motive is another powerful incentive for
promoting arms sales, considering that the major
weapon-exporting countries sell an average of $30
billion worth of armaments annually. About 70 per
cent of the total imports of major weapons is
consumed by third world countries. This huge diversion of resources by developing countries for arms
acquisition stands in stark contrast with the dire need
for social and economic development, for which
those resources might otherwise have been used.
14. This unacceptable situation must be addressed
urgently at both the international and the regional
level. The flow of arms in a region must be regulated
and the level of arms and armed forces kept to the
minimum necessary for security, in consultation with
both the supplier and the regional countries concerned. More stability at a lower level of military
parity and equality and the undiminished security of
all States must be the guiding principles of all
negotiations.

15. A new body whose task would be to help
stabilize regional tensions and also serve as a kind of
alert system could be set up to diminish the risk of
conflict, and hence the demand for armaments. The
resulting non-armament would greatly facilitate the
process of disarmament. We propose the establishment of a standing commission consisting of 10 to 15
members to work closely with the Secretary-General,
who has the responsibility under Article 99 of the
Charter to alert the Security Council to potential
conflagration. That new standing commission would
not be paralysed by the veto and might therefore be
more effective in serving as mediator and perhaps
reconciling disputing parties.
16. All efforts aimed at disarmament will not
completdy succeed if we fail to address the one factor
that seems to drive the perpetual engine of the arms
race, that is, fear. Fear is mostly irrational. Reason
dictates the obvious course that we must follow in
this most vital issue of disarmament, especially
nuclear disarmament. And yet we have been impelled
to pursue the opposite direction even if it may lead
us ultimately to self-destruction. We consider that
confidence-building measures can play an important
role in achieving disarmament objectives. More
transparency in military matters and reductions and
restrictions in military deployments are some of the
measures that can increase mutual trust and confidence.
17. Verification by technical and human means is
an important complement of confidence-building
measures to ensure that treaties are being adhered to
by all the parties. We welcome and support the
proposal made by the leaders of the Six-Nation
Initiative [A/S-J5/AC.lIJ] for a United Nations
multilateral verification system to be set up. This
capability will certainly strengthen the role of the
world Organization in the disarmament process.

f
(

1

I

20th meeting-14 JU'le 1988
~ht

~lf­

les

)th
In

es.
for
Jor
30

Jer
IS

erms
:ed
ich

ied

:lal
:ed

:he
ith
>0-

lry
of

all
~lp

of
of
'he
:he
ih15
'aI,
:he
ial

lId
be
IPS

lOt

tor
ms
on
In

lly
led

:ad

lat
Int

)re
nd
:he
lfi-

IS

mg
to
:he
on
ms
his
:he

18. In a nuclear world where disarmament has
become synonymous with survival, our instinct for
self-preservation should impel us to disarm or die.
The first step back has already been made. The
return journey is an arduous one because we have
chosen to travel along the road of peril for so long.
Let us not allow history to judge this se.'ssion harshly
for failing to move decisively away from the abyss.
19. Mr. GURINOVICH (Byelorussian Soviet Socialist Republic) (interpretation from Russian): I
should like most cordially to congratulate you, Sir, on
your unanimous election as President of the third
special session of the General Assembly devoted to
disarmament and to wish you success in your work.
20. Special sessions of the General Assembly provide a means for focusing the attention of the world
public on the most pressing global issues, and they
serve as an instrument for internationalizing and
concentrating efforts on the search for mutually
acceptable solutions to these problems. The third
special session on disarmament is particularly important h~cause it is faced with the task of dealing with
the most pressing problem confronting mankind, a
problem which has a direct bearing on its future
survival.

21. The international situation in which this session
is taking place is favourable, on the whole. Influenced
by the new political thinking and bold initiatives, a
positive trend is emerging in international relations,
one that has already yielded tangible results.
22. The Soviet-American summit meetings in Geneva, Reykjavik, Washington and Moscow and their
results have substantially changed the world situation
by causing the threat of nuclear war to recede and
opening the way for the achievement of universally
acceptable agreements based on realism, accommodation of mutual and universal human interests,
reason and political good will. In Moscow (he Soviet
Union and the United States not only solemnly
reiterated their resolve to prevent any war between
them, whether nuclear or conventional, and their
renunciation of any intention to achieve military
supremacy, but they also took an historic step
towards a nuclear-free world. The entry into force of
the Treaty between the United States of America and
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on the
Elimination of Their Intermediate-Range and Shorter-Range Missiles-the !NF Treaty-has been \velcomed with tremendous satisfaction throughout the
world, and this has been borne out also by the
statements of heads of delegations made from this
very rostrum. On our agenda now is the task of
scrupulously implementing history's first measure of
real nuclear disarmament, as envisaged by the treaty.
23. The world community has welcomed the intensive work done in Moscow to prepare an agreement
on a 50 per cent reduction in strategic offensive
weapons of the Soviet Union and the United States
and to draft an agreement for the preservation of the
Treaty on the Limitation of Anti-Ballistic Missile
Systems. l A serious step towards confidence and
further accords was the signing of the Soviet-American agreements on notification of launches of
intercontinental ballistic missiles and submarinelaunched ballistic missiles, as well as on the conduct-

ing of a joint verification experiment on nuclear
explosions. Co-operation between the Soviet Union
and the United States in other spheres also is to be
expanded.
24. It should also be noted that the mandate for
negotiations on reductions in armed forces and
conventional armaments in Europe is shortly to be
finalized in Vienna. Efforts to eliminate regional
conflicts are yielding the first results. A treaty has
been concluded on the establishment of a nuclearfree zone in the southern Pacific, and bilateral and
multilateral co-operation among States continues to
develop. Thus, as has been justly emphasized in
many previous statements, there now exists a favourable situation. What is important now is to ensure
that the special session also has a positive effect on
further progress in improving the international situation and bringing about disarmament. One of its
main tasks, as we see it, is to take advantage of the
momentum imparted by progress in bilateral and
regional fields and apply it to multilateral efforts.
25. It would be no exaggeration to say that in the
recent past the United Nations has been forced to
remain for some time on the sidelines of practical
disarmament measures. It would be wrong, however,
to see only the negative side in the assessment of the
United Nations role. Among its positive achievements is the production of important and, we would
even say, fundamental conclusions and concepts in
the field of strengthening peace and achieving disarmament. These include the need to ensure comprehensive and equal security for all; recognition of the
importance of disarmament, in particular nuclear
disarmament, in building such security; the need to
conduct parallel negotiations in all areas of disarmament; the responsibility for disarmament of all
States without exception, with particular emphasis
on the special role of nuclear and other militarily
significant States; efforts to build confidence and
openness and to enSUle strict and effective international verification with a view to achieving disarmament goals; the interrelationship between disarmament and development, and the use of resources
thus released for economic and social progress,
including assistance to developing countries; t.he
importance of public anti-war activities; and, finally,
the central role of the United Nations in this process
and the need to strengthen it.
26. In addition to laying such a conceptuai foundation, the United Nations has taken a significant
number of decisions outlining specific practical steps
and determining both the character of and conditions
for their implementation. Taken together, these
decisions, whose nucleus was the Final Document of
the first special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament, make up a comprehensive
disarmament programme. This is a kind of disarmament charter, which undoubtedly preserves its relevance and significance. It can guide us towards the
achievement of positive results.
27. It is our view that the current task is precisely to
preserve and make I.:ffective use of the powerful
potential that has been built up and, by comparing
approaches that have been worked out with the
current requirements of nuclear and space realities,
to chart a well-considered and bold programme of

I

390

General Assembly-Fifteenth SP'lcial Session-Plenary Meetings

concrete action for tomorrow, one that must be
adequate to meet the challenges of our times which
have been confronting humanity with a difficult
dilemma, namely, survival or extinction, peaceful
coexistence or non-existence.
28. The solution, which appears to us both desirable and realistic-and ultimately the only possible
one-is to be found in continuous and steady
progress towards a nuclear-free world, a world without violence, wars or weapons. Such a course is
consistent with the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations and is entirely compatible with the desire for general and complete
disarmament.
~9. Advancing along this road is not a matter of
idealistic dreams; it is an entirely feasible undertaking. In recent years all the necessary conditions have
been created for it. They are based on an awareness
of the absolutely catastrophic and unacceptable consequences of nuclear confrontation. Incidentally, it
should be pointed out that it is the United Nations
which deserves the credit for the broad international
recognition of this fact.

30.

1.

I'

i

How can we avoid a fatal confrontation?

31. The concept whereby a nuclear catastrophe can
be prevented only by a policy of strength and nuclear
deterrence smacks of the logic of the absurd, and
from the moral standpoint it smacks of amorality. To
imperil perpetually-every day, every second-the
lives of billions of children and adults and all living
things on this planet and to hold the future of
civilization hostage to an accident is, I am sure
delegations will agree, something that is not in
keeping with the morality worthy of the supreme
creation of nature. Furthermore, this concept is in
fact something that cannot be regarded as inevitable.
32. There is a different, sound logic: the logic of
total nuclear disarmament on a reciprocal and verifiable basis, disarmament that can be achieved even
before the end of this very century. A serious
practical achievement-tl1\~INF Treaty-proves that
achievement of this goal is entirely feasible. Herein
lies the global significance of this treaty. This major
advance did not become possible as a result of a
policy of strength, for otherwise approaches based on
force and confrontation would long since have produced a whole system of agreements in the area of
practical disarmament. It became possible because of
the triumph of common sense, realism, regard for
mutual interests, the increasing injection of the
elements of new poEtical thinking into the fabric of
relations among States, and the anti-war solidarity of
the general public in various countries. The public
voice has played an essential role in the efforts of the
peoples to achieve a common goal-a truly safe
world for all rather than just for a select few.
33. Now our task is to ensure further steady movement towards disarmament, and in this regard there
are several points to which I should like to draw
attention.
34. What is the meaning of the process of disarmament? Clearly it is to phase out certain categories of
weapons, with the ultimate goal of eliminating them

-~_.,.-'~~...

completely. It is certainly not to replace disarmament
measures with the building up of armaments in other
places or in contiguous categories.
35. Yet this is precisely what constitutes the subtext
of the plans for so-called "compensation" and "modernization", which have been so vigorously promoted
since the Treaty on the Elimination of IntermediateRange and Shorter-R.mge Missiles took tangible
form. This is anti-disarmament logic. Such plans, in
essence, are designed to neutralize the process of
disarmament, to reduce not missiles but disarmament itself to naught, and to repair the breach in
nuclear arsenals that has been made with so much
difficulty, as a result of the new thinking and new
approaches. One of the most important objectives of
concerted efforts by the entire world community
should be to make disarmament irreversible.
36. We must advance from the treaty abolishing the
first two classes of nuclear missiles to major reductions and ultimately to the total elimination of all
nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction,
including chemical weapons. "We must prevent the
arms race from taking off into outer space on any
pretext whatsoever, including the one of alleg~d
defence. We must forgo development of new types
and systems of weapons of mass destruction, undertake steady reductioi1s in conventional arm~ and
armed forces down to the limits of reasonable
sufficiency and work together towards general and
complete disarmament under effective international
control.
37. Undoubtedly, a stage will be reached when the
focus of nuclear disarmament will have to be expanded to incorporate all States possessing nuclear
potential and when the process of disarmament will
have to involve all militarily significant States, and
subsequently other countries too. Preparations for
such a stage, which does not appear to be that far off,
should begin now. From the standpoint of both
common sense, and particularly the new thinking,
such preparations should not mean building up
military potential. These buildup plans cause extreme concern and should be abandoned.
38. The realities of the disarmament process demand that it be comprehensive. This requires a
political will and a bold approach based on the
realism of all the negotiating parties, a search for a
balance of interests and, in the final analysis, on the
orinciole that it should be l!ood for everYone. rather
than for one alone. Of major importance- here is also
the idea of abandoning the "enemy complex" with
regard to other States and acknowledging the right of
every nation to live and develop according to its own
choice rather than by outside coercion.
39. Such an approach appears to enjoy practically
universal support, as has become clear in the course
of the general debate. There have been quite a few
specific proposals dictated by the desire for a safe
and disarmed world. Many of these proposals have
already been put forward and some have been
embodied in United Nations resolutions, but there
are quite a few new suggestions.
40. For its part, the Byelorussian SSR takes a
positive view of other countries' proposals and

deems it essential
collective outline
goals: to ensure a
lent world; to cre,
from weapons of n
to pursue disarmar
to a comprehensi
conflict situations:
outer space with p
it for peaceful expl
Earth space of pc
peaceful space fligt
nuclear testing; to
strictly comply wit:
total elimination 0
the most stringenl
goals and principle:
embark on a proC(
arms and armed fOI
non-offensive strw
forces at a lower le
non-aligned and d
buildup of their r
reducing it to a n
efforts on economi
substantially sales 0
ly the black mad
proliferation of the
ons; to restrict na'
extend confidencerl
oceans and to wod
would permit the
from the sea; to red
year 2000 foreign IT
of other countries
foreign military h
verification procec
United Nations; to
of scientific and
achievements; to (
agreements on limit
ament and to expa
ments; to establish
component of relati(
public in various COl
of disarmament and
41. Practical work
criteria of the defeJ
trines and the defe
could constitute an
enhance predictabili

42. It is certainly I
disarmament measu
difficulties which ar,
cal complications, I
great efforts are bein
of confrontation, e
which have been p
setting it would be tc
artificial obstacles, t(
on. It is high tim(
thoroughly.
43. As the disarma:
depth, the significant
ing. It should becom
effective. It should 0
cover arms limitatiOl

20th meeting-14 June 1988

deems it essential that the final document reflect a
collective outline of ways to achieve the following
goals: to ensure a nuclear-weapon-free and non-violent world; to create zones of peace and zones free
from weapons of mass destruction or offensive arms;
to pursue disarmament in such a way as to contribute
to a comprehensive and equitable settlement of
conflict situations; to prevent the militarization of
outer space with proper verification and to preserve
it for peaceful exploration and uses, to cleanse nearEarth space of pollution and to ensure safety for
peaceful space flights; to establish a complete ban on
nuclear testing; to conclude as soon as possible and
strictly comply with a truly global convention on the
total elimination of chemical weapons and to ensure
the most stringent universal compliance with the
goals and principles of the 1925 Geneva Protocol;2 to
embark on a process of reductions in conventional
arms and armed forces and to ensure a transition to a
non-offensive structure of armaments and armed
forces at a lower level; to create conditions in which
non-aligned and developing countries can halt the
buildup of their military potential and set about
reducing it to a reasonable range, and focus their
efforts on economic and social progress; to reduce
substantially sales of arms and to eliminate completely the black market in weapons, te prevent the
proliferation of the most destructive types of weapons; to restrict naval activities and armaments, to
extend confidencerbuilding measures to the seas and
oceans and to work out verification procedures that
would permit the limitation of the nuclear threat
from the sea; to reduce and eliminate entirely by the
year 2000 foreign military presence on the territories
of other countries, including the dismantling of
foreign military bases, coupled with appropriate
verification procedures, particularly through the
United Nations; to ban the use for military purposes
of scientific and technological discoveries and
achievements; to observe conscientiously existing
agreements on limiting the arms race and on disarmament and to expand participation in these agreements; to establish confidence as an indispensable
component of relations among States; and to keep the
public in various countries informed about the status
of disarmament and to take their views into account.
41. Practical work in the United Nations on the
criteria of the defensive character of military doctrines and the defensive structure of armed forces
could constitute an important element which would
enhance predictability and trust in the military area.
42. It is certainly not easy to put into ~ffect major
disarmament measures. There are objective technical
difficulties which are further compounded by political complications, particularly in situations where
great efforts are being made to break up the log-jams
of confrontation, enmity, suspicion and mistrust
which have been piling up over decades. In this
setting it would be totally counter-productive to raise
artificial obstacles, to invent technical catches, and so
on. It is high time to clean this Augean stable
thoroughly.
43. As the disarmament process gains in scope and
depth, the significance of verification is also increasing. It should become comprehensive, stringe~t and
effective. It should operate on a reciprocal baSIS and
cover arms limitation and disarmament measures on

391

land, at sea and in outer space. The goals set at the
present stage in the area of disarmament highlight the
desirability of creating, under the auspices of the
United Nations, machinery for international verification of compliance with disarmament agreements. In
this regard, the well-known proposals of the SixNation Initiative appear to be interesting and are
worthy of careful consideration. There is an urgent
need to raise to a qualitatively new level the standards of confidence, scope and depth of mutual
verification and control over the obligations entered
into.
44. The realities of the nuclear and space age call
for persistent and concerted efforts by the States of
the United Nations to ensure the transition to an
integrated system that would embrace measures to
ensure equal security for all, to reach disarmament
objectives, to consolidate confidence and to establish
effective international control on a broad scale which
would apply both to disarmament and to the settlement and prevention of armed conflicts.
45. Those are all major, formidable tasks. They are
simply too big for a small group of countries to cope
with. For the processes of building genuine security
and of disarmament can indeed become irreversible
only if they acquire a global, universal nature. It is
not realistic to have separate oases of confidence and
security in a vast scorching desert of confrontation.
Such oases can become mirages.
46. The United Nations, as the universal organization in terms of its membership, is the natural
instrument and channel for joint productive work to
move towards a safe world. We see a great potential
for strengthening and drastically increasing its role in
all aspects of disarmament and confidence-building,
whether conceptual, negotiation or verification. For
its part, the Byelorussian SSR will do its utmost, in
co-operation with other States, to strengthen the
United Nations as a genuine centre for harmonizing
the actions of States and as a guarantor of comprehensive security.
47.

Many millenia ago the evolution of life created

homo sapiens-the reasoning man. In the world of
today the evolution of political thinking should lead
to the creation of humanitas sapiens-reasoning
mankind. It is the task of the United Nations to
becorn~ ItS embodiment.
48. Mr. AZIZ (Iraq) (interpretation from Arabic): I
<im very pleased to convey to you, Sir, on behalf of
the delegation of the Republic of Iraq and on my own
behalf, our sincerest congratulations on your election
as President of the General Assembly at its fifteenth
special session, the third special session devoted to
disarmament. I wish to assure you of our delegation's
full readiness to co-operate with you in order to
achieve the great objectives of this session and to
fulfil the high hop(~s placed in it.
49. We should first recall the general welcome given
by Member States to the Final Document and the
Programme of Action for limiting the arms race as a
prelude to achieving the ultimate objective of comprehensive disarmament, which were adopted in
1978 by the General Assembly at the conclusion of
its tenth special session [resolution S-lO/2]-the first

,')
,

l'.

I
"l~~.'

392

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

special session devoted to disarmament. The Republic of Iraq welcomed the important results achieved
during that session, which Iraq viewed as an expression of the unanimous international political will to
take practical and balanced steps towards eliminating
the threat of total annihilation and replacing the
policies of stockpiling nuclear arms and developing
their destructive power by more rational policies
based on dialogue, the promotion of international cooperation and the strengthening of trust, while not
violating the security and safety of States or adversely affecting their legitimate right to defend themselves or to acquire the means necessary to exercise
that right.
50. The course of events since 1978, however, has
not proved to be consonant with the optimistic
atmosphere in which the first special session was held
or with the hopes and expectations placed by the
international community in its outcome. That has
been particularly evident in the clear failure at all
regional and international levels to attain those
results. The reality of the international situation is
that in 1980 the Second Review Conference of the
Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons failed to achieve any success worth
mentioning towards agreement on a final act. Another reality of the international situation was the failure
of the second special session of the General Assembly
devoted to disarmament, held in 1982, to widen
international consensus in this field.

j,'

'.j.'

L
I,
~ .~

51. We must, however, welcome the ongoing dialogue of the two super-Powers and their conclusion of
the INF Treaty. We should welcome such an agreement not only because it is the first to bring about the
destruction of actually existing nuclear weapons, but
also because it is an important event that will lead to
the strengthening of trust, will help improve the
chances of reaching further agreements and will
provide concrete evidence that insistence on serious
negotiations does indeed lead to new agreements on
the reduction or elimination of other weapons. We
feel, none the less, that such agreements, however
important, cannot be truly effective in eliminating
the threat of nuclear catastrophe and increasing the
sense of security and peace in the world unless efforts
are intensified to conclude a general and comprehensive nuclear-test-ban convention.
52. All the peoples of the world have a genuine
interest in the success of disarmament negotiations.
All countries are therefore entitled to participate in
multilateral negotiations, particularly those that have
a direct impact on their national security. We are not
alone in holding that view. Indeed, there is unanimous international agreement on it, and this is
reflected in the Final Document of the first special
session of the Assembly devoted to disarmament. Yet
the doors of the Conference on Disarmament have
remained closed to many countries rlS a result of an
erroneous interpretation of the rules of procedurean interpretation consonant with the short-sighted
interests of certain parties, which they place before
the greater objective for which the Conference was
originally established-and as a result of the desire of
those parties to use their membership of the Conference to push matters of special interest to them. We
hereby call for this aberrant state of affairs to be
redressed without delay, either by enlarging the

membership of the Conference or by placing no other
condition on the participation of States than their
own desire to participate in the discussion of an issue
of concern to them.
53. In our view, the establishment of nUclear-weapon-free zones strengthens the atmosphere of confidence and contributes to the creation of conditions
more suitable to and favourable for progress in the
negotiations on the limitation and non-proliferation
of nuclear weapons. For those reasons, Iraq has
supported the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree zone in the Middle East. To that end, Iraq has
called upon all countrie5 in the region tl1at have not
yet declared that they renounce the acquisition of
nuclear weapons to do so and to get rid of any such
weapons actually on their soil. Iraq has called upon
those countries to accede to the Non-Proliferation
Treaty and to place all their nuclear installations
under the IAEA safeguards system. We would regard
such a declaration as an essential expression of good
will. In addition, all the countries in the nuclearweapon-free zone would be expected neither to enter
into military alliances with any nuclear-weapon
countries nor to allow any bases for nuclear weapons
to be established on their territories.
.
54. The Israeli entity has always ignored that call
and, instead, has continued to strengthen its nuclear
armament capability, and there is now abundant
documented information confirming that that entity
possesses nuclear weapons. We cannot overlook the
grave threat posed by Israeli nuclear armament to
peace and security in the region and in the world at
large. Nor can we overlook the dangerous and direct
challenge it pose~ to the nuclear-non-proliferation
system to which all the other countries in the region
are committed.
55. The Assembly no doubt remembers the Zionist
aggression committed against my country on 7 June
1981, when the Zionist entity attempted to destroy
our Tammuz nuclear reactor, which was devoted to
peaceful purposes and had been placed under the
IAEA system of safeguards and inspection. The
international community was unanimous in its condemnation of that act of aggression as a flagrant
breach of the Charter and international law, as a
violation of Iraq's sovereignty and its inalienable and
undisputed right to the use of science and technology,
including peaceful nuclear technology, in its development programmes and according to its own needs
and priorities, and as a direct assault on IAEA and its
safeguards system. Despite that condemnation, the
international organizations concerned, particularly
the Security Council, failed to take the measures
needed to deter the Israeli aggressor entity and force
it to place its own nuclear installations under international control as demanded by the Security Council
in resolution 487 (1981). Those international organizations concerned also failed to provide effective
guarantees against the repetition of such aggression.
56. Among the facts that have now become common knowledge in the international community is
the strong link between the problems of armament
and of preserving international peace and security.
The Assembly is no doubt aware that the Concluding
Document of the second special session of the

."_' _':: ...:__ .,_j:i.'.c,,_:_ .. __ ~

General Assemb
stressed that lin
57. However, c
link will not in
atmosphere of pe
upon the achie
towards arms lin
tional conduct bt
while working fe
objectives and pr
the United Nati(
without complial
larly the perman<
cil, to which the (
bility in this respl
this Organization
and security.
58. We are raisi
we feel deeply tl
special emphasis i
and because realil
assess the credibl
59. Our region 1
increase in the
occupation, expaI
interference in th
also been seeing
Charter, internati(
tions adopted b'
mandatory resolui
trated than in the
that the Iranian n
ag?.inst my countl
the Israeli aggres
Palestine and otht
have referred to
situations.
60. Since the be
against Iraq and th
Iraq has recogniz
Council in the Cl
occasions for a p
settlement of the (
the resolutions ad<
has expressed its fl
good faith. For it:
own constitution a
n~tllrp
.. .. _._a _

it i"
•
a.
a.., tn
"''""' tho
Lit\,,> 1

international coml
both the mandate
dispute and the cor
and bases agreed i
61. After eight ye,
fact has remained u
fied the dangers of
exacerbated to sud
grave threat to pe.
region but also in tt
community was de
end. The Security
(1987) on 20 July
containing the elen
ment. That imp(
generated a sense c
the world and was I

20th meeting-14 June 1988

General Assembly on disarmament,3 held in 1982,
stressed that link.
57. However, common realization of this inherent
link will not in itself be sufficient to ensure an
atmosphere of peace and security in the world merely
upon the achievement of some concrete results
towards arms limitation. It is essential that international conduct be based on credibility and good will
while working for the achievement of the common
objectives and principles enshrined in the Charter of
the United Nations. That cannot possibly be done
without compliance by the Member States, particularly the permanent members of the Security Council, to which the Charter entrusted a special responsibility in this respect, with the resolutions adopted by
this Organization on the issues of international peace
and security.
58. We are raising this point in particular because
we feel deeply that it is a matter which deserves
special emphasis in our debates at this special session
and because reality is the criterion by which peoples
assess the credibility of the resolutions adopted.
59. Our region has in fact been witnessmg a great
increase in the use of force, armed aggression,
occupation, expansion at the expense of others and
interference in their internal affairs. The region has
also been seeing an ominous departure from the
Charter, international law and respect for the resolutions adopted by competent bodies, particularly
mandatory resolutions. Nowhere is this better illustrated than in the war of aggression and expansion
that the Iranian regime has been incessantly waging
ag?.inst my country since 4 September 1980 and in
the Israeli aggression against the Arab people of
Palestine and other Arab States. The phenomenon I
have referred to is very evident in both these
situations.
60. Since the beginning of the Iranian aggression
against Iraq and throughout the years of that conflict,
Iraq has recognized the mandate of the Security
Council in the conflict and has called on many
occasions for a peaceful, just and comprehensive
settlement of the dispute. Iraq has also accepted all
the resolutions adopted by the Security Council and
has expressed its full readiness to implement them in
good faith. For its part the Iranian regime, whose
own constitution and ideology confirm how alien in
nature it is to the whole contemporary system of the
international community, has refused to recognize
both the mandate of the Security Council in the
dispute and the contemporary agreements, principles
and bases agreed upon for resolving disputes.
61. After eight years of hostilities that fundamental
fact has remained unchanged. In 1987, having identified the dangers of the conflict and having seen them
exacerbated to such an extent that they constituted a
grave threat to peace and security not only in the
region but also in the world at large, the international
community was determined to bring the war to an
end. The Security Council adopted resolution 598
(1987) on 20 July 1987, as a mandatory resolution
containing the elements of a comprehensive settlement. That important and unique resolution
generated a sense of optimism in the region and in
the world and was regarded as a major step not only

393

I

towards ending the war but also towards consolidating the role of the international Organization in
dealing with regional disputes seriously and decisively. Because Iraq wanted peace and acknowledged the
mandate of the Security Council and believed in the
Charter, it accepted the resolution in an official and
documented manner when I came here only three
days after the resolution was adopted and handed the
Secretary-General a letter to that effect.
62. As for Iran, which has never acknowledged the
mandate of the Security Council or abided by the
Charter or international law, it has failed to comply
with that mandatory resolution. The Iranian regime
has pursued a course of manoeuvering, mendacity
and prevarication in order to prevent the Council
from moving on to the stage of imposing sanctions
against it for having failed to comply with the
resol ution.
63. Along with all the peoples of the region that
have suffered the ravages of war, we had expected a
serious and firm stand on the question of compliance
with resolution 598 (1987). Yet 11 months have now
been wasted on a series of manoeuvres and futile
attempts that have left onc painful fact untouched:
Iran's insistence on war and its persistence in threatening the security and stability of the region, as well
as international peace and security. At this point I
should like to ask how long the Security Council
should wait for a Member State to take a political
decision regarding war and peace on the basis of a
mandatory resolution unanimously adopted by the
Council itself.
64. The question that inevitably forces itself upon
us now is, what do we do now? We believe that the
issue is not one of playing a game of manoeuvres or
diplomatic rhetoric, because such a course could
create a very dangerous illusion. The war will continue and so will its threat to world peace, while the
illusion that something or other is being done to end
the war will persist when in point of fact nothing of
the sort is being done at all.
65. The issue is one of political decision to be
taken by the member States of the Security Council,
particularly the permanent members. Those States
are required to spell out, in unequivocal terms, their
political options. Are they ready to pursue the course
charted by the mandatory resolution, as was the
impression they gave us when they voted for that
resolution 598 (1987), or are they dealing with it as a
mere proposal, subject to give-and-take or to bargaining?
66. An undeniable fact in this respect is that Iran
has failed to implement the resolution and has
insisted on continuing the war, as has been made
abundantly clear by its highest officials. How long
will this indecisive situation prevail in the Security
Council? How long will paragraph 10 of the resolution remain unimplemented? Such a state of affairs is
a ~rave threat to the credibility of the Council and of
thIs international Organization.
67. This forum has once again listened to another
representative of the Iranian Government shedding
crocodile tears over international agreements and
over certain details pertaining to the conflict which

1'.

Ir:
I

t'
l~

I
\:i'
l~

i
I·

I,

t

I

,
l

;.

394

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

han insists upon perpetuating. It is to be noted,
however, that not even once did the Iranian official
make reference to the position of the Iranian regime
on the question of peace under the Security Council's
mandatory resolution 598 (1987), which embodies
the unanimous will of the competent body in this
Organization concerning questions of war and peace.
Why should he fail to make such a reference? The
answer is well known. As already mentioned, Iran
takes the view that acceptance of the resolution and
its implementation in good faith would establish
peace and security between Iraq and Iran and in the
region, something which Iran has all along refused to
allow to happen.
68. The Iranian Minister has focused on a single
agreement from among the countless international
agreements making up the body of international law.
This selective approach to the implementation of
international law is by no means a new phenomenon
to the Iranian regime. We have tried repeatedly, in
this and other international forums, to draw attention to the deceptive way in which the Iranian regime
aims, in the first place, to continue its war of
aggression and to achieve its expansionist programme by calling for the implementation of such
agreements as would allow it to carry on the war,
while failing to show any readiness to comply with
any legal provision adopted by the international
community that runs counter to such a policy.
69. Working for peace and the safeguarding of
human values entails respect for all international
agreements, notably the Charter of the United Nations. Has the Iranian regime complied, for example,
with the 1949 Geneva Convention relative to the
Treatment of Prisoners of War? The method by
which the Iranian regime deals with the tragic plight
of prisoners of war is a most abhorrent and disgraceful crime. The Iranian regime mistreats prisoners of
war, subjects them to the ugliest forms of physical
and mental torture, practises brainwashing on them
in order to make them change their political and
religious beliefs, physically eliminating those who fail
to respond, and denies them the protection of the
International Committee of the Red Cross [ICRC].
All these practices are aimed at turning Iraqi prisoners of war into a source of political and military
pressure against their homeland. These crimes are
documented in the records of the ICRC and have
been the subject of numerous statements issued by
the Committee.
70. Let us now look into other issues which are by
no means less criminal in nature than the acts
committed by the Iranian regime against prisoners of
war. The Iranian regime has been throwing children
into the furnaces of war and employing them as
human mine-sweepers. This fact is well known to all.
How can such a barbaric regime-a regime responsible for the death of millions of people-dare to speak
of human values and humanitarian considerations?
71. In March 1988 we called upon the SecretaryGeneral to dispatch a team to investigate the conditions of the prisoners of war, but our request has
remained unanswered to date. The fate of thousands
of human beings who have been suffering under
appallirtg conditions over many years calls for the
immediate and utmost attention of the Secretariat,

the Security Council and the international community.
72. Iraq has called in the past, and calls now, for
respect for all-I repeat, all-international agreements, in the forefront of which is the Charter of the
United Nations. If the allegations of the Iranian
regime are true, why does it not accept this challenge?
The international community is now called upon to
make a correct assessment of the barbaric and
aggressive Iranian regime, a regime that has refused
to recognize the mandate of this international Organization and which has spurned its Charter. The
international community should also, without hesitation, take the necessary steps to deprive that regime
of all the means of war and aggression, since dealing
with the regime or sympathizing with its deceptive
lies have absolutely no moral justification.
73. Lastly, I must point out that during this session
the General Assembly has heard statements by the
representatives of certain States which claim neutrality and concern for human values, notwithstanding
evidence, published in their own press, of their wilful
involvement in the secret sale of weapons to Iran.
Those States must realize that the scandals about
their involvement in such sales are well known to
world public opinion, and their representatives
should put their own houses in order before coming
here to talk to others, from this podium, about
morality and humanitarian considerations.
74. If the tragedy of the war of aggression and
expansion continually waged by the Iranian regime
against Iraq and the international efforts made to
implement Security Council resolution 598 (1987)
are a major concern to the Arab nation, the Palestinian question is another unfolding tragedy that has
waited a long time for words to regain their credibility through the implementation of resolutions.
75. The courageous popular uprising of the Arab
Palestinian people on the occupied lands is of
historic significance. It has come 20 years after the
aggression of 1967, a period during which all sorts of
policies of terror and territorial annexation have
been perpetrated. It has come as a stern and courageous historic response to foreign occupation. The
uprising offers eloquent and glaring proof of the
vitality of the Palestinian people, their profound
faith in freedom and their genuine desire for selfdetermination. It also provides irrefutable proof that
the policies of aggression, force, occupation and
suppression cannot withstand the firm attachment of
the oppressed peoples to their rights.
76. The uprising of the Arab Palestinian people has
led to the adoption of important international stands
and resolutions which have unequivocally condemned the policies imposed by Israel on the occupied Arab lands and exposed the racist and inhumane nature of foreign occupation. Motivated by the
letter and spirit of the Extraordinary Arab Summit
Conference held at Amman in November 1987, the
Arab States have exerted strenuous efforts at the
international level to muster support for the just
cause of the Arab Palestinian people. The Arab States
have set up a ministerial committee of seven to
follow up the developments of the Palestinian uprising and to make contacts with the States members of

the Security
resolutions 6(
the conditiol
territories. Dt
tional stands I
people to self
defy the will
peace based c
pation and or
the Arab Pall
77. The intt
support the stt
manifested in
right conclusi
Foremost of
illusions enter
cies of force, :
course of hist
called upon tt
Palestinian pe
tine Liberatio
representative
Foremost am{
determination
pendent Pales
78. The maj(
has been convt;
achievement c
concerned. Ho
situation we ar
the policies 0
interference in
upon us to ad{
link to that g{
79. The achil
security and t
violations is tl
Organization ~
to the collectiv
Charter. This
our collective il
ciently compre
achieved withl
needed to ensu
tions adopted il
wise, we shall ,
feeling that thi:
role to play i
incompatible ~
humanity on tJ
80. Mr. HEP}
doubt that the I
tional commun
question of arm
disarmament. 11
when the first s
without hesitati,
made to reduce
the other hand,
military spendi
certain about tl
81. Another fj
reached in par1
tempting for p,

20th meeting-!4 June 1988

the Security Council. The Council has adopted
resolutions 605 (1987), 607 (1988) and 608 (1988) on
the conditions prevailing in the occupied Arab
territories. Despite those resolutions and all international stands in support of the right of the Palestinian
people to self-determination, Israel has continued to
defy the will of the international community for
peace based on discontinuance of the military occupation and on recognition of the legitimate rights of
the Arab Palestinian people.
77. The international community has a duty to
support the steadfastness of the Palestinian people, as
manifested in their popular uprising, by drawing the
right conclusions from the lesson of the uprising.
Foremost of these lessons is the futility of the
illusions entertained by oppressive Powers that policies of force, suppression and terror can change the
course of history. The international community is
called upon to support the aspirations of the Arab
Palestinian people under the leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organization, their sole, legitimate
representative, to achieve their legitimate rights.
Foremost among those rights is their right to selfdetermination and to the establishment of an independent Palestinian State.
78. The major issue for which this special session
has been convened is highly important in so far as the
achievement of international peace and security is
concerned. However, the direct reality of the grave
situation we are witnessing in our region as a result of
the policies of force, aggression, occupation and
interference in internal affairs makes it im:umbent
upon us to address the situation because of its close
link to that goal.
79. The achievement of international peace and
security and their protection against threats and
violations is the common objective for which this
Organization was established, to function according
to the collective security system provided for in its
Charter. This objective cannot be achieved unless
our collective international endeavour becomes sufficiently comprehensive to attain it, nor can it be
achieved without commitment to the credibility
needed to ensure the implementation of the resolutions adopted in accordance with the Charter. Otherwise, we shall all be responsible for entrenching the
feeling that this Organization has only a peripheral
role to play in international relations; which is
incompatible with the high hopes placed on it by
humanity on the day of its inception.
80. Mr. HEPBURN (Bahamas): There can be no
doubt that the climate is auspicious for the international community to pay serious attention to the
question of arms limitation and general and complete
disarmament. If we compare the present with 1978,
when the first special session took place, we can say
without hesitation that very serious efforts have been
made to reduce the threat of a nuclear holocaust. On
the other hand, more nations have increased their
military spending, in part because they are not
certain about the efficacy of a disarmed world.
81. Another factor is that when milestones are
reached in particular areas of concern it is very
tempting for participants to divert their attention

395

from other matters that are of equal importance and
hold potential danger.
82. The historic 'signing of the Treaty on the
Elimination of Intermediate-Range and ShorterRange Missiles in December 1987 was one such
milestone. Who would have thought in the early
1980s that this, the first nuclear-arms-reduction
agreement in history, would be signed? But what does
this act mean? It is still a fact that the Anti-Ballistic
Missile Treatyl signed in 1972 by the United States
and the Soviet Union has not been implemented. It is
in fact an area of major disagreement between the
two Powers, with the United States contending that
the treaty permits strategic defence initiative deployment and the Soviet Union maintaining that it
forbids deployment. The Soviets are also insisting on
the need for limits on the deployment of sealaunched cruise missiles. Perhaps these differences
may have lessened at the recent summit meeting held
in Moscow.
83. These facts notwithstanding, this signing can
easily be regarded as the most positive step to date in
the field of disarmament, as it is an actual disarmament measure as opposed to an arms-control agreement. Never before have two world Powers agreed to
eliminate an entire category of weapons, whether
they be bombers, battleships or ballistic missiles.
Although bilateral in nature, the INF Treaty, together
with its materialization and impact, lifts a significant
element of threat from citizens of Western Europe
and Asia within range of those missiles. No matter
how it is regarded, the elimination of this class of
nuclear weapons is a significant step towards general
and complete disarmament.
84. Yet the security benefit of this agreement
should not be seen as its only outcome. Indeed, the
positive example set by those two countries of how it
is possible to solve long-term problems that once
seemed intractable should be regarded as an equally
important legacy of the treaty. Nevertheless, examples are useful only in so far as they are followed. It is
the expressed hope of my delegation that the same
spirit of conciliation which prevailed at that time will
continue during the bilateral and multilateral negotiations of this third special session devoted to disarmament.
85. The confidence-building aspect of the INF
Treaty is tangible evidence of the capability to scale
down military confrontation and to diminish the
danger of nuclear war. This effect is corroborated by
the accord concerning verification, and in this respect it can be concluded that new ground has also
been broken, for it will be the first time that
international verification will be applied to the
obligation to abolish two categories of nuclear weapons and to guarantee at the same time that they will
not be produced and deployed again. This aspect is of
great importance as well for the drafting of future
bilateral regional and global disarmament accords.
Indeed it could signify that the basic conflict over
verification and disarmament agreements is finished
once and for all. While the verification issue has
finally lost its function as a political and ideological
instrument for potential confrontation and preventing disarmament measures, verification is now gaining importance as an element of constructive co-

396

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

operation. It stands to reason that verification and
arms limitation are co-operative activities in the
same way as confidence-building measures and verification are related.

Mr. Moumin (Comoros). Vice-President. took the
Chair.
86. The prevailing atmosphere in the disarmament
field provides an excellent augury for future disarmament negotiations. It cannot but have a positive
implict on the deliberations of this special session
and indeed on the prevention of horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. In this same vein, my
delegation sees the establishment of zones of peace
and co-operation and nuclear-weapon-free zones as
major steps towards general and complete disarmament. Similarly, regional disarmament is an equally
important facet of general and complete disarmament. It is to be hoped and desired that these issues
will receive just consideration during our deliberations.
87. During the period leading up to the signing of
the INF Treaty and frequently since, there has been
much talk about glasnost and perestroika. My delegation would warmly welcome during these deliberations an attitude which demonstrated a perestroika
which would allow that: first, a country's worth can
be measured in terms other than its military and/or
economic power; secondly, due import be given to
the area where the largest amount of resources is
spent, namely conventional weapons; thirdly, the
broad interests represented in multilateral forums
receive as much attention and focus as the pursuit of
bilateral super-Power disarmament agreements;
fourthly, both overarmament and underarmament,
instead of guaranteeing international peace and security are threats to them; fifthly, there is indeed a
relationship between disarmament and development;
sixthly, security can be assured with a very low level
of armaments as long as a balance is maintained;
seventhly, nuclear proliferation is a global problem
which can be addressed only through the application
by all States of the requisite constraints and regulations; eighthly, conventional disarmament is necessary to avoid rearmament; ninthly, confidence-building measures cannot replace disarmament but must
come out of it; and tenthly, nuclear weapons are
weapons of mass destruction and not weapons of
war.
Every success in the bilateral disarmament
negotiations spotlights the role and effectiveness of
multilateral arms limitation and disarmament efforts
which focus on reaching global solutions.
00.

89. It is clear that all States and peoples have an
interest in seeing international peace and security
strengthened. Their right, duty and desire to cooperate to this end is evidenced by the representation
in this Hall. To use to the full the great policy
potential of a multilateral mechanism such as the
United Nations is not just an imperative of international democracy but also an increasingly urgent
matter if practical results in the disarmament process
are to be achieved. That some 25 heads of State or
Government have decided to afford to disarmament
sufficient importance to war7ant their presence goes
a long way towards the promotion of the kind of

spirit that will lend itself to compromise, conciliation
and considerable progress.
90. For many years, particularly since 1984, negotiations towards a global ban on chemical weapons
have continued at the Conference on Disarmament.
France, Iraq, the Soviet Union and the United States
are the only countries whose possession of chemical
weapons is confirmed, but at least II other States are
believed to possess them. The Conference on Disarmament is in broad agreement on prohibiting the
possession of chemical weapons, on destroying existing stocks and facilities over 10 years and on
verifying prohibited as well as permitted activities,
including some form of on-site inspection. Only last
year the Soviet Union agreed to mandatory on-site
inspection without a right of refusal. Therefore,
although the conclusion of a global convention
remains a distant project, it is reasonable to expect
that some further progress will be made during the
next few weeks.
91. The Final Document of the 1978 special session
on disarmament points out:
"In the task of achieving the goals of nuclear
disarmament, all the nuclear-weapon States', in
particular those among them which possess the
most important nuclear arsenals, bear a special
responsibility." [Resolution 8-10/2. para. 48.]
That the two major nuclear Powers should be the
forerunners in concrete action to halt the nuclear
arms race is further borne out by the fact that they
possess 95 per cent of the world's total nuclear
weapons. Encouragingly enough, this is beginning to
be realized and recognized by them, as the joint
communique of the November 1985 Geneva summit
meeting states that a nuclear war cannot be won and
must not be fought. Further, the treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces can be seen as the most
significant indication of the acceptance of this responsibility by these Powers.
92. This reality Tlotwithstanding, the super-Powers
alone cannot effect general and complete disarmament. It is no secret that virtually all the wars fought
since the Second World War have been fought in
developing countries with the use of conventional
weapons. The super-P.:>wers have cleared the way for
progress on all aspects of the arms race. This great
opportunity afforded us should and must be taken
advantage of. General and complete disarmament is
the desire of all States and a goal towards which all
States can contribute, even if only at the level of
facilitating negotiations between those who are actually in a position to effect change.
93. It is very tempting for militarily insignificant
States to assume the attitude of "This is not my war",
but in the Bahamas we have first-hand experience of
what it means to be caught in the middle, being a
transit State in the drug route between Latin America
and North America. The whole Bahamian society has
suffered greatly both locally and internationally as a
result. The problems between the consumers and the
producers have now become our concerns. No longer
can we stand back and say, "Let them work it out."
Bahamians have had to wise up and play their part in
the war against drugs in their own national interest.

We are:
on our C
ly unwa
94. Th
disarma
attitude
the mail
thereby
attitude
chairma
ament (
facilitat<
special ~
95. Mr
to expn
election
Republi<
devoted
under h
assistanc
session

1

96. Tht
Affairs I
already ~
the Eurc
of cours
statemer
97. Del
internati
political
The thir
place at <:
prospect:
perhaps I
on disan
sky was
the sessil
precedin:
progress
disarmar
and the:
ment in
98. The
constitut
whole cL
't"'rA"'C'''....
J-II V V 1.:JIVl

asymmet
procedur
ago, havl
treaty. Tl
towards
disarman
gress th,
reductior
possible 1
reductior
nuclear <::
must be
control a
Governm
preservat
Ballistic-]
99. The
nuclear al

20th meeting-14 June 1988

397

We are now called upon to fight a war which landed
on our doorsteps uninvited, unprovoked and certainly unwanted.

of Foreign Minister Genscher-"essential to reduce
the rdiance on nuclear deterrence through a cooperative security policy."

94. The activities of the Bahamas in the field of
disarmament have always been characterized by an
attitude of granting assistance wherever possible to
the maintenance of international peace and security,
thereby encouraging others into action. It is this
attitude which characterized our activities in the
chairmanship of the recent session of the Disarmament Commission, and it is in this same role of
facilitator that my delegation will perform during this
special session.

100. The world-wide arms race is a symptom of
mutual lack of confidence, rather than its cause.
Fortunately, it is now increasingly recognized that
arms control and disarmament cannot be considered
in a vacuum but that measures to remove mistrust
and create confidence are essential ingredients in the
disarmament process. Arms limitation, disarmament
and confidence-building are processes that mutually
reinforce one another. Therefore, it is of particular
importance that the United States and the Soviet
Union have initiated a sustained dialogue at all levels
and on a wide range of issues, not only in the arms
limitation and disarmament field but also covering
regional conflicts, human rights and co-operation in
general. This offers prospects for an era in which we
shall finally be able to move on from what some have
t~rmed peaceful coexistence to peaceful co-operation.

95. Mr. BIERRING (Denmark): First of all I wish
to express the pleasure of my delegation at the
election of Mr. Florin of the German Democratic
Republic as President of the third special session
devoted to disarmament. We feel confident that,
under his able guidance and with the competent
assistance of the other officers of the Assembly, the
session will lead to fruitful results.
96. The Vice-Chancellor and Minister for Foreign
Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany has
already spoken on behalf of the 12 member States of
the European Community [8th meeting]. Denmark,
of course, fully shares the views expressed ill that
statement.
97. Denmark welcomes this opportunity for the
international community to address itself at a high
political level to the vital questions of disarmament.
The third special session on disarmament is taking
place at a very propitious moment which offers better
prospects for disarmament and arms limitation than
perhaps ever before. When the second special session
on disarmament was held in 1982 the international
sky was clouded, and it proved impossible to bring
the session to a successful conclusion. In the period
preceding this session we have witnessed important
progress in bilateral nuclear arms limitation and
disarmament negotiations between the United States
and the Soviet Union, as well as a general improvement in East-West relations.
98. The treaty on intermediate-range nuclear forces
constitutes a historic breakthrough, eliminating a
whole class of nuclear weapons. Its unprecedented
provisions for reductions-and, fUithermore, for
asymmetrical reductions-as well as for verification
procedures that seemed highly unrealistic a few years
ago, have consequences far beyond the scope of the
treaty. The treaty is thus a most significant first step
towards further progress in arms limitation and
disarmament. We also welcome the important progress that has been made in the strategic arms
reduction negotiations and hope that it will soon be
possible to conclude an agreement on a 50 per cent
reductiun of the United States and Soviet strategic
nuclear arsenals. While negotiations proceed, there
must be continued compliance with existing arms
control agreements in spirit as well as in letter. My
Government attaches particular importance to the
preservation and continued observance of the AntiBallistic-Missile Treaty.
99. The final goal must be the total abolition of
nuclear arms, but in the meantime it is-in the words

I
.,

(Mr. Florin (German Democratic Republic) resumed the Chair.)
101. However, progress has been made not only in
the bilateral negotiations between the United States
and the Soviet Union. In Europe the process initiated
by the Helsinki Conference in 1975 has brought new
results. The Stockholm Conference made a valuable
contribution to the establishment of a system of
confidence- and security-building measures in Europe.
102. It is hoped that the Vienna Follow-Up Meeting
of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe will soon be able to register further steps
towards the gradual dismantling of the artificial
barrier between East and West in Europe. We are
also looking forward to the establishment within the
framework of the Conference process of a specific
forum for negotiations on furthering conventional
stability in Europe. The goal is the establishment of a
secure and stable balance at ~ower levels of armament, the removal of disparities prejudicial to stability and security and, as a matter of high priority, the
elimination of the capability of launching surprise
attacks and initiating large-scale offensive action. We
earnestly hope that these negotiations will start later
this year.
103. The positive bilateral and regional developments I have described should act as an inspiration
for our work in this third special session of the
General Assembly devoted to disarmament. The
situation offers a unique opportunity for a positive
and constructive contribution to the world debate
through the United Nations multilateral system and
thereby for a revitalization of the United Nations
role in disarmament. It is hoped that this session will
be able to meet this challenge.
104. The first special session devoted to disarmament adopted a Final Document, which contains
the most comprehensive set of principles and guidelines for disarmament ever worked out by the
international community. That Final Document still
provides an important basis for our deliberations and
should be recognized as such. However, our deliberations should first and foremost be forward-looking.

,

I

""I

!

.,i
i

.~1

i
,I
I

I

398

General Assembly-Fifteenth S~cial Session-Plenary Meeiings

An evaluation of developments since 1978-1982
brings certain disarmament aspects into focus. It
would be natural for this session to register and
acknowledge the greater emphasis and importance of
conventional disarmament, verification, confidencebuilding measures, openness in military matters, and
regional initiatives.
105. The primary responsibility for disarmament
rests with the major military Powers. However, all
States, individually and through multilateral co-operation, have responsibilities in the disarmament field.
106. It is a source of great concern that the multilateral disarmament machinery has been able to show
relatively few results in the past decade.
107. The negotiations at Geneva on the global
elimination of chemical weapons are one of the more
encouraging developments. Denmark welcomes the
progress made in recent years. Chemical weapons are
cheap, relatively easy to produce, highly mobile and
easy to hide. Their effects are abhorrent, and reports
of their proliferation thus give rise to great concern.
Despite the prohibition of their use contained in the
1925 Protocol,2 the international community has
witnessed repeated use of these weapons in recent
years. This has underlined the urgency of reaching an
agreement on a global convention completely banning chemical weapons from the face of the Earth. In
the meantime, any use of chemical weapons must be
unequivocally condemned.
108. The negotiations in the Conference on Disarmament have shown the participants' growing
readiness to work towards a verifiable ban. It is
important that all sides take an active part in these
negotiations. Although a number of major difficulties
still remain unsolved, the outstanding problems do
not seem insurmountable. It is important, however,
to preserve the momentum in the negotiations.
Given the necessary political will, it must be possible
to reach agreement on the outstanding problems. A
convention must be effectively verifiable; however,
we should not aim at unrealistic levels of certainty. It
is possible to reach a degree of effectiveness that
makes the remaining danger of non-compliance so
small that it is no threat to security.

109. The Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, to which more than 130 States are now
parties, remains one of the most important armscontrol agreements reached to date. The non-proliferation regime has made a significant contribution to
world stability. The successful outcome of the Third
Review Conference, in 1985, confirmed the commitment to non-proliferation by the parties to the treaty.
Since its entry into force no non-nuclear-weapon
State party to the treaty has acquired nuclear weapons. The non-proliferation regime-and strong international support for it-should see to it that the
nuclear option will never become an attractive
solution to perceived security needs. Any introduction of new nuclear-weapon States is bound to have
extremely destabilizing effects, triggering unforeseeable developments. Reports of the nuclear ambitions
of certain countries in different parts of the world are
extremely worrying. The positive effect of the NonProliferation Treaty on international peace and security has benefited all States. We welcome recent

accessions to the treaty and urge those who still stand
outside the non-proliferation regime to recognize
their responsibility and join it.
110. In July we can celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the signing of the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
The third special session on disarmament should
mark that occasion by contributing to the further
strengthening of its regime. Denmark, together with
the other Nordic countries, has prepared a memorandum on nuclear non-proliferation [A/S-15/14, annex]. We shall seek the inclusion in the final document of this session of appropriate language on the
importance of preserving and enhancing the nonproliferation regime.
Ill. The creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones in
various parts of the world could be an important
contribution to non-proliferation and the disarmament process in general, especially in areas where
not all countries have acceded to the Non-Proliferation Treaty. In accordance with the Final Document
of the first special session on disarmament, nuclearweapon-free zones must be based on arrangements
freely arrived at among all the States of the regions
concerned and taking into account the characteristics
of each region.
112. The conclusion of a comprehensive nucleartest-ban treaty also remains a vital issue on the
international arms-control and disarmament agenda.
While not an end in itself, a comprehensive test-ban
treaty would be an important step towards nuclear
disarmament and would enhance the non-proliferation regime's attractiveness for non-nuclear-weapon
States.
talks between
113. Denmark welcomes the bil,
the United States and the Soviet Union on all aspects
of nuclear tests. We are encouraged by recent developments and look forward to the ratification of the
threshold test-ban treaty4 and the Treaty on Peaceful
Nuclear Explosions 5 as a first step towards a comprehensive test-ban treaty. Over the years Denmark has
urged the earliest possible conclusion of a treaty
banning all nuclear tests, in all environments, by all
States, and for all times.
114. It is regrettable that the Conference on Disarmament again this year was unable to agree on a
mandate for an ad hoc committee on a comprehensive nuclear-test ban. The role of the Conference on
Disarmament in negotiating an effective and verifiable comprehensive nuclear-test ban is important
and is complementary to any bilateral negotiations or
understandings on the matter. The international
community must continue to call for a ban on
nuclear testing. Maximalist positions, however, may
be counter-productive to strengthening the multilateral role that the Conference can play towards a
comprehensive test-ban treaty.
115. This session also addresses the question of
verification. The necessity of adequate and reliable
verification in arms control and disarmament has
gained widespread recognition over past years. The
Assembly should reaffirm this recognition at this
session. Verification procedures are first and foremost treaty-specific. There is, however, scope for an
important supplementary multilateral role in verifi-

catl
agr
priJ
que
of:
Nal
con
l

IH
cen
ma
sea:
tral
as :
fon
pol
elel
117
the
gro'
the
con
res(
urg l
oft!:

dev
exp
effc
dis,
118
witl
Dis
We
con
con
109
thal
tute
ope
Sec
SlOT

we
con
mul
Nat
add
arm
our

an

J

exp
tion
119
clus

tun
sem
dec.
sho'
limi
wor
lagg
and
negc
mar

120

Iron

plea

20th meeting-14 June 1988

Istand
ognize
mver"reaty.
,hould
urther
r with
lOran~.

an-

docu-

m the
nonles in
)rtant
sarmNhere
iferalment
clearnents
glOns
'istics
::learI the

cation given the consent of all parties involved in an
agreement. The role of the United Nations would
primarily be to provide a data and service base. The
question should be, as has been suggested, the subject
of an expert study on existing and possible United
Nations activities in verification of multilateral arms
control and disarmament agreements.
116. Naval armaments and disarmament have recently gained attention. As a maritime nation, Denmark must defend freedom of navigation on the high
seas. However, confidence-building, openness and
transparency are important concepts for naval as well
as for other disarmament areas. The role of naval
forces must be examined in an overall military and
political context, since they represent an important
element in the global strategic balance.
117. Multilateral disarmament deliberations since
the last special session have been characterized by a
growing awareness of and increasing concern over
the conventional arms race. The burden of the
conventional arms race in terms of the diversion of
resources from economic and social purposes is an
urgent problem in a large number of countries and is
often a serious obstacle to social and economic
development. There is an urgent need for all States to
explore what each can do to initiate or facilitate
efforts aimed at conventional arms limitation and
disarmament.

~nda.

t-ban
clear
lferaapon
Neen
:>ects
evelf the
::eful
lpre: has
'eaty
y all
Dis)n a
l..~_

118. We regret that no progress could be registered
with regard to conventional disarmament during the
Disarmament Commission session a few weeks ago.
We are, however, encouraged by the interest in
conventional disarmament and problems related to
conventional weapons which has been manifest during the general debate of this session. We also noted
that reference to conventional disarmament constituted a substantial part of the Secretary-General's
opening statement [1st meeting]. The concern of the
Secretary-General has been expressed on many occasions. We welcome his very pertinent remarks, which
we hope will contribute to keeping the issue of
conventional disarmament at the forefront of the
multilateral debate on disarmament in the United
Nations. The United Nations should be capable of
addressing the complex issues of conventional disarmament systematically, substantially and with vigour. We believe that the third special session offers
ltn nnnnrtnn;h/
fnr
thp ;nt<>rnat;nnal
_yl-'''' "'
"')
"'. ..
"'
.a""' "" u .. "n
""""'

nn;t"
tn
;
L""

l1l;;U-

_Aa

on
:rifitant
IS or
)nal
on
nay

expand the area of consensus in the field of conventional disarmament as well.

~

lit iis a
of
lble
has
[he
this
)re. an
'ifi-

&\.&

119. There are thus encouraging, though still inconclusive, signs that we may finally have reached a
turning point in our efforts to come to grips with the
senseless arms race that has harassed our globe for
decades. Bilateral and regional initiatives have
shown the way, while the multilateral process of arms
limitation and disarmament in the framework of the
world Organization has lagged behind. What is not
lagging behind, however, is technological innovation
and sophistication. It is therefore imperative that the
negotiation process catch up and keep pace with
man's ingenuity in science and technology.
120. Mr. AL-SHAHEEN (Kuwait) (interpretation
from Arabic): My country's delegation is extremely
pleased to see you, Sir, presiding over the meetings of

399

the third special session on disarmament, after the
steady success you achieved in chairing the work of
the Assembly's forty-second session, including the
resumed session imposed by subsequent circumstances. We are confident that by virtue of your
prudence and excellent conduct of the work of these
meetings, this third special session will realize its
purposes.
121. Although all international actions concerning
disarmament acquire absolute significance in view of
the undeniable fact that nuclear weapons constitute
the greatest danger to mankind and its survival, this
third special session convened by the United Nations
on the question of disarmament is of special importance because it is being held following the SovietAmerican summit in Moscow. It may also be viewed
as an integral part of this phase in which the
significance of disarmament measures in relation to
the achievement of world security and the reduction
of i~tense international and regional conflicts is
growmg.
122. The conclusion of the treaty on intermediaterange nuclear weapons has opened a door leading
towards halting the nuclear-arms race and achieving
nuclear disarmament. Although the world community welcomed the progress attained in bilateral negotiations, such bilateral negotiations should be complemented by multilateral negotiations, since every
State in the world has a vital interest in negotiations
on nuclear disarmament. The existence of these
destructive weapons in the arsenals of a small group
of States does not mean that their effect would be
confined within those States. Rather, the quantitative
and qualitative development of such weapons exposes the vital security interests of the States of the
world, whether they be nuclear-weapon States or not,
to sudden danger.
123. We concur with many who think that the
present holds favourable opportunities unprecedented since the Second World War as a result of the
great dynamism ensuing from the active resumption
of East-West dialogue. Thus, participants at this
important session are under an obligation to utilize
this new international climate and translate it into
effective and positive moves and steps to promote
the mechanism of multilateral negotiations.
124. "Ve may all have seen or known about the
demonstrations in which hundreds of thousands of
individuals representing different peoples expressing
their dismay over the repeated use of this nuclear
weapon, that took off from the area surrounding the
United Nations buildings last Saturday to march
through the streets of New York City, Similar
marches also took place in many other countries, all
of them directed towards a simple, unanimous goal
and will-the complete elimination vf the terrible
spectre that dominates the worlcl
World public opinion, clearly reflected in the
this special session, has resolved that
mcompetent official policies with regard to restraining conflicts and halting the race towards destruction
can no longer be tolerated, nor can differences of
opinion and conflicts over supremacy be the cause of
the permanent absence of a common denominator
that would unite all sectors of the world community
125.

~athering at

I

400

General Assembly-Fifteenth Special Session-Plenary Meetings

and direct their energies towards lasting peace and
security based on the norms and morals governing
mankind through messages revealed from heaven
over untold centuries.

thing to think seriously of those who might be killed
by nuclear arms in the future. But, it is also very
important that we make a greater effort to put an end
to the suffering of the victims of human carnage who
are currently being killed by conventional arms.

126. While our world spends about $2 million each
minute on the arms race, by comparison 50 per cent
of our children in the third world use polluted water
which exacerbates their wretchedness and suffering.
Yet the annual armaments budget in the world equals
the total income of 2.6 billion people living in the 44
poorest countries.

132. The Second World War might have been the
last human calamity in Europe, but we have to be
aware that since 1960 about 81 wars have broken out
between the peoples and countries of Africa, Asia
and Latin America, whose toll has surpassed 12.5
million people.

127. There is no doubt that all the countries of our
world are obliged to exert every possible effort to
reach the goal of eliminating nuclear arms. Regional
arrangements to limit weapons can contribute to the
international efforts to reverse the nuclear-armaments race. Hence, there have been the noble atlempts of those who are conscientiously working in
mankind's common interest to keep the different
parts of the globe free from nuclear arms and who
have attempted to give the subject priority at United
Nations discussions since the 1950s.
128. Since those pioneering efforts were crowned
with the first treaty on the establishment of a nuclearfree region, in Antarctica, signed in 1959 by 35
States, the symbols of mature human awareness have
continued their sublime struggle to broaden the bases
of these treaties to include all parts of our globe.
Despite their inability to do so in other areas, they
have concluded two other treaties, one in Latin
America in 1967, and the other in the South Pacific-which, by itself, constitutes one sixth of the
globe's area-in 1985. Each of these treaties was a
gigantic stride in the international and regional
march towards the prevention of nuclear arms proliferation.
129. We, therefore, cannot afford at this time not to
stress the necessi,ty for the achievement of such
treaties on the pr:tctical, actual and implementational
level in regions of such strategic importance and
weight as the Middle East and Africa, if the world
community wants to maintain its collective security
and ward off the dangers of human annihilation. But
whenever one addresses that question in those two
regions one is confronted with the racist entities in
Israel and South Africa, bent on stockpiling nuclear
arsenais which ihey use io biackmaii and ierrorize ihe
indigenous peoples of the area and to impose their
dominance, hegemony and regional expansion on
them.
130. Israeli nuclear armament has become one of
the menacing and negative factors of the security
balance in the Middle East area. While the Zionist
entity allows itself to bombard an Iraqi nuclear
reactor serving peaceful purposes, as indicated by the
consensus of all international resolutions, we find
that its nuclear ambitions extend to its associate
racist entity in South Africa, where Israel continues
its shameful co-operation with the apartheid regime
in Pretoria in the field of nuclear armament, notwithstanding the international condemnation of and
protest at this blatant armaments collaboration.
131. May I be allowed to reiterate what I referred to
on a previous occasion, namely, that it is a noble

133. In our area, in particular, we have suffered
from six wars over the last 20 years, among them the
Iran-Iraq war which has been raging for eight years,
in close proximity to my country, Kuwait. Its destructive effects and enormous dangers extend to the
security of the Arabian Gulf, a vital international
economic artery, and to the Arab region. Its complications have an impact on all States of the world that
have common interests with us.
134. While the Kuwaiti delegation lauds the consistently positive Iraqi stance towards all just and
peaceful solutions, as currently embodied in Security
Council resolution 598 (1987), we equally add our
voice and effort to the entire world's sincere appeal
to Iran to respond seriously to international efforts to
restore peace, security and stability in the area, in a
manner that serves the interests of all.
135. Kuwait considers that it is imperative to
establish a comprehensive prohibition of nuclear
tests as the most effective single measure in restricting the nuclear-armaments race. If unjustifiable
obstacles still impede defining the role of the United
Nations in the prohibition of nuclear tests, we are of
the view that General Assembly resolutions 42/26 A
and Band 42/27 contain the elements that might
constitute a clear basis for this definition.
136. We also urge continued consideration of the
issue of the security of States that do not have
nuclear arms. It is the issue for which the Third
Review Conference of the States Parties to the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons was'
convened in 1985. We re-emphasize the importance
of conventional disarmament and regret the lack of
concrete progress in this field, as was recently openly
recognized by the co-ordinator oi the concerned
working group in the Conference on Disarmament.
137. We hope that the work in the Conference on
Disarmament on a draft convention on chemical
weapons is now entering the final stages of the
preparation of such a convention which cannot be
accomplished without the co-operation and political
will of some Governments.
138. I am also pleased to e,.press on this occasion
the full support of my country for the leaders of the
Six-Nation Initiative, who expressed their willingness
in the Stockholm Declaration 6 to present a common
proposal at this session aimed at mandating the
United Nations to promote the establishment of an
appropriate multilateral system to ascertain the compliance of States with the regulations concerning
nudear non-proliferation and to ensure that the
system not be confined to the countries possessing

I
20th meeting-14 June 1988

: killed
o very
an end
~e who

rms.

advanced military technology. We also support them
in focusing on achieving a treaty on a comprehensive
prohibition of nuclear tests, and we appreciate their
initiative in offering their assistance to monitor any
halting of those experiments.

en the
to be
en out
" Asia
j 12.5

139. The Charter has given all Member States the
right to individual and collective self-defence, which
does not mean that some States have the right to hold
the future of mankind and its survival hostage to
their nuclear policies.

lffered
~m the
years,
[ts deto the
ltional
DmpliId that
:onsis:t and

~curity

Id our
appeal
orts to
a, in a

,ve to
uclear
:strictifiable
Jnited
are of
~/26 A
might
of the
have
Third
freaty
lS was'
rtance
ack of
)penly
:erned
Iment.
Ice on
~mical

)f the
lot be
tlitical

::asion
of the
19ness
nmon
19 the
of an
: com~rning

It the
essing

140. As responsible representatives of the peoples
of the world, our efforts should not be restricted only
to making sketchy and marginal amendments to the
existing nuclear structures, or partial or temporary
reductions in the arms race; we must rather endeavour to create an effective structure for world security.
The super-Powers have to be convinced of the fact
that nuclear war cannot be won, and it is in the
interests of all humanity that they demonstrate their
seriousness in the reduction of their military budgets
and the execution of the action programme adopted
by the International Conference on the Relationship
between Disarmament and Development. 7
141. In conclusion, I should like to underscore the
importance of the central role and major responsibility of the United Nations in the sphere of disarmament and its role as an effective mechanism in
verifying disarmament and the compliance of States
with relevant agreements. Moreover, the roles of the
Secretary-General, the Security Council, the First
Committee, the Disarmament Commission, the Conference on Disarmament and all relev1nt organs
within the Organization should be enhanced in a way
that befits the principal role of the world Organization in maintaining international peace and security
and its function as a world f.orum with a strong
impact on world public opinion.

Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations (continued)*
142. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I wish to draw the General Assembly's attention to document A/S-15/ 18/Add. 2, which contains a
letter addressed to me by the Secretary-General,
dated 14 June 1988, in which he informs me that
further to his letter of 2 June [A/S-15/18/Add. 1],
Dominica has made the necessary payment to reduce
its arrears below the amount specified in Article 19 of
the Charter. May I take it that the General Assembly
duly takes note of that information?

It was so decided.
AGENDA ITEM 3
Credentials of representatives to the fifteenth special
session of the General Assembly (continued)**
(b)

Report of the Credentials Committee

The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): The Assembly will now consider the first report
of the Credentials Committee [A/S-15/36]. I shall
143.

·Resumed from the 5th meeting.
··Resumed from the Ist meeting.

401

1

now call on those delegations which wish to speak on
the Committee's recommendation.
144. Mr. SUMAIDA (Iraq) (interpretation from
Arabic): On behalf of the Group of Arab States, I
have the honour of drawing your attention to our
objection to the credentials of Israel's delegation to
the third special session devoted to disarmament.
Our reasons for this objection are as follows.
145. First, Israel's failure to comply with Security
Council resolutions relating to the question of Palestine, the s5tuation in the Middk East and related
matters violates Article 25 of the Charter.
146. Second, Israel has failed to implement General
Assembly resolutions relating to the question of
Palestine and the situation in the Middle Ea"t which
call for the restoration of the inalienable rights of the
Palestinian people, including the right to return, the
right to self-determination and the right to establish
its own independent State in Palestine. Those resolutions also emphasize the need to end the Israeli
occupation of Arab territories, in accordance with the
principle that acquisition of territory by force is
inadmissible, as well as the need to ensure Israel's
withdrawal from all the territories occupied since
1967, including Jerusalem and the Syrian Arab
Golan.

d

I
:1

il,

i

147. Third is Israel's failure to implement General
Assembly resolutions on other items related to the
question of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East.
148. Fourth, Israel has violated human rig'-;.ts in the
occupied Palestinian territories and the other occupied Arab territories, and in particular the provisions
of the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August
1949.
149. Fifth, Israel's annexation of Palestinian and
other Arab territories, including Jerusalem and the
Syrian Arab Golan continues, thereby violating the
provisions of the Charter and the rules of international law.

I
:/.-1

I

'01

150. Sixth, Israel continues its aggression against
Arab States and has extended its aggression to
Lebanon, Iraq and Tunisia.
151. Seventh, Israel continues to co-operate with
the racist regime of South Africa, particularly in the
nuclear and economic fields.
152. Ei~hth, the credentials of the Israeli delegation
to the thIrd special session devoted to disarmament
were issued in the occupied city of Jerusalem, in
violation of Security Council resolutions, particularly
resolution 478 (1980), and related General Assembly
resolutions, particularly resolution 35/169 E of IS
December 1980.
153. Ninth, Israel refuses to accede to the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and has
failed to comply with the provisions of United
Nations resolutions calling upon it to place all its
nuclear facilities under the international system I)f
safeguards and control.
.: ~,'

-- .. - -- ---.

--

-

,-

'I
:1

I
I

11,
'!
402

General Assembly-Fiiteenth Special Session-Pienary Meetings

154. The Group of Arab States has submitted .a
formal letter on this subject and has requested that It
be circulated as an official document [A/S-15/41] of
the General Assembly, under agenda item 3.

I.

~

i

I

I
I
"

155. The PRESIDENT (interpretation from Russian): I invite members to turn their attention to ~he
draft resolution recommended by the CredentIals
Committee in paragraph 18 of its report [A/S-15/~6].
In the Credentials Committee, that draft resolutIon
was adopted without a vote. May I take it that the
General Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution S15/1).
The meeting rose at 12.25 p.m.

NOTES

IUnited Nations, Treaty Series, vot. 944, No. 13446.
2Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating,
Poisonous or Other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods of
Warfare, signed at Geneva on 17 June 1925 (League of Nations,
Treaty Series. vot. XCIV (1929), No. 2138).

30jficial Records of the General Assembly, Twelfth Special
Session, Annexes, agenda items 9-13, document AlS-12/32.
4Treaty between the United States of America and the Union of
Soviet Socialist Republics on the Limitation of Underground
Nuclear Weapon Tests.
STreaty between the United States of America and the U,nion of
Soviet Socialist Republics on Underground Nuclear ExplosIons for
Peaceful Purposes.
6A/43/125, annex.

1Final Document of the International Conference on the Relationship between Disarmament and Development (United Nations
publication, Sales No. E.87.IX.8), para. 35.

United Nations

GENERA
ASSEME
FIFTEENTH SPEClA

Official Records

Presidenj
(German

In the absence 0
guay). Vice-Presid;

A4
Gener
1. Mr. NDONG (
from Spanish): Tht
which I have the h
fortunate the elect
this special session
to disarmament. \
his great experiel
balance are a guara
we shall have a (
convey from this 1
country and Gov
exerted by the Secn
noble ideals of ou

,
I..

2. As the Gener
special session, the
ament, as if to hail
special session on
there exists in hu
characterized by tol
pattern of econom
imbalance are only
fulfilling our cateJ
maintain, conserve
kind an ever better
absolutely no one,
author or owner.

3. Perhaps, in ordl
the Assembly's thin
recall and emphasii
enced by mankind
between the States
powerful than the
imbalance from w
suffering and which
annihilation. The t~
conventional arsena
only to certain coun
if there were to 1
disaster would not I
imperative need fOl
sideration of disarr
the nuclear, chemi,
would have an effec
