S/PV.8077

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-second year

8077th meeting

Thursday, 26 October 2017, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Delattre. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(France)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Egypt. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Italy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Senegal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ukraine. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Uruguay. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Inchauste Jordán
Mr. Shen Bo
Mr. Kandeel
Mr. Alemu
Mr. Cardi
Mr. Kawamura
Mr. Sadykov
Mr. Iliichev
Mr. Seck
Mr. Skoog
Mr. Vitrenko
Mr. Allen
Ms. Sison
Mr. Bermúdez

Agenda
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to the Sahel region (19 to 22 October 2017)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

17-34697 (E)
*1734697*

S/PV.8077

Security Council mission

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Security Council mission
Briefing by Security Council mission to the
Sahel region (19 to 22 October 2017)
The President (spoke in French): The Security
Council will now begin its consideration of the item on
its agenda.
At this meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings by the co-leads of the Security Council
mission to the Sahel region from 19 to 22 October,
namely, Ethiopia, Italy and France.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of France.
At the outset, I should like to convey our deep
condolences to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and the Government of Chad, following the attack on a
convoy that led to the loss of life of three Chadian Blue
Helmets today in northern Mali. The Security Council
paid its respects to the memory of the Blue Helmets
who died in the line of duty during its visit, and we do
so again today. We also convey the same condolences
to the Governments of the countries of the Group of
Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel), whose people and
security forces are regularly subjected to often deadly
terrorist attacks.
The Security Council conducted a field mission to
the Sahel from 19 to 22 October, during which it visited
Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso. The visit was
jointly led by France, Ethiopia and Italy and was part
of the Security Council’s close monitoring of the issue
of the joint force of the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5
Sahel). One of the goals of the visit, which began the day
after the issuance of the report on the operationalization
of the Joint Force (S/2017/869), was to provide the
members of the Council with a first-hand assessment
of the situation on the ground and an opportunity
exchange views with the various actors on the ground
of the Secretary-General’s recommendations aimed at
strengthening international support for the Joint Force.
We focused in particular on the implementation of
the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali,
in line with the Council’s conviction that there can
2/7

26/10/2017

be no lasting stability in the Sahel without effective,
comprehensive and inclusive implementation of the
provisions of the Agreement.
It should be noted that the Peace and Security
Council of the African Union, which was officially
invited to participate in the visit, was unable to send
a representative because of its heavy workload at that
time. Nonetheless, the Chairperson of the Peace and
Security Council expressed his great appreciation for the
courtesy shown by the Security Council and indicated
the Peace and Security Council’s full willingness to
participate in future visits. It seems to us that such a
practice should be encouraged.
In keeping with the division of labour that we
adhered to during the visit itself, I will provide an
update on the visit to Mali, before giving the floor
to my colleagues from Italy and Ethiopia, who will
provide briefings on the segments of the field visits
to Mauritania and Burkina Faso, respectively. We will
each conclude our briefings by sharing the main lessons
that we learned from the visit overall.
In Mali, the Security Council met with President
Ibrahim Boubacar Keita and several Government
ministers, all of whom unanimously reaffirmed their
country’s commitment to making the Joint Force fully
operational as quickly as possible. The visit to the Joint
Force headquarters, located in Sévaré, in central Mali,
allowed us to see that it is up and running. Much has
been done in a short period of time in order to make
the Joint Force operational. I refer in particular to the
fact that the Joint Force has already achieved its initial
operational capability and that the command post for the
Central Sector in Niamey has been established, as well
as to the high quality of the G-5 officers in command,
not to mention the fact that it will be deploying its first
operational mission in the next few days.
Our discussions with the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and the MINUSMA Force
Commander allowed us to identify, from among the
elements contained in the options submitted by the
Secretary-General, those that could be achieved in the
short term and that would need to be preceded by a
strengthening of MINUSMA’s capacity and therefore
could only be implemented further down the line.
Our discussions with the representatives of
the French Operation Barkhane and the European
operations — the European Union Training Mission
and European Union Capacity-building Mission in
17-34697

26/10/2017

Security Council mission

Mali — allowed us to better understand the activities
of the other international security forces present in the
area and to assess their mutual complementarity. In
particular, it became apparent that the force generation
for the G-5 Sahel Joint Force was intended to enable
MINUSMA and Operation Barkhane to implement
their mandates.
With regard to the peace process in Mali, a
meeting with members of the Monitoring Committee
of the Agreement on Peace and Reconciliation in
Mali was an opportunity for the Malian authorities to
share the progress that had recently been made in the
implementation of the provisions of the Agreement. In a
joint document, the signatory groups deplored a lack of
consultation with them on the part of the Government
on this issue. In response to these statements, on behalf
of the entire Council, I reiterated the strong message
that we conveyed in our press statement on Mali issued
on 6 October (SC/13019) by stressing the Council’s
expectation that concrete progress would be achieved
by the end of the year. This message was supported by
the Algerian presidency of the Monitoring Committee
and by the representative of the African Union.
We held two meetings with representatives of civil
society — one in Bamako and one in Mopti — that
allowed us to directly address the concerns of the Malian
population. They emphasized the desire of women
to be more involved in the practical implementation
of the peace agreement, and in particular to be
better represented in the institutions responsible for
monitoring its implementation, as well as the weariness
of the population in the centre of the country with
regard to the security threat it faces on a daily basis
and its wish that the influence of terrorist groups in the
region be combatted.
Finally, we also took part in a ceremony honouring
the 146 peacekeepers of MINUSMA who have died
while serving their mandate, which was held at the
MINUSMA memorial in Bamako. Regrettably, there
are now 149. It was an emotional time for the Mission
and the Council delegation, and it led us to conclude
that it was a good practice which should be observed
during each Council visit to a country hosting a
peacekeeping operation.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Cardi.

S/PV. 8077

Mr. Cardi (Italy) (spoke in French): I associate
myself with the sincere condolences conveyed by
the President in the light of the loss of life of three
Chadian soldiers deployed to the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission
in Mali (MINUSMA) who died, which is a reminder
of the difficulties faced by peacekeeping operations
throughout the world.
During its visit to the Sahel, the Security Council
visited Mauritania on 20 October. Upon arriving in
Nouakchott, the members of the Security Council
were received by the President of the Islamic Republic
of Mauritania, Mr. Mohamed Ould Abdel Aziz. He
was joined by a large delegation comprised of, among
others, the Minister for Foreign Affairs, the Minister
of Defence, the Minister for the Economy, the Chief of
Staff of the Army, the Chief of Staff of the President
of Republic and the Permanent Representative of
Mauritania to the United Nations. The Security
Council then visited the permanent headquarters of the
Group of Five of the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) to meet with
Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed, Permanent Secretary of
the G-5 Sahel. Our discussions with the Mauritanian
authorities allowed Council members to acquire critical
analytical information, which allowed us to to pursue
our reflections on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force and to
expand our understanding of the security environment
in the Sahel.
Mauritania, a key player within the G-5 Sahel
and in the broader Sahel region, has long been fully
involved in efforts of the G-5 Sahel’s joint activities to
combat terrorism and instability in the region. During
our discussions with President Ould Abdel Aziz, the
Security Council heard confirmation of the Mauritanian
authorities’ resolve to defeat and stamp out terrorism.
Given the country’s history on the front lines of the
battle against this scourge, the Mauritanian authorities
are well placed to assess the terrorist phenomenon, its
expansion across the region over the years, its close links
with illegal trafficking, its influence on the political
agendas of the countries in the Sahel, and the need
to combat this phenomenon not only with a security
response, but also by using counter-narrative tools to
deter radicalization. All of this was very enlightening
for Council members.
Throughout our open dialogue, our interlocutors
openly expressed their hopes of seeing the Security
Council ensure robust support for the G-5 Sahel Joint
Force. According to Mauritanian authorities, that

17-346973/7

S/PV.8077

Security Council mission

initiative, owing to its proactive stance against the
terrorist threat and its mission to entrench its security
capabilities in the Sahelian region, meets the priority
and strategic demands for the countries of the region
and deserves the full support of the United Nations and
international community.
The motto appearing on the banner of the G-5
Sahel is “Security and Development”. Accordingly,
discussions with the Permanent Secretary of the G-5
Sahel, Mr. Najim Elhadj Mohamed were focused on
those two dimensions. During a meeting in which the
security vision was aligned with the goals of growth
and development — which is the other pillar of the G-5
Sahel architecture — Mr. Mohamed told members of
the Security Council that, in line with those ambitions,
development must “immediately precede, follow and
consolidate security activities in the region”.
That premise is embodied in a development and
security strategy whose principal components were
illustrated to the members of the Council and that
encompasses the priority investment plan, which the
G-5 Sahel considers key to promoting growth in the
Sahel and which will, of course, require significant
international resources. Moreover, the meeting with the
Permanent Secretary focused on the need to coordinate
the work of various platforms focused on the Sahel,
such as the United Nations Integrated Strategy for the
Sahel, with the specific demands and priorities of the
countries of the region.
The messages we heard during our visit to
Mauritania confirmed the shared aspirations of that
country to build around the G-5 Sahel a security and
development architecture for the region, with the Joint
Force at its core. That observation was corroborated
by the convergent messages addressed to the Security
Council by its interlocutors, through which the various
countries underscored the increasing insecurity in
a region shaken by terrorism, illegal trafficking in
persons, arms and drugs, and anaemic development.
I believe that henceforth we should find common
ground so as to strengthen support for the Force, which
we hope — and I am speaking here in my national
capacity — to be able to meet the ambitious goals of the
countries of the region.
As a co-leader of the mission, I would like to
conclude by sincerely thanking you, Sir, for having
taken the initiative of organizing this visit under your
presidency, which confers very significant added
4/7

26/10/2017

value to the discussions on the G-5 Sahel Joint Force
and the Sahel region that have been held over the past
several months. I should also like to add that we highly
appreciated the work of the presidency, as main co-lead,
in assuring the visibility of other colleagues and
sharing the responsibilities associated with the mission.
I also thank the host countries — Mali, Mauritania and
Burkino Faso — which gave the Council in a warm
and friendly welcome. I also thank the United Nations
personnel based in New York who travelled with us,
in particular the staff of MINUSMA and Special
Representative Annadif, for their outstanding efforts to
ensure the complete success of the visit.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Cardi for his briefing.
I give the floor to Ambassador Alemu.
Mr. Alemu (Ethiopia): I want to join you, Sir, and
the representative of Italy in expressing our solidarity
with Chad and in condemning the terrorist attack in
northern Mali. What took place highlights the reason
why the mission went to the region. It also highlights the
need once again for robust international cooperation.
I wish to express our deep appreciation to the French
presidency for its initiative to organize the Security
Council mission to States of the Group of Five for the
Sahel (G-5 Sahel). The visit to three of the G-5 Sahel
countries — Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso — was
not only very successful, but also an eye-opener. In our
view, the visit undoubtedly has helped confirm the
value of Security Council missions. In fact, we already
knew the extent to which the situation faced by the G-5
Sahel States was grim, but seeing is believing. It is
impossible to deny the particular and critical challenges
that some of the countries are facing. What is needed is
an urgent response, both from the Security Council and
the international community, before the tipping point
is reached.
The margin between where they are now and the
tipping point is razor-thin. What could give relief to
the G-5 Sahel countries is a holistic approach with a
purview covering climate change, environmental issues
and general development matters. There is simply no
gainsaying the fact that the absolute prevalence of
insecurity caused by terrorism and trafficking in
drugs and persons, which fuel terrorism, have become
scourges that those countries are hardly in a position
to contain, let alone reverse, without the support of the
international community. Therefore, the fact that there
17-34697

26/10/2017

Security Council mission

is an urgent need for practical solidarity with those
countries is self-evident. Failure to come up with an
appropriate positive response would be disastrous and
have huge implications for the international community,
and that is also obvious.
The readiness of the G-5 Sahel States to do their
share and discharge their responsibilities is also
undeniable. In all three countries, the Security Council
mission was received with open arms and was able
to talk with the relevant officials, including their
respective Heads of State and Government, who were
not frugal with their time.
I should like to turn to the last leg of the trip, in
Burkina Faso, which I had the privilege of leading. It
was very symbolic of the purpose of our mission that we
headed for Ouagadougou from the governorate of Mopti,
in central Mali, where our last meeting was held with a
representative of civil society. It brought home to us, in
a very saddening manner, the extent to which the people
of the region feel that they have no security — even
when going to the market. The Government of Burkina
Faso made the point of highlighting why we were there
by taking us immediately upon our arrival to the site
of the 13 August terrorist attack, in which 19 people
were killed and 22, including security personnel, were
wounded. The Homeland Security Minister received us
there and subsequently stayed with us until the end of
our visit.
Although the initial plan was to directly hold
discussions with the President of the Republic, we had
an opportunity to interact with his Cabinet Ministers,
which was coordinated by the Foreign Minister. The
Cabinet Ministers briefed Council members on how the
security crisis in the neighbouring Republic of Mali to
the north is affecting social and economic development
in the already long-neglected part of Burkina Faso.
They recounted the deliberate and targeted burning of
schools and the killing and intimidation of teachers by
terrorists and transnational criminals. We were told that
13 schools and two higher-level training institutions
were not able to provide services because they were
either totally destroyed or burned down. Terrorists, they
said, were working around the clock to end the presence
of service providers with the objective of undermining
State authority.
The Ministers also emphasized that terrorist
attacks had been increasing in frequency during 2016
and 2017, including through the use of improvised

S/PV. 8077

explosive devices as well as other makeshift mines,
which are usually very difficult to detect. They told us
that more than 100 people had been killed in about 18
attacks in different parts of the country, mostly in the
North. They underlined the fact that more than 85 per
cent of those attacks came directly from Mali. The
Minister of Homeland Security described the Burkina
Faso, Mali and Niger border triangle, in particular, as
highly volatile.
One salient matter that should not be overlooked
is how well organized and methodical the Burkinabé
leadership is. It has a strategy for addressing the
challenge that the country and the region are facing.
Council members were briefed on what the Government
is doing to address the menace of terrorism, including
through efforts to eliminate conditions that are
conducive to terrorism and the activities of traffickers
and transnational criminals, with a focus on the
Sahelian region of the country. In that connection, the
Minister of Economy stressed that a separate policy
and socioeconomic development strategy and plan
are being prepared to address the crushing inequality
in the Sahelian region. She also emphasized that as
far as its resources allowed, the country was building
the capacity of its security forces by ensuring access
to adequate equipment and training and providing
reasonably effective administrative services in every
part of the country, with special focus on the remote
northern and north-eastern border areas. However,
she also said that the burden has been too heavy, the
negative impact on the economy has been huge and the
need for international cooperation is critical.
Council members then held a fruitful interactive
dialogue with the President, who said that the only way
that they will be able to succeed in the fight against
the challenges of terrorism is through coordination
with other countries of the region. He emphasized the
importance of the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel and
how critical it has become to their efforts, the same
narrative that we heard both in Mali and Mauritania.
He also informed us that his Government was actively
participating in establishing strategic security corridors
based on the shared objective of defeating terrorism.
With respect to the four options forwarded by the
Secretary-General, the President made it clear that his
choice is option one. He argued that after the Force’s
operationalization they would need sustainable and
determined support. In terms of the challenges his
country faces, he emphasized that every country of

17-346975/7

S/PV.8077

Security Council mission

the region, not just his own, suffers from the generally
porous borders, which have become convenient for
terrorists and criminals. He said that there was no
alternative to the Joint Force of the G-5 Sahel, urged
for its speedy deployment and appealed to the Council
for meaningful support as soon as possible. He
underlined the importance of establishing a sustainable
funding mechanism and creating a dedicated support
office to be financed through United Nations assessed
contributions. He reminded Council members that the
problem of the Sahel region is an international crisis
that should receive international attention and an
international response.
In conclusion, as I said at the beginning, the visit
was both timely and very necessary. The countries of
the Group of Five for the Sahel have shown that they
are determined to carry the burden of the problem as
far as their capacity allows. Each has already made a
first contribution of €10 million. Our visit to the Force
headquarters in Sévaré showed us the degree of its
readiness to get up and get going. The infrastructure
there is ready, but there is a great need for support,
and there can be no arguing that it is a need that the
Security Council and the international community
have a responsibility to respond to. I should add that we
constantly reminded our interlocutors of the value of
ownership and action on their part, in line with what is
stated in the Mission’s terms of reference.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Alemu for his briefing.
I shall now make some concluding remarks in my
capacity as the representative of France.
As this meeting draws to an end, and in full
agreement what has been said, I believe that I have
good reason for saying that the Security Council’s
visit to the Sahel came at a particularly timely moment
in terms of its work with regard to the Joint Force of
the Group of Five for the Sahel (G-5 Sahel) and was
both useful and productive. For our part, we took away
three main lessons from the field visit. The first is
that the authorities of the three countries we visited
unanimously underscored their political commitment to
ensuring the quickest possible operationalization of the
Force, together with a strong and clear call for increased
international support, bilateral and multilateral.
That political mobilization has been accompanied by
significant progress on the Force’s deployment on the
ground, as has been mentioned. It will be important

6/7

26/10/2017

to ensure that in Mali it is accompanied by tangible
progress in implementing the Agreement for Peace and
Reconciliation in Mali, as was conveyed to the Malians
during the visit.
The second lesson is that the our visit gave us an
opportunity to emphasize the unanimous support of
Council members to the Joint Force. The Force is seen as
an essential response to the transnational nature of the
security threat facing the States of the Sahel, but also as
a complement to the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA)
and Operation Barkhane that will enable them to create
an environment in which they can better execute their
mandates. What we pointed out — and the members of
the G-5 Sahel share our view — is that the Joint Force’s
security response, however crucial, must absolutely
meet expectations in terms of respect for human rights
and must be complemented by development efforts on
the ground to ensure that it is not counterproductive.
The third lesson is that the real debate is no longer
about whether the Joint Force is relevant or even
whether we should be strengthening international
support for the Force, but about how that support
should be calibrated. Next Monday’s Security Council
meeting, which will be presided over by Mr. Jean-Yves
Le Drian, France’s Minister for Europe and Foreign
Affairs, is being convened to tackle that very question
through our discussion of the best way to strengthen
the international community’s support for the Joint
Force of the G-5 Sahel. In our national capacity, we
will express our hope that we will be able to give the
Joint Force the support it needs right now while taking
account of the differing points of view of those around
the Council table.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
Before we adjourn the meeting, on behalf of the
Council I should like to express our appreciation to
the authorities of Mali, Mauritania and Burkina Faso
for their very warm welcome to us. I would also like
to thank all of my colleagues on the Security Council,
especially those from Italy and Ethiopia, for the genuine
team spirit that was the hallmark of the mission.
Last but not least, I would especially like to thank
the entire Secretariat team who worked to organize
and ensure the success of the visit, both in New York
and on the ground. I refer in particular not only to the

17-34697

26/10/2017

Security Council mission

Security Council Affairs Division, but also to the teams
in the Department of Peacekeeping Operations and
the Department of Political Affairs, MINUSMA, the
Resident Coordinators in Mauritania and Burkina Faso,
our interpreters and security officers — in other words,

S/PV. 8077

everyone who was involved. Their work was truly
exemplary, and they played a key role in the success of
this visit. On behalf of all of us, I am deeply grateful
to them.
The meeting rose at 3.40 p.m.

17-346977/7
