UNITED NATIONS

TWENTY-EIGHTH

YEAR

st

MEETING: 11 JUNE 1973

NEW YORK

CONTENTS
Pay
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/ 172 1) . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Adoption of the agenda . . , . . . . . . , . , . . , , . . . . . . , . . . . . . , . . . , . , , .

1

The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 I (1973);
fb) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution
331(1973) (S/10929) . . . , . . , . . . . . . . . , . . , . , . . . . . , . . , . . . . . .

1

SJPV.1721

NOTE
Symbols of United Nations documents are composed of capital letters combined with
figures. Mention of such a symbol indicates a reference to a United Nations document.
Documents of the Security Council (symbol S/. . .) are normally published in quarterly
Supplements of the Official Records of the Security Council, The date of the document
indicates the supplement in which it appears or in which information about it is given.
The resolutions of the Security Council, numbered in accordance with a system
adopted in 1964, are published in yearly volumes of Resolutions and Decisions of the
Security Council. The new system, which has been applied retroactively to resolutions
adopted before 1 January 1965, became fully operative on that date.

SEVENTEEN

HUNDRED

AND TWENTY-FIRST

Held in New York on Monday,
President: Mr. Yakov MALIK
(Union of Soviet Socialist Republics).

MEETING

11 June 1973, at 3.30 p.m.
2. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I should
like to inforin members of the Council that, as President of
the Council, I have received a letter from Ambassador
Ghorra, the Permanent Representative of Lebanon to the
United Nations, requesting that the Lebanese delegation be
invited to take part, without the right to vote, in the
consideration of the agenda item before the Security
Council today. In accordance with established practice and
the provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council, I
propose to invite the representative of Lebanon to take the
place reserved for him in the Council chamber and to take
part, without the right to vote, in the Security Council’s
examination of the situation in the Middle East, He will be
invited to take a place at the Council table when it is his
turn to speak.

Present: The representatives of the following States:
Australia, Austria, China, France, Guinea, India, Indonesia,
Kenya, Panama, Peru, Sudan, Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, United States of America and Yugoslavia.
Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/l721)
1. Adoption of the agenda.
2. The situation in the Middle East:
(a) Security Council resolution 33 1 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security
Council resolution 33 1 (1973) (S/10929).

At the invitation of the President, Mr. E. Ghorra
(Lebanon) took the place reserved for him at the side of the
Council chamber.

me meeting was called to order at 4 p.m.

3. Mr. KHALID (Sudan): Mr. President, it is my turn now
to convey to you the message of Africa. Together with my
colleagues from Algeria, Chad, Guinea, Kenya, Nigeria and
the United Republic of Tanzania, we bring you a message
from the elders of our continent. Our 41 Heads of State
and Government have dispatched us to say this to you:
Please move to bury the bloody hatchet and restore justice
to a region that has since the beginning of time been the
hub of the world. Whatever happens there touches almost
everywhere. That is one reason. But if Africa is concerned
with what is happening in that region, it has other reasons
also to be so.

Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East:
(u) Security Council resolution 331 (1973);
(b) Report of the Secretary-General under Security Council resolution 331 (1973) (S/10929)
1, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): In accordance with decisions adopted by the Security Council at
previous meetings, I intend, with the Council’s consent, to
invite the representatives of Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the
United Republic of Tanzania, Chad, the Syrian Arab
Republic, Nigeria, Algeria, Morocco, the United Arab
Emirates, Somalia, Guyana, Mauritania, Kuwait, Qatar and
Saudi Arabia to take part, without the right to vote, in the
Council’s examination of the situation in the Middle East.

4. Africa is concerned because it cannot stand idly by
watching part of the territory of one of the founding
member States of its continental organization occupied by
a foreign army, Africa is concerned because an injustice has
been inflicted on the peoples of that area, in the sense that
“one nation has solemnly promised to a second nation the
country of a third”, to use the words of Arthur Koestler.

At the invitation of the President, Mr. M. H El-Zayyat
(Egypt), Mr. Y. Tekoah (Israel), and Mr, A.H. Sharaf
(Jordan] took places at the Council table; and Mr. S. A.
Salim (United Republic of Tanzania), Mr. I2 G. Ouangmotthing [Chad), Mr. H. Kelani (Syrian Arab Republicj,
Mr. E. 0. Ogbu (Nigeria), Mr. A. Bouteflika (Algeria),
Mr. 11XZen&r (Morocco), Mr. A. Al-Pachachi (United Arab
Emirates), Mr. H. Nur Elmi (Somalia), Mr. R. E. Jackson
(Guyana), Mr. M. El Hassen (Mauritania), Mr. A. K. Bishara
(Kuwait), Mr. J. Y. Jamal (Qatar), and Mr. 0. Sakkaf (Saudi
Arabia) took the places reserved for them at the side of the
Cbuncil chamber.

5. Africa is concerned because if it condones might as a
source of right, the grounds for resisting the anachronistic
barbarism of Portugal, South Africa and the white minority
in Zimbabwe will be eroded. The liberation rnovcments in
our continent ebb and flow with the success and failure of
others engaged in the same pursuit. The Palestinian people’s
fight for regaining its land is an organic whole with that of
Guinea (Bissau), with that of Angola, with that of
Mozambique, with that of South Africa and with that of
Zimbabwe.
1

6. Africa is concerned because this calamitous conflict,
which has brought economic stresses to many parts of the
world, has caused to some parts of its continent even more
suffering on account of the closure of their traditional
route of communication.

achievements and the shortcomings of our Organization,
which came into being after the shattering experience of
the Second World War had made it absolutely clear that
the need for a world body, capable of international action
to prevent a third world war, was necessary.“1

7. Africa is concerned because its media are now resounding with disconcerting tidings presaging an impending
confrontation of which large parts of its land and people
will not be able to writhe free, even if they wanted to
do so.

11. Are our minds really at one, or do words mean
different things to different people? The world has every
right to ask us why we are coming in at this juncture. What
is new? Why are we coming as forcefully as never before?
The answer is very simple: the world should not forget that
we have not let this crisis out of our sight ever since it was
inflicted on the world. Africa did not come to this path on
an impulse. Ever since the war in 1967, it has been treading
slowly, calling on the world community here to seek a way
around the obduracy of those who are making it impossible
for differences to be composed.

8. Africa is concerned because Africa believes in the
United Nations and owes the United Nations a good deal.
Some of us, as well as others, owe their very existence to it.
And because of this faith, Africa has waited for six years to
see this Organization put an end to this tragedy. And if it
moves now, it is moving because it can no longer sit and
watch one single member of the world forum rocking the
boat and eventually sinking it.
9. That is the essence of the message we bring you from an
organization that represents almost one third of the
membership of the United Nations and some 300 million
people. And in all humility may I say that when Africa
speaks the world would do well to heed-not because Africa
is armed with steel but because its sense of justice is
instinctive. The last time the world did not heed the
warnings of Africa it brought disaster on itself. That was
the time when the Emperor of Ethiopia pleaded with the
League of Nations to restrain the Fascists from gassing his
people and raping his land. My friend Mr. El-Zayyat has
ably and amply quoted [I71 7th meeting/ from His
Majesty’s speech. What he did not say is that the big and
mighty ignored the Emperor’s plea, and three years later
the Second World War broke out in the name of freedom
and justice.
10. Today Africa comes again, not in the person of a lone
figure but in a massive train of emissaries. And believe you
me the mere thought that the United Nations is likely to go
the way of the League of Nations makes us shudder. We do
not want it to cross our minds, but we shall be hiding the
truth if we do not say that it does cross our minds. How
interesting that the same thought has also crossed the mind
of no less a person than Mrs. Golda Meir, Prime Minister of
Israel. Addressing the United Nations General Assembly on
the occasion of the commemorative session, Mrs. Meir said:
“The First World War was the war to have ended all
wars. Those of us who were in our teens then believed
this. The entire world wanted it to be true; the League of
Nations was to be the guarantee that this would be so.
And we were all witnesses to, and victims of, its failure.
“The reason for the failure, I am convinced, was not
lack of a sincere desire for peace but lack of determination to act for its preservation. We need only recall the
moving words of the Emperor of Ethiopia, when he
appeared before this Organization in 1962, warning
against a recurrence of the international inaction which
had opened the way to aggression against his country and
thus endangered the peace of the world. It is in the light
of the League’s tragic failure that we must judge the

12. The records of our summit and mb!isterial meetings
bear witness to that. We are coming in at this moment
because in many ways the political climate that prevailed in
November 1971 seems to obtain now. There is now, as
then, a disquieting lull. There is now, as then, a dangerous
tendency in this Council to trap the worId in the slippery
vocabulary that allows for outrageous shifting of positions,
and evasiveness. There is now, as then, the portentous
sound of sabre rattling. And it is for all those reasons that
our Heads of State and Government have asked us to come
here and convey to you the pulse of their meeting by
putting to you some of the thoughts that were expressed.
In doing so we want, as my friend John Malecela said the
other day (1718th meeting], to render our support to you
in any constructive course you may take to restore peace in
the Middle East and keep the faith of Africa in the United
Nations as firm as we would like to see it.
13. Let us, therefore, look briefly at the scene as it is, the
scene we hope to change. In spite of the 310 resolutions
adopted by the principal organs of the United Nations on
the Palestinian problem since 1948, Israel wants to think
that the United Nations jurisprudence on the matter only
rests on Security Council resolution 242 (1967). Let US
grant that it does so, for the sake of argument. Where then
has this resolution taken us since November 1967?
14. The meetings of the big Powers, initiated by France in
April 1969, came to a standstill in December of the same
year because the United States of America found itself
unable to continue talking with the other permanent
members of this Council. Secretary of State Rogers’
initiative of June 1970 came to nothing. So did President
Sadat’s offer of February 1971.
15. Ambassador Gunnar Jarring moved in with an innovative formula on 8 February 197 1. His initiative was not the
figment of the imagination of a lone man, as some would
wish to suggest in construing the Jarring aide-r&moire as an
unwarranted attempt to construe a carefully composed
resolution. His was an imaginative endeavour of an honourable peace-maker, which is in accord with the views of the
I See Ofjicial Records of the General Assembly, Twenty-fifth
Session, Plenary Meetings, 1876th meeting,paras.74-75.

authors of the resolution. The United States draft fourpower statement of 1 March 1971 had this to say:

20. Modesty aside,the Committee of Ten African Heads
of State and Government made a splendid job of the
mission of inquiry, discussedin the Secretary-General’s
report [S/10929, paras. 95-961. It is illuminating to note
that our leaderscameto the conclusionarrived at 23 years
agoby men who had had moretime and more accessto vast
amounts of relevant material. It is in my opinion a caseof
fair minds thinking alike. The Secretary-Generaltells us, in
the section of his report dealingwith this African contribution, that:

“They noted with satisfaction the initiative undertaken
on 8 February by the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, an initiative which they consider to be
fully in accord with his mission under Security Council
resolution 242 (1967).
“They reaffirmed their support for Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and the efforts of the Special
Representative and expressed the view that the parties
should co-operate with and respond positively to him.”

“The missioncameto the conclusionthat the success
of
renewed negotiationscould be regardedasassured,if the
practical application of the concept of secured and
recognized boundaries did not oblige Egypt to alienate
part of its national territory and that it was necessaryto
obtain Israel’s agreement to the putting into effect
(without territorial annexation) of arrangementsoffering
sufficient guarantees to ensure its security.” [Ibid.,

16. Furthermore,
the working group of deputies, on
3 March 1971, issued a draft communique which was
presented and approved by the permanent representatives
on 5 March of that year. That communique said:
“They reaffirmed their support for Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) and the efforts of the Special
Representative under this resolution and expressed the
view that the parties should co-operate with and respond
positively to him. They welcomed the initiative undertaken by the Special Representative on 8 February
concerning key issues of the settlement and expressed the
view that, in taking this initiative, Ambassador Jarring
was acting fully in accordance with the terms of his
mandate under Security Council resolution 242 (1967).”

para. 96.1

21. And here comesmy point of fair mindsthinking alike.
Article V of the Armistice Agreement with Egypt, concluded on 24 February 1949, providesthat:
“The Armistice Demarcationline is not to be construed
in any senseasa political or territorial boundary . . .“z,
The same goes for the other three neighbouring Arab
States. The Armistice Agreement, concludedwith them in
the same year, provided that the armistice lines are
delineated without prejudice to the ultimate settlement of
the Palestinian question. And there is the rub: the
settlement of the Palestinian question. We are the best
qualified to know why. The United Nations haschosento
call the annually recurring Arab-Israeli problems “the
Palestinianquestion.” We cannot cometoday and deny the
existence of a Palestinian people and a Palestiniannation.
Exercises in self-righteousness
cannot deny it, and equivocation might lead those who are lessversedin the problem
to indulge themselvesin self-delusion.But thosewho know
have no right to do so, unlesswe want our efforts to expire
in disaster.

17. Ever since December 1967, when Ambassador Jarring
met with the parties, the Israeli party has been struck with
the idea of direct negotiations. When they came around to
the idea of indirect negotiations, in 1970, they stipulated
that the indirect talks were only the first stage. The dogged
insistence on an id& jJxe givesone the feelingthat it is not
a peace agreementthat is being sought, but rubbing the
nose of the vanquished,primarily that of Egypt. IS this
what the Security Council wants? Is this what the other
protagonists of direct or indirect negotiationswant? Was
Lieutenant GeneralBurns, the former Chief of Staff of the
United Nations Truce Supervision Organisation, that far
from the truth when, somefive years before the June war,
he summedup the Israelis’intentions thus:
“They proclaim daily that they want peace,a peaceful
settlement assoon aspossible,that they arewilling to sit
down and negotiate with the Arabs any time, any place.
But, of course, what they want is peaceon their own
terms.”

22. The kind of logic advanced by our 10 wise men
irritates the leadersof Israel. They would like to think that
the Middle Eastern crisisis a consequenceof the June 1967
war. The truth of the matter is that the June war is a
consequenceof the unresolvedcrisis sinceIsraelburgeoned
its way into a State in 1947. Any referenceto the Armistice
Agreement vexes Israel, becausegoing back 25 years helps
clear our thinking, though it doesnot necessarilymeanthat
we are unaware of the facts created by war and current
international diplomacy. The presentcannot be divorced
from the past. It is one piecewith it. It is the preludeto the
future. Those who have an almost psychopathic senseof
history and heritage should be the first to realize this. On
the other questionof territorial integrity of StatesMembers
of this Organization, Israel is neither in tune with our
Committee of Ten, nor, indeed, is it in tune with the
verdict of this Organization.

18. In March 1971, Secretary-GeneralU Thant reported to
this Council that it wasa “matter for increasingconcern”
that AmbassadorJarring’s attempt to break the deadlock
had not so far been successful.“I appeal,therefore, to the
Government of Israel”, the Secretary-Generalcontinued,
“to give further considerationto this questionand respond
favourably
to
Ambassador Jarring’s initiative.”
[S/lOO70/Add.2,

para. Li.]

19. In reply to this appeal,there was only silence. Africa
decided to break that silence,It had to move, and so it did,
only eight months after this significant statement. The
Committee of Ten African Headsof State was formed.
There wasno other way. The world had goneastray.

2 i?fflciaI Records
Supplement

3

No. 3.

of the Security

Council,

Fourth

Year, Special

23. Six years after this Council has adjudicated against the
inadmissibility of acquisition of territory by conquest and
the booty of the stronger, and two years after the
conclusion on this matter by the African peace committee
in the manner reported by the Secretary-General, the Prime
Minister of Israel persists in what she considers to be the
only truth. In the April 1973 issue of that most thoughtful
and respectable quarterly review, Foreign Affairs, she
argued thus:

how Bernadotte would have reacted to the many requests
to Israel to:
“desist from further destruction of refugee shelters and
from further removal of refugees from their present
places of residence and to take immediate and effective
steps for the return of the refugees concerned to the
camps from which they were removed and to provide
adequate shelters for their accommodation”. [S/1092!?,
para. 42.1

“The border changes Israel seeks do not involve loss of
territory vital to Arab interests. The Sinai desert has in
the past served no Egyptian purpose save to provide a
ready staging-ground for attacks on Israel and for the
maintenance of blockade. No Egyptians live in Sinai and
only a few Bedouin tribes (not Egyptian citizens) roam its
sands. Sharm-el-Sheikh, a desolate, uninhabited outpost,
was used by the Egyptians only to blockade the Gulf of
Aqaba. In any case, Israel, under a peace settlement,
would not seek to retain all ‘or most of Sinai. As for the
Golan Heights, it constituted primarily a military fortress
directed at our agricultural settlements in the valley
below. I have made it clear several times that in
negotiations with the Kingdom of Jordan we will naturally present proposals for a territorial agreement.”

27. The heart of the matter is that Israel has long ago
decided that:
“a complete solution of the refugee problem will come
about only when the Arab States assume their full
responsibility within the vast geography that is at their
disposal”,
and this is the voice of no lessa personagethan the Prime
Minister of Israel,only three months ago.This is the way uf
the conqueror, ii is not that way of one who is seeking
peace.
28. So what doesAfrica hope for? What is to be done
now? We do not pretend we have a monopoly of wisdom
but I, for one, feel that our leaders would first and
foremostlike to seeAmbassadorJarring resumehis mission.
AmbassadorJarring’strials have been many, and if a hero
emerges
from the Secretary-General’sreport before US,it is
Gunnar Jarring. I am not referring to his physical trials.
shuttling between here, Moscow, Cairo, Tel Aviv, Cyprus
andWestAfrica. It is the moral fortitude with which he put
up with the manner of Israel in handlinghis missionandat
onestagehis own person.

24. ‘This condescending attitude takes a sharp turn into
one’s vanity and you read on as if you were reading
somebody who conquered the world, not one who had only
won a battle against a few Arab countries. What else? The
Prime Minister of Israel goes on in the same article to assert
that “Jerusalem shall remain united and the capital of
Israel”. The Secretary-General’s
report enumerates the
number of resolutions adopted since 4 July 1967 in 12
paragraphs that show how resolute world opinion is on the
question of Jerusalem.

29. On the questionof withdrawal, for instance:

25. It really takes a very sick mind to think that we are
anti-Semite or anti-Jewish in Africa, but the way Israel has
been conducting itself over the years prompts us to say
what Henry Byroade said to Israel as early as 1954:

“They reiterated their public statementsthat they did tool
considerthemselvesbound by General Assembly resolution 2799 (XXVI).” (Ibid., para. 102.1

“You should drop the attitude of the conqueror and
the conviction that a policy of retaliatory killings is the
only policy that your neighbours will understand. YOU
should make your deeds correspond to your frequent
utterances of the desire for peace.”

They madeit plain
“ . . . that before discussionscould take place U&X
AmbassadorJarring’s auspices,he should give an assur.
ante that he consideredhis mandateto be basedsolely 01%
Security Council resolution 242 (1967) and that he dill
not considerhimself bound by General Assembly resulution 2799 (XXVI) or by his aide-mhmoireof 8 Februarfa
1971”. [Ibid.]

26. The message we bring you from Africa is not different
from this advice to Israel given by one of the eminent
intellects of the day,. The advice has been ignored and our
own efforts have come to nothing. Our leaders have
therefore come to the same conclusion John Davies came to
15 years after that wise advice. Like him, African leaders now
believe that, “. . . in the end one must ever be prepared to
impose corrective measures on Israel against her will”.
Several of our leaders were in public life when Count
Bernadotte referred to what he called “Israel’s arrogance”
and “its blatant unwillingness for co-operation”, and what
he stressed as the “uncompromising
and stiff-necked
behaviour of the Jewish government”. Experiences like this
are usually dismissed as pro-Arab sentiments, but that is
only flying in the face of facts. Count Bernadotte has been
more than vindicated 20 years later. One has only to skim
through the section on the “Palestine refugee problem”, in
the report of the Secretary-General before us, and visualize

It is not a man of intellect, resourcefulnessand courageof
conviction that is wanted, it is a postman. Ambassador
Jarring did not intrude when he conceived of his aidem&moire.He was probing for a way out of the rut. tic
meant to end four years of futile hedging. We believe that
he did a great deal, and any attempt to cramp his style
would be a pity. The task is not that of a messenger:it
needsinventiveness,it needsingenuity, and it needsenergy.
He has all thesequalities and we recommendthat he start
againforthwith.
30. But where should he go from here? The African
stanceis obvious from the little you have seen.It stands111
4

c

resolution 242 (1967). It rejects the view that the resolution is ambiguous. It suspects the squabbling that attended
its birth. And it calls for implementing it as it is. We go even
further. We impress upon the Council that a time limit
should be set for the total withdrawal of Israeli armed
forces from all occupied Arab lands. The Chairman of this
session of the Organization of African Unity, General
Yakobu Gowan of Nigeria, has made this point clear
beyond any doubt. This point is to be reiterated by the
Chairman himself before the General Assembly if the
deadlock does not show signs of easing up by September. If
the Council goes ahead with this view, it will find us behind
it to a man.

war, have been aircraft, missiles and electronic systems
more advanced than those provided to the countries with
whom we are allied in NATO or SEATO, I do not see
how this can be reconciled with a policy on Israel’s part
of ‘tenacious solitude’.
“Even more important than Israel’s dependency upon
is the fact that we ourselves have a crucial stake in the
Middle East-the avoidance of conflict with the Soviet
Union. It takes no great feat of imagination to conjure up
some new Arab-Israeli crisis in which the two sides
managed to draw their respective patrons into a head-on
conflict. Premier Meir says that we ought not to press for
Israeli withdrawal from the conquered Arab territories
because, as she puts it, ‘This is not the border of the
United States . . .‘, If indeed that were the whole of the
matter, if Israel, as the Premier says, really were prepared
to ‘stand up for itself without involving others, it might
make sense to let the Arabs and Israelis work out their
differences, or fight them out, and come to their own
solution. We all know, however, that that is not the case,
that American interests of the most crucial nature are
involved, that another war in the Middle East might well
set us against the Russians, and that, therefore, we have
not only the right, but a positive responsibility, to bring
an influence to bear.”
US

31. The Security Council is up against a formidable task,
and it will have to face up to it. How much help the
Secretary-General and Ambassador Jarring will be getting
from the great Powers remains to be seen. Judging by the
past attitudes of successive Governments of the United
States of America, one cannot help feeling that there will
not be much help forthcoming in the future unless a
complete change of heart takes place in the thinking of
public opinion in America. But that is a matter for the
citizens of the United States to decide. As for us, we can
only say that it is about time the United States of America
came out clearly on this issue for its own sake, for the sake
of world peace and for the sake of Africans and Arabs who
hope to see the United States unbound. Its responsibility is
not a mean one. Many great Powers have committed grave
sins on their own volition and for their own interests. In so
doing they were first-rate sinners and their history abounds
with not so spotless deeds, but, on reflection, those spots
do not blemish, otherwise, a record as good as man can
afford to be. But I know of no example in history where a
great Power chose of its own volition, and perhaps against
its own interests, to be a fellow traveller in sin. America
would do justice to itself by crediting, on this issue, Israel
with everything and the Arabs, and indeed the whole world,
with nothing.

33. I will now go on with what we think should come out
of this debate. Having reactivated Ambassador Jarring’s
mission and secured the total withdrawal of occupying
forces, a different atmosphere will be created and new ideas
bound to come up. They are not going to come up through
the sterile argumentation over direct, indirect, and proximity talks. What is required is a restoration of confidence.
Mankind may be brutish, may be egotistic, but it will never
stop getting more intelligent, more enlightened. The
African message, therefore, is first things first.
34. We have heard my colleague from Nigeria on the
resolution adopted in Addis Ababa before our coming, but,
by way of summing up what I was saying about Africa’s
wish to reactivate Ambassador Jarring’s mission, I should
like you to bear with me if I read out what I consider most
relevant to the question I posed a little while ago, that is,
“Where do we go from here? ” An OAU resolution adopted
at Addis Ababa contains the following paragraphs: paragraph 3 deplores Israel’s negative and obstructive attitude
which prevents the resumption of the Jarring mission;
paragraph 4 invites Israel publicly to declare its adherence
to the principle of non-annexation of territories through
the use of force; paragraph 5 invites Israel to withdraw
immediately from all the occupied Arab territories to
pre-5 June 1967 lines in accordance with Security Council
resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November 1967.

32. The voice of reason has come, a few years ago, from
that tower of intellect and almost liturgical character in
Washington: Senator William Fulbright. Addressing the
Annual Political Union at Yale, in April 1971, the Senator
had this to say on the Middle East in the course of his
illuminating lecture entitled “New Internationalism”:
“For reasons which may warrant our sympathy, but not
our support, Israel pursues a policy of antiquated-and to
a great degree delusional-self-reliance.
As Foreign
Minister Eban expressed it, ‘a nation must be capable of
tenacious solitude’. In fact, neither Israel nor any other
nation is capable of so profound an isolationism in our
time. Israel is heavily dependent on the United States for
both arms and economic assistance. Only last December
Congress appropriated a half billion dollars for military
assistance to Israel. Since 1948 the United States Government has provided $1.4 billion in direct economic
assistance to Israel; this does not include military aid.
Since 1948 private American citizens have provided
another $3 billion in tax-deductible contributions and
regularly purchase between $300 and $400 million a year
in Israeli bonds. Included in the massive American
military aid, which has increased greatly since the 1967

35. Before I conclude, I should like to address myself to a
significant view in the chapter entitled “Observations” in
the Secretary-General’s report. It is significant because it
concerns preserving the United Nations itself. The Secretary-General refers to the efforts of the Organization and
goes on to warn that
“these efforts can only be useful if the parties concerned
wish to avail themselves of them”. [S/l 0929, para. 117.1
5

coerced unto Your or W
forever, impossihlc.”

36. we must note here that Egypt has gone along with
almost all the ideas put forward by the organs of the United
Nations. Israel has not, and when it did, it was always a
qualified
consent. It should rethink its attitude. It cannot
forever count on the divergent views prevailing in the Arab
world. Nor is that such an absolute fact. The Foreign
Minister of Israel recognized that when it suited him to do
so. Commenting on the sale of weapons by the United
States of America to Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, he was
telling America to note that:

WY.

Par a While,

perl,aps,

39. This is tllC way of the w0rld. This is the waycfthe
United Nations. This is the path for this Councilto take
The other dtCrrlatiVC iS frightening. It is nasty, brutish, ,,,
short. Rut in the abscnccof justice it is the way cf tl,e
world to rcSOrt to SUCh iI11 ii\tCrllative.
We ]IaVe learned
in
our respectivecountries ttlilt the corollary of oppresslo,,
is
seditiouscommotion. ht i~lX3llllch
as the world
wants to
take the path of the Charter, it is being pushedn,oreand
more to think With
tiiiit gI?iIt Jewish intellect,Martin
Bubcr,
in his h/h’
it, ~,ffOpiU,that: “Power
abdicates
,,Q
under the stressof coun1cr-power.”

“ . 4 . it is important to understand that even those Arab
States at loggerheads with each other on political matters
or international issues are united in a purpose of hostility
to Israel”.

40. SO hCrC
That is true, but what is uniting the Arabs, the Africans,
and indeed, the whole world, is not hostility to Israel as
much as a desire to see an honourable and just peace
reigning in the Middle East. The Israeli leaders have to help
the world by being a little consistent.

YOU

t0

do

WC UT
Wtllit

-Wt

ilSkhg

iS Withill

thC

for the moon,but asking
CO~~lpass

of

your

authority,

Again in the WOr’dS lbf Senator t~ulbright, the Middle~~~~
problemprovidesyou
“with the best opl>ortimity since World War 11tc In&e
U.S.? of the pcacc-keeping prL)ccduresof the United
Nations in approsirnntoly the mannerenvisionedby tllc
framersand, in SO dOiQ!,
tr) CrC:ltc
;L Vidldk precedent
for the future”.

37. The 25 years that have passed since the State of lsraei
was founded have been years of real agony for that State
and for the Arabs, and no amount of talking can obscure
the fact. Israel has won a war, but has not won the peace; it
is not likely to do so as long as it lives in a world of
make-believe. This will not amuse Israel and its unquestioning world. The Prime Minister of Israel holds that:

41. In summingup the hlitldlu Hastsituation in hisaddress
at the tenth sessionof the Assembly of African l-leads
of
State and Govcrnmcnt, the Sccrctary-General,Kurt Wald.
heim,had this to Sil):

“ . . . there can be no greater mistake in assessing the
current situation in the Middle East than to assume that
the conflict continues because of specific political Arab
grievances”.

“The intractable nature of the problem may belargely
due tu the fact that fllfldkl~11C~ltill
principlesof the Charter
are involved: the sanctity of the territorial integrityof
Mcmbcr States; the right of cvcry State to bc secure
within its territorial boundaries;and the inalienable
riglit
of self-detemlinatiun of pc0plcs. Tlicsc principlesareof
crucial i~~lportililCC
in the f0t7~~l~lilti~~n
of any peace
agreement.I..ct me un~phsize tllilt WCarc dealingwitha
highly csplosivc situation. Time is not in our favour.The
elementsof this iluesthm show that the longertheissue
remains unsolved the more complicated they become.
The new efforts to find ;I way to a settlementin the
Middle Eastneednot IX futile. Thar effort shouldinclude
il new appraisalr,f the possibilitiesillld
procedures
of the
Security (‘ouncil itself for conciliation iltld 3n exploration
of a11the mc’ansby wllicll lhc framework of the United
Nations might he usctl tn assistthe partics in reaching
a
just iUld lasting scttlc~~~cllt.‘”

She goes on to enumerate the grievances that she says Jo
not constitute a problem:
“ . . . the plight of the Arab refugees, the Israeli prcscnce
on the West Bank, or in the Sinai, the reunification of
Jerusalem”.
To her, those are not the causes of the conflict.
“The root of the issue”, she contends, “is the Arab
attitude to Israel’s very existence and security. Once the
Arab countries accept the legitimacy of Israel as WChave
always accepted theirs . . .“.
Well, if this is not make-believe, what is it then? If there Is
one single root of the problem it is this make-bclicve. l-low
to counter this, I do not know. Can it be countered‘? One
doubts it. Hence our contention and decision that Africa
may have to reformulate its attitude towards Israel if that
country continues with its policies.

42. llvw true, then, it is Ihal what is on trial isnot Israel,
What is really on trial is the Security Council itself.It was
thercfijrc rcfrcshing the 0th
d:w -to Kild
the statement
made by AmbassadorJohn Scali,*thc United Statesreljre.
sentative to the Ilnited Nati\>ns, at the annual United
Nations-United States tlinnur, and his rcfereim to Our
effort within the Security (‘ouncil as “a testimonyof
mankind’s continuing hop tllilt
this gKilt imna~iO~lal

38. One hopes that Israel will understand that it is only
after a scrutiny of truth that peace can be built-truth that
all believers in this Organization should uphold absolutely.
It is the truth of live and let live. In the voice of one of the
illustrious builders of the United Nations, Mr, Dag l-lammarskjold:

Orga~liziltion

cull

I&Y

towards

its

most

important

goa’ ns

the guarantor of pence”. WC hope those wordswill be
matchedby deeds.

“For others to live with others, you have to see how
those others think and how they feel. Nohdy
CM he

43. Mr. President,thank you for calling upon me to speak.
Thank you for listening patiently. Your holdingcf t”e
6

office of President for this month is not going to be the
easiest of tasks, but my confidence in your competence is
limitless. Indeed, your opening remarks on the state of the
world prompt me to hope that no Memberof this custodian
of peace will hold the world hostage to its supposed
national interests. To you, Mr. President,to our able and
vigilant Secretary-Generaland to the indefatigable Ambassador Jarring I pledgethe co-operationof Africa, which has
honoured me by makingme one of its emissaries.
All along,
Sir, I have addressedyou as President of the Security
Council. But the kind words you said about your predecessor in the Chair, AmbassadorRahmatalla Abdulla,
representative of the Democratic Republic of the Sudan,
have touched me deeply. I am grateful, and so is my
country.

50. One, does the principle of non-acquisition of territories by force or by war, or the necessitythat ,the weight
of military victory should not be reflected-to use an
American expression-meanthat no territory at all can be
thus acquired, or doesit meanthat the acquisitionof small
choice morsels of territory is permissiblewhile the acquisition of unreasonablybig territories is not?
51. Two, is the principle of territorial integrity that
everyone here upholds and defends-inchrding the United
States of America, whoselast five Presidentshave asserted
their conviction that this principle shouldbe inviolable in
the Middle East-applicable to all the nations or to all the
nationsexcept the Arab nations?
52. Three, is the principle of self-determinationacclaimed
by all the United NationsMembers,including Israel, valid
vis-a-visthe hundredsof thousands,the millions, of Arab
Palestinians,or is it valid for everyone except for the
Palestinians?

44. The PRESIDENT (translatedfrom Russian):The next
speaker on the list is the Minister for Foreign Affairs of
Egypt, on whom I now call.
45. Mr. EL-ZAYYAT (Egypt): Pendingthe full study we
have said we are making of the Secretary-General’sreport,
we have now three queries that I hope the SecretaryGeneral will be able to answer. They are all about the
aide-memoireof February 1971 presentedby his Special
Representative[S/10403, annex I].

.53. Could the Council have adopted, or could it adopt
now, any decisionsor resolutionsthat would ahow or can
be interpreted to allow the breach of these three principles? These are also serious questions, but we will
patiently wait until the end of this debate to hear the
answersto them. The purposeof this short intervention is
to solicit, as soonaspossible,the answersof the SecretaryGeneral, if he wishesto give them, only to the first three
queries about AmbassadorGunnar Jarring’s aide-memoire
of February 1971.

46. First, this aide-memoire deals obviously with the
Egyptian sector only. Was the Special Representativeto
follow this aide-memoirewith others covering the rest of
the subjectscontainedin Council resolution242 (1967) of
22 November 1967? More precisely, did the Special
Representative intend to have other aide-mbmoiresfor
Jordan, about Palestinianrefugees,and for Syria if Syria
should express its willingnessto receive such an aidem&moire? That is the first question.

54. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
Secretary-General is taking part in the meetingsof the
Security Council devotedto examinationof the situation in
the Middle East. He hasheard your three questions,and I
noticed that he wrote them down. Consequently,there is
no need for me to put your questionsto him formally. I
hope that he will answerthesequestions.As to your other
questions,I assumethat they will be studied and that YOU
will be given answersin due course.

47. Second, the aide-memoireof 8 February 1971 does
not mention the Palestinianterritory of Gaza.I, as the then
representative of Egypt, noted this omission.I find in my
own notes that in answerAmbassadorJarring explained
that the absenceof a referenceto the GazaStrip, which
was
entrusted to the administration of Egypt in accordance
with the Egyptian-IsraeliArmistice Agreementof 1949, was
without prejudice to the status of the strip as “an Arab
territory occupiedby Israelwhich shouldbe de-occupied”.
I hope my notesare correct.

55. I now call on the Secretary-General.
‘56. The SECRETARY-GENERAL: I just wanted to say
that I take note of the questionswhich have beenput to me
by the Foreign Minister of Egypt. I am sure that the
Council will understandthat I shahneeda little time for a
careful study before answeringthem. For this reason I
would wish, with your permission,Mr. President,to answer
them at a later meeting.

48. The third query seeks an affirmation from the
Secretary-General, if he would, of the fact that the
Permanent Representativeof the United Statesof America,
in his capacity asthe Chairmanof the meeting of 24 June
1971 of the four-Power talks, did indeed inform the
Secretary-Generalof the United Nationsofficially, if orally,
that the representativesof the four permanentmembersof
the Security Council welcomedand supportedthe initiative
of the Special Representative in his aide-m&moire of
8 February and believed that he, in taking that initiative,
was acting fully in accordance with the terms of his
mandateunder resolution242 (1967).

57. Mr. JAMIESON (United Kingdom): Mr. President, I
shouldlike to start by joining with othersin congratulating
you, and indeedourselves,on your assumptionof the office
of President of the Security Council. You have years of
experience both on matters of substance and of the
procedures of this Council, and indeed of other organsof
the United Nations, andthis augurswell for the orderly and
successfulconduct of our affairsthis month.
58. I should like alsoto congratulatethe representativeof
the Sudan on hisimpeccablehandlingof our affairs in May,
and I am particularly happy to do soin the presenceof his

49. Those are all the queriesI put today. The Council is
conscious,however, that there are three other questions I
have put earlier.
7

resolution 242 (1967) intact. That is indeed the duty of
this Council. But it is also the Council’s duty to make
progress towards putting that resolution into practical
effect. That is the real challenge facing the Council. Just
how progress will be made is what we are here to discuss
and agree upon. But my delegation has been encouraged by
the constructive spirit which was shown by all members of
the Council and by the principal parties to the dispute ia
the consultations which preceded this debate. We welcome
too the words of the Foreign Minister of Egypt that he had
“not come here to score points or to seek a verbal victoty”
[I 717th meeting] and we were glad to hear those words
echoed in the initial statement of the representative of
Israel [ibid./. We hope that we can get back to that
constructive spirit. As we look to the future and consider
how progress can be made, we hope that polemics will as
far as possible be avoided. The problem with which we are
dealing is far too serious for us all, and the opportunity too
important, for us to allow our proceedings to degenerate
into the sort of slanging match with endless rights of reply
to which we have grown all too well accustomed in previous
Council debates. In a situation such as that which we face
in the Middle East, it would be unrealistic to expect any
instant solution. But our task here is to see to it that the
search for the solution is vigorously pursued and that solve
genuine diplomatic process gets going.

Foreign Minister, himself no mean hand in presiding over
the Council’s deliberations.
59. I make no apologies for speaking early in this debate,
early, that is among the members of the Council. Peace in
the Middle East is of vital importance for us all. First, it is
of vital importance for the peoples of the area who have for
more than 25 years lived in the aftermath of hostilities and
with the threat of further fighting hanging over their heads.
But it is also of great concern to countries outside the area,
not least to my own, My Government certainly cannot
regard with equanimity the present unsatisfactory
and
fragile situation of “no war, no peace”. Furthermore, so
long as this situation continues there is the constant danger
that attitudes within the area will become increasingly rigid
and extreme and that this will be reflected in a corresponding hardening and polarization of attitudes outside the area.
Anything of this sort would increase the seriousness of the
situation and, at the same time, make it more difficult to
resolve.
60. It is for these reasons that my Government is anxious
that the Security Council should make the most of the
present opportunity. As the Secretary-General has noted in
his admirable report which provides the background for our
discussions, this is the first time that the Security Council
has considered the Middle East problem as a whole since
the adoption of resolution 242 (1967) of 22 November
1967. My Government has always recognized that, in the
absence of progress towards the implementation of that
resolution, it would be necessary for the Council to address
itself to the problem again. We therefore look upon this
debate as a responsibility
and as a challenge. It is a
challenge to us all to find a way to break out of what the
Secretary-General, in introducing his report at the 1717th
meeting, described as “a vicious circle of action and
reaction, violence and reprisal” and to escape from, again I
quote the Secretary-General’s words, the “series of seemingly insurmountable obstacles to the process of conciliation and settlement”. My delegation, for its part, faces this
debate with determination and hope.

63. I have read the Secretary-General’s report with much
interest. It provides a clear, if depressing,account of the
efforts which have been made over the past six years to
achievea just and lasting peaceon the basisof resolution
242 (1967). Above all, the report is a testimonial to tile
efforts which havebeenpade by the Secretary-Generaland
by his predecessorand in particular by their Special
Representative,Mr. Jarring. The patience and ingenuity
which Mr. Jarring has shown over the past six years have
earnedthe admiration of us all. It is certainly not his fault
that hisefforts have so far not met with success.
64. The Secretary-General’sreport deals mainly with the
efforts that have been made within the framework of the
United Nations. As most previous speakershave stressed,
the United Nations has a particular responsibility in the
Middle East.But, in addition to the efforts made within the
United Nations framework, there have been many other
efforts. Without attempting to list them all, I should like to
say a few words about someof them. First, there have been
the efforts of individual countries, notably the United
States,to contribute towards a lesseningof tension in the
area and to increasethe chancesof a settlement. For its
part, my Government has consistently welcomed these
efforts. It waslargely thanks to United States efforts that
the cease-firewas establishedalong the Suez Canal in
August 1970. In this connexion, we should all take to hear1
the Secretary-General’sobservationin his report that the
cease-firewill remain precariousand unstable so lang asa
just and acceptedsettlementof the problem is not in sight.
More recently, United Statesefforts have concentrated an
the possibility of negotiating an interim arrangemeld,
designedto result in somemeasureof withdrawal by Israeli
armed forces and the consequent reopening of the Suez
Canal.The British Government has always made clear that
we would be glad to seesuchan interim arrangementCOW?
into effect, on one important condition; that is, that it

61. I have spoken of the absence of progress. But in fact
some advances have been made since the war of June 1967
towards the establishment of a just and lasting peace in the
Middle East. These should not be underestimated; and it is
important that they should not be undone. First, there is
resolution 242 (1967) itself. This resolution constituted the
first serious attempt since 1947 by the international
community to tackle the roots of the Middle East problem
as opposed to palliating the symptoms. It was adopted
unanimously and has since received overwhelming support.
We must be careful not to jeopardize that support. There
are other advances too that must be preserved. In particular, I have in mind the declared willingness of the
Government of Egypt to enter into a peace agreement with
Israel if that State would give certain commitments
covering the implementation on its part of resolution
242 (1967). Jordan too has given an analogous undertaking.
These are very considerable advances and it is essential that
the Council should, in its consideration of the problem,
ensure that this hard-earned ground is retained.
62. But it is not enough to say that we must not throw
away the progress already made, that we must preserve
8

would have to be, and be seen to be, a step towards an
over-all
settlement
in accordance with resolution
242 (1967), as well of course, as being acceptable to the
parties, Most recently, we have welcomed President Nixon’s
affirmation of his continuing interest in seeking a settlement, notably as expressed in Ambassador Scali’s statement
on 29 May. There is no doubt that the United States has a
unique contribution to make.

Egypt raised two specific questions: concerning the Palestinians and concerning the frontier between his country and
Israel. AS I have said, all the views in the policy statements I
have referred to still hold good, but 1 should like to
reaffirm our views on those two particular points; first, that
as regards the Palestinians my Government believes that any
settlement which is to be just and lasting must take account
of the views of all the peoples of the area, including the
Palestinians; secondly, that the old, long-existing international boundary between Egypt and the former Mandated Territory of Palestine should be confirmed in a
settlement as the international frontier between Egypt and
Israel, subject to whatever arrangements may be agreed on
to deal with the special problem of Gaza.

65. Other efforts that have been made outside the
immediate context of the United Nations include the
mission of the African Heads of State in 1971. This was an
important and helpful initiative by a group of statesmen
with an impartial interest in peace and justice; and their
balanced conclusions quoted to us by the Foreign Minister
of Nigeria at the 1718th meeting and again today by the
Foreign Minister of the Sudan, seemed to my delegation to
open up a promising approach. There have also been useful
bilateral exchanges between the United States and the
Soviet Union and consultations between representatives of
France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the
United States. These latter consultations, which became
known as the four-Power talks, were not formally set up by
the United Nations and, therefore, they are not covered in
any detail in the Secretary-General’s report. Though the
four-Power talks, unfortunately, did not succeed in finding
a solution to the Middle East problem, and while the
participants themselves recognized that the terms of a
settlement could not be dictated from outside, progress was
made and valuable work was done, particularly on international guarantees. That is a subject of obvious importance, We for our part have always considered that there is a
close interconnexion between all the elements of the
settlement envisaged in resolution 242 (1967),
and,
obviously, if agreement could be reached on a watertight
system of guarantees, this would have an important effect
on the attitude of the parties towards other elements of the
settlement. In any case, guarantees constitute a subject
which clearly lends itself to study by third parties, since it
is they who would have to provide the guarantees. I would
add that, if it appeared that further such consultations
between permanent members of the Security Council
would be useful, my delegation, for its part, would be ready
to take part in them.

67. I thought it right to refer to these examples of efforts
made outside the direct United Nations framework. For
while, as I have said, it is generally recognized that it would
never be possible to impose a solution from outside on the
parties to the conflict, or as my Secretary of State has put
it, to “dictate a peace”, nevertheless there is very clearly a
role for outsiders to play. That is why we welcome any
contribution that any countries, large or small, can make,
individually or collectively, That, of course, is why we
welcome this present renewed effort by the Security
Council itself.
68. The story of the Arab-Israel problem is a sad story of
missed opportunities. It is quite extraordinary how each
time that the establishment of a lasting peace in the
area-or at least progress towards it-has appeared to be at
hand, something has happened to destroy the opportunity
before those concerned can pluck up the courage to seize it.
And unfortunately, each time that an opportunity is missed
a further obstacle to progress is created, a further complication introduced into the problem. That is why my
Government feels so strongly that this present opportunity
must not be lost and that every effort must be made to
move forward,
69. As I have said, the starting-point-the
firm base-for
this forward movement is resolution 242 (1967), and it is in
our view the duty of this Council to preserve that
resolution intact. Now, the mission of the SecretaryGeneral’s Special Representative is part of that resolution,
and we feel that it is essential that it too be retainedindeed, not merely retained, but re-energized. We therefore
consider that the primary objective of any action taken by
this Council should be to provide renewed impetus to the
mission of Ambassador Jarring in such a way that it will
generate its own momentum. This mission remains, in the
view of my Government, the best hope for progress. AS my
Secretary of State hasput it, “No progresswill be madein
solving the problem unlessthe momentumandintensity of
the exchangeof views is accelerated”.If there is to be any
hope of progress the pace of the process must be
quickened, the rangeshortened.

66. It was in the course of the four-Power talks that my
delegation first set forth British views on the substance of
the problem. Subsequently, thkse views on the essential
outlines of a just and lasting settlement, on how the two
principles of withdrawal and commitments to peace could
be cemented into reality, were set out in a major policy
statement which my Foreign Minister, Sir Alec DouglasHome, made in Harrogate on 31 October 1970 and were
repeated by Sir Colin Crowe in the General Assembly on
2November of the same year.3 These views, covering the
whole range of issues, including territorial questions and
commitments to peace, the problems of the refugees and of
freedom of navigation, the question of guarantees and so
on-these views hold as good today as they did in the past,
and my Government fully stands by them. I have no need
to repeat these views at length, But the Foreign Minister of
3 See Official
Session, Plenary

Records
Meetings,

of the General Assembly,
1893rd meeting.

70. The Secretary-Generalhasnoted in his report that the
Security Council is the only forum where all the parties to
the conflict have been able to meet together in the same
room. That is why this debatehasgiven us, the membersof
this Council, a unique opportunity on which we should
surely now build. At least at this stageof the debate, my

Twenty-fifth
9

delegation has no specific proposals to put forward. But the
essential is surely that this Council should take the
necessary action in order to get a genuine diplomatic
process going in which all concerned will co-operate. The
important thing is that there should be progress, however
achieved, towards breaking the present intolerable deadlock, towards recharging and putting in motion the at
present stalled mechanism whereby progress can be made
towards the aim which we all share, the establishment of a
just and lasting peace in the Middle East.

Security Council by Egypt’s Foreign Minister. I do not
believethere is need for any further comment on my part
on thesematters.
77. At the Security Council meeting last Friday, 8 June
I said that the multiplicity of Arab
statementsin this debate is in fact beneficial. One could
almost say today: the more the merrier. No one could
demonstratemore convincingly the justice of th.e Israeli
position and the extremism of the Arab attitude than the
Arab spokesmenthemselves. No State Member of the
United Nationsexcept Israelis surrounded by enemieswho
openly proclaim in the United Nations that their objective
isto eradicateit, asreaffirmed today with a greater or lesser
degreeof explicitnessby the representativesof Kuwait,
Algeriaand the Sudan.

[I 718th meeting/,

71. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I now
call on the representative of Israel, to speak in exercise of
his right of reply.
72. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): I have already drawn the
Council’s attention to what appears to us to be the real
purpose of the Egyptian demands. The crux of those
demands is the following.

78. It is well known that these are not mere words. One
does not, for instance, mount a campaign of barbaric
slaughterof innocent men, women and children unlessone
thinks and acts in terms of total annihilation Algeria has
servedasthe havenof Arab terrorists and air pirates.

73. After 25 years of Egyptian warfare against Israel,
Egypt now seeks to impose on Israel Egypt’s diktat to
restore the insecurity and vulnerability of the past, to
change resolution 242 (1967)-the
only basis for United
Nations peace-making eFforts accepted by both parties-and
to reject negotiations between the parties, the only method
that could lead to agreement between them.

79. According to pressreports the Sudan, apparently out
of sympathy for the murder of guiltlesscivilians by Arab
terrorists,has decidednot to put the assassins
of Khartoum
on trial. Kuwait is one of the principal sourcesof financial
support for the Arab terror organizations, as well as a
supplierof military equipment and armsto them. Algeria’s
attitude towards Israel wasformally expressedby President
Boumediene,asfollows:

74. I regret to say that even as we have been deliberating
here in the Council chamber, the Egyptian governmental
press has been, day after day, confirming our worst fears
regarding the Egyptian position. Thus I indicated here that
when demanding Israel’s withdrawal to the 1967 lines,
Egypt seems to continue to consider that this will be only
the first stage in the struggle against Israel that will go on.
In our view, Minister El-Zayyat confirmed that when he
declared that Israel’s recognized boundaries were those of
1947. Mr. Hassanin Heykal once more made the Egyptian
view more explicit in his weekly article in the semi-official
AZ-Ahram of 8 June, in which he wrote:

“The true freedomof the entire homelandmust be won
through the liquidation of the State of the Zionists.”
Algeria’s Foreign Minister today gave expression to the
sameview when, inter alia, he spokeof the “original sin” of
creatingIsraeland of Israel’sbeing an artificial State.
80. The position of the Sudan was defined by President
Numeiri,asreported by Reuterson 2 June 1969:

“Israel in its present position, composition and character has no future in the region and is an entity which is
historically doomed to extinction. Israel thus constitutes
an additional attempt at colonialism, which is out of
place.”

“The tnilitary leader of the Sudan, General Al-Numeiri
today stated that his regimewill work for the strengthening of the Arab nation with the purpose ‘to annul the
resultsof aggression
and put an end to Israel’s existence
on Arab soil’.”

75. In my previous interventions I also submitted that
Egypt’s refusal to negotiate with Israel is not a matter of
procedure, nor is it motivated by Israeli occupation of
Egyptian territory, for the refusalpredatesthat occupation,
but emanates,it would seem,from Egypt’s denial of Israel’s
fundamental,legitimate rights. On 6 June, the very day on
which the Security Council opened this debate, Al-Ahram
confirmed this and wrote:

81. Kuwait’s fundamentalpolicy hasbeen expressedby its
rejectionof the Security Council’scease-fireresolutions and
of resolution 242 (1967). On 17 February 1969, tire
Kuwaiti Foreign Minister declared that his Government
rejectedall peaceful solutionsof the Palestineissue.At the
plenary meeting of the General Assembly on 4 November
1970, the following declaration was made on behalf of
Arab States,includingAlgeria and Kuwait:

“The Arab refusal to negotiate with Israel concealstheir
insistenceon the rejection of a racial and colonial entity.”
76. Finally, I drew attention to Egypt’s attempt to change
resolution 242 (1967) by proposingthe dismembermentof
Jordan. AZ-Ahram again confirmed this. Only yesterday it
publishedan article stating that it is essentialthat the world
should recognize a Palestinian State, as proposed in the
10

“ ‘Israel is composedpreponderantly of transplanted,
alien settlers, who have forcibly dispossessed
and subjugated the indigenousPalestinian people and conquered
and usurped its homeland. To contend, as the draft
resolution does, that the recognition of the claims of
Israel to the attributes and prerogatives of statehood ia
indispensablefor the achievement of a just peace is

tantamount to contending that the legitimization of a
gross injustice is a prerequisite for the attainment of
justice and peace. We reject this thesis as well as the
principle on which it is predicated;

“Today, this unwillingness to engage in direct negotiations is explained on the ground that Israel is in
occupation of Arab territories. A commitment by Israel
for total withdrawal
is insisted upon by Egypt, in
particular as a pre-condition to any form of negotiationdirect or indirect.

“ ‘Our
respective Governments have categorically
rejected, and continue to reject Security Council resolution
242 (1967) , . , on which
draft
resolution
A/L.602/Rev.2 . . . is essentially based’.“4

“It is a simple fact of international life, however, that a
refusal to negotiate on this ground is unprecedented and
contrary to international custom and usage , , .‘I.

82. These are the defenders of international law and of the
United Nations Charter. These are the Arab States which
came today before the Security Council to speak of respect
for the Council’s resolutions and their principles.

Ambassador Goldberg continued
lization of resolution 242 (1967):

to explain the crystal-

“The unanimous support for resolution 242 (1967) was
the product in considerable measure of intensive diplomatic activity by the United States . . . The United States
went all out diplomatically because we still hoped, first,
to get a resolution, and second, to have all parties,
pursuant to the resolution, negotiate an agreed and
accepted settlement before positions congealed.”

S3. The Security Council cannot ignore this attitude of
the Arab States. Israel will not ignore it. The Government
of Israel would be amiss in its international and national
obligations if it did not remain at all times alert to the fact
that Arab States continue to strive for the liquidation of
the only independent Jewish State and preach this in the
United Nations.

Then he defined the resolution as follows:
84. How secondary must appear some of the questions
touched upon in our discussion, at a time when the entire
situation is overshadowed by the Arab objective to deprive
the Jewish State of its freedom and equality with other
natjons.

“Resolution 242 (1967) does not explicitly require that
Israel withdraw to the lines occupied by it before the
outbreak of the war. The Arab States urged such
language; the Soviet Union, as I have already mentioned,
proposed this at the Security Council, and Yugoslavia and
some other nations at the special session of the General
Assembly. But such withdrawal language did not receive
the requisite support either in the Security Council or in
the Assembly.

85. It has been said that the Security Council is the only
forum where all the parties of the conflict have been able to
meet in the same room. If today’s appearances of Kuwait,
Algeria and the Sudan, and the Algerian
insist-I
-I Minister’s
_
ence that he should not be contaminated by the presence 01
the Israeli representative, are examples of such meetings in
the same room, I am certain that those really desirous of
peace would rather forgo them.

“Resolution 242 (1967) simply endorses the principle
of ‘withdrawal of Israel’s armed forces from territories
occupied in the recent conflict,’ and interrelates this with
the principle that every State in the area is entitled to live
in peace within ‘secure and recognized boundaries’.”

86; At the meeting, on 7 June, I stated:

“The notable omissions-which
were not accidental-in
regard to withdrawal are the words ‘the’ or ‘all’ and ‘the
S June 1967 lines’. In other words, there is lacking a
declaration requiring Israel to withdraw from ‘the’ or ‘all
the’ territories occupied by it on and after 5 June 1967.”

“Egypt’s Minister for Foreign Affairs asked . . . that the
Security Council change resolution 242 (1967) and in
particular to replace the establishment in agreement
between the parties of secure and recognized boundaries
by the Egyptian diktat to restore the insecure provisional
old line of 1967; and to replace the call for a just
settlement of the refugee problem, which appears in
resolution 242 (1967) by a provision referring to the
so-called Palestinian rights, implying in effect, as we heard
yesterday, the dismemberment of Jordan, a State Member
of the United Nations.” [1718th meeting, para. 104.1

88. There were two major attempts by the Arab States to
gain the Security Council’s approval for their demand that
Israel should withdraw from all the territories. One attempt
was made in June 1967, the other in November 1967. In
both instances the Council refused to endorse the Arab
demand. Thus it rejected demands that Israel should
withdraw its troops “behind the armistice lines” or “to the
positions held before 5 June 1967”. Equally, demands that
withdrawal should be “from all the territories” failed to
gain the Council’s support. Even a formula that spoke of
withdrawal “from the territories” was rejected.

87. It is important that we have a closer look at that
resolution. A principle architect of resolution 242 (1967),
Ambassador Arthur J. Goldberg of the United States,
declared in a speech in Washington on 8 May of this year:
lLThe record shows that even before the Six-Day War
the Arab States were opposed, as they are now, to direct
negotiations with Israel to settle their differences and to
conclude a peace agreement.
4 Ibid.,

1897th

89. In view of all these abortive efforts it is clear that the,
absence of the word “all” or even of the definite article
“the” from the withdrawal
phrase is significant and
purposeful. On 13 June 1967 the USSR representative

meeting,para. 16.
1

submitted a draft resolution to the Council which said inter
alia:
The Securily Council,
.

.

4

“2. Demands that Israel should immediately and unconditionally remove ail its troops from the territory of
those States”-that is, the United Arab Republic, Jordan
and Syria-“and withdraw them behind the armistice lines
and should respect the status of the demilitarized zones,
as prescribed in the General Armistice Agreements.”
/ 1358th meeting, para. 45. /
This Soviet draft was rejected by the Security Council at
the 1360th meeting.

97. The Arab delegations eventually realized that the
Council did not support their insistence on withdrawal
from all the territories. This opened the way for the British
draft, which spoke of withdrawal
from “territories”,
without the definite article, and without the word “all”.
98. The following is an account of the days preceding 22
November 1967. On 16 November 1967 [.2379th meeting),
Lord Caradon, the representative of the United Kingdom,
submitted a draft resolution.
99. On what happened immediately after the Council’s
meeting in which Lord Caradon had submitted the United
Kingdom draft, we read in The UN and the Middle East
&v’s, 1967s by Arthur Lall, a former Ambassador of India
to the United Nations:
“V. V. Kuznetsov at once met with the Arab delegates,
who told him that the formulation on the withdrawal of
Israeli forces in the first operative paragraph of the British
draft was not acceptable to them. They insisted that the
wording read either that Israeli forces would be with.
drawn from ‘all the territories’, instead of ‘territories’
occupied by Israel, or that Israel would ‘withdraw to the
positions of 4 June 1967’. In addition, the Arabs were
unwilling to accept the phrase ‘recognized boundaries’
also occurring in operative paragraph 1.

90. On 7 November 1967 the United Arab Republic
requested an urgent meeting of the Council. The Council
met on 9 November and the discussions that started then
ended on 22 November with the adoption of resolution
242 (1967). The note to the President of the Council in
which the United Arab Republic, today Egypt, requested
the urgent meeting, said inter alia:
“I have the honour. . . to request the convening of the
Security Council in an urgent session to consider the
dangerous situation prevailing in the Middle East as a
result of the persistence of Israel not to withdraw its
armed forces from all the territories
which
it
occupied.. .“. [S/8226.]

.

93. A comparison of the Egyptian demands as presented
to the Council with the resolution actually adopted by the
Council demonstrates the dimension and finality of the
dismissal of the Arab demands.

I

“The Arab States met on the morning of 17 November
and took a dramatic decision. . . . The Arabs concluded
that it was better to get a resolution backed by all 15
votes in the Council than to insist on a resolution which
might not be adopted or which might obtain the bare
minimum of nine votes. Several of them discussed matters
with Caradon. Could he not use the formulation ‘all the
territories’ instead of ‘territories’ in relation to the clause
requiring Israel’s withdrawal?
Caradon’s response was
that his draft represented a delicate balance which would
be upset by any changes.”

91. Thus at the core of the request of the United Arab
Republic was spelled out clearly, explicitly, the demand
that Israel withdraw “from all the territories”.
92, In his opening address at the Council meeting the
Egyptian representative urged that it was the “duty” of the
Council “to force the . . . Israeli forces to return to the
positions held before 5 June” /1373rd meeting, para. 831.

.

100. On 20 November 1967, four days after the British
draft had been submitted, the USSR representative submitted his own draft resolution which, on the subject of
withdrawal, said:
“The Security Council,

94. On 7 November 1967, India, Mali and Nigeria submitted a pro-Arab draft resolution which, on the subject of
withdrawal, required the following:

“2.

Urges that . . .:

“(a) The parties to the conflict should immediately
withdraw their forces to the positions . . . held before
5 June 1967”. [1381st meeting, para. 7.1

“Israel’s armed forces should withdraw
from alI the
territories occupied as a result of the recent conflict”.
(ibid., para. 91.1

101. This USSR draft once more attests how wide is the
gap between the pro-Arab demands and resolution
242 (1967) that was ultimately adopted, and which speaks
of withdrawal “from territories”.

95. On the same day, the United States also submitted a
draft resolution which, on the subject of withdrawal, spoke
of “withdrawal of armed forces from occupied territories”.
It further spoke of “respect for the right of every State in
the area to . . . secure and recognized boundaries”. [see
S/8229.]

102. Before the vote, Lord Caradon, sponsor of the draft
about to be adopted, affirmed:
. . . the draft resolution is a balanced whole. To add to
it or to detract from it would destroy the balance and
“

96. For a few days, discussions went on in the Council and
behind the scenes without any version gaining enough votes
for adoption.

5 New York, Columbia University Press, 1968.

12

also destroy the wide measure of agreement we have
achieved together. It must be considered as a whole and
as it stands. I suggest that we have reached the stage when
most, if not all, of us want the resolution, the whole
resolution and nothing but the resolution.” (1382nd
meeting, para. 59.1
103. The foregoing was the basis for the following
summary made by Professor Eugene V. Rostow, Professor
of Law and Public Affairs at Yale University who, at the
time of the adoption of resolution 242 (1967), was United
States Under-Secretary of State for Political Affairs:
“ . . . paragraph 1 (i) of the resolution calls for the
withdrawal
of Israel armed forces ‘from territories OCcupied in the recent conflict’, and not ‘from the
territories occupied in the recent conflict’. Repeated
attempts to amend this sentence by inserting the word
‘the’ failed in the Security Council. It is therefore not
legally possible to assert that the provision requires Israeli
withdrawal from all the territories now occupied under
the cease-fire resolutions to the Armistice Demarcation
Lines.”

security. It is clear, however, that a return to the situation
of June 4, 1967, will not bring peace. There must be
secure and there must be recognized borders. Some such
Iines must be agreed to by the neighbours involved.”
108. On 1 July 1970, President Nixon stated:
“Israel must withdraw
defensible.”

to borders, borders that are

109. On 12 July 1970, the Assistant Secretary of State,
Mr. Joseph Sisco, declared:
“That resolution did not say ‘withdrawal
to the
pre-June 5 lines’. The resolution said that the parties must
negotiate to achieve agreement on the so-called final
secure and recognized borders. In other words, the
question of the final borders is a matter of negotiations
between the parties.”
Again, on 7 May 1973, Mr. Sisco declared:
“The Security Council did not call for unconditional
Israeli withdrawal to the Armistice Lines as had been the
case at the time of the 1956 war in Sinai. Rather, it called
for ‘withdrawal . . +from territories occupied’ in the 1967
war as part of a package settlement in which the parties
would agree to respect each other’s right to live in peace
within secure and recognized boundaries, The Security
Council resoIution established principles, it did not
establish borders or define precisely the obligations of
peace and security.”

104. Addressing the Security Council moments after the
adoption of the draft resolution, Mr. Abba Eban, Israel’s
Minister for Foreign Affairs, declared:
“For us, the resolution says what it says. It does not say
that which it has specifically and consciously avoided
saying.” [ibid. para. 93.1
105. Of particular interest are the following statements
reflecting the views of members of the Security Council
regarding
the withdrawal
provision
of resolution
242 (1967).

110. The United Kingdom, as the Council knows, was the
sponsor of resolution 242 (1967). On 17 March 1969,
Mr, Goronwy
Roberts, Minister of State, Foreign and
Commonwealth Office, in a reply to a question in Parliament said:

106. On 15 November 1967, Mr. Arthur Goldberg, the
United States representative, said in the Security Council:
“To seek withdrawal without secure and recognized
boundaries, for example, would be just as fruitless as to
seek secure and recognized boundaries without withdrawal. I-Iistorically there have never been secure or
recognized boundaries in the area. Neither the armistice
lines of 1949 nor the cease-fire lines of 1967 have
answered that description, although the . , . Armistice
Agreements explicitly recognize the necessity to proceed
to permanent peace, which necessarily entails the recognition of boundaries between the parties. NOW SUCK
boundaries have yet to be agreed upon. An agreement on
that point is an absolute essential to a just and lasting
peace just as withdrawal is. Secure boundaries cannot be
determined by force; they cannot be determined by the
unilateral action of any of the States; and they cannot be
imposed from the outside. For history shows that
imposed boundaries are not secure and that secure
boundaries must be mutually worked out and recognized
by the parties themselves as part of the peace-making
process.” [1377th meeting, para. 6S.]

“The Security Council resolution lays down certain
principles which are required for the establishment of a
just and lasting peace.Theseinclude ‘withdrawal of Israel
armed forces from territories occupied in the recent
conflict’ and the right of every sidein the areato live in
peace within ‘secure and recognizedboundaries’.These
boundarieswill be determined in the context of a general
settlement.”
111. On 17 November 1969, Mr. Michael Stewart, Secretary of State for Foreign and CommonwealthAffairs, in
reply to the following questionin Parliament,
“What is the British interpretation of the wording of
the 1967 resolution? Does the Right I-Ion. Gentleman
understand it to mean that the Israelisshouldwithdraw
from all territories taken in the late war? “,
stated:

107. On 10 September 1968, President Lyndon Johnson
declared:

“No, sir. That is not the phraseused in the resolution.
The resolution speaksof secureand recognized boundaries. Those words must be read concurrently with the
statement on withdrawal.”

“We are not the ones to say where other nations should
draw lines between them that will assure each the greatest
13

“If our aim is to bring about a settlement or a political
solution, there must be withdrawal to secure and recognized borders. . .“. (1373rd meeting, para. 216.1

112. On 9 December 1969, Mr. Michael Stewart, in reply
to the observation by Sir Alec Douglas-Home that
“the House should be told whether or not this resolution
requires the complete withdrawal of the Israelis”,

117. Again on 9 November, Mr. Otto R. Borch, the Danish
representative in the Security Council, speaking in the
discussions which preceded the adoption of resolution
242 (1967), quoted a public statement of the Danish
Minister for Foreign Affairs, Mr. Hans Tabor, as follows:

stated:
“As I have explained befork, there is reference, in the
vital United Nations Security Council resolution, both to
withdrawal from territories and to secure and recognized
boundaries. As I have told the House previously, we
believe that these two things should be read concurrently
and that the omission of the word ‘all’ before the word
‘territories’ is deliberate.”

“ ‘As we see it, the full implementation of these
principles would include the withdrawal of Israeli troops;
the safeguarding of the territorial and political integrity
of all States in the area, including a final settlement of the
borders in the area . . .‘.” (Ibid., para. 232.1
118. On 22 November 1967, Mr. Gerald0 de Carvalho
Silos, the Brazilian representative, said:

113. Mr. George Brown, British Foreign Secretary in
1967, at the time of the adoption of resolution 242 (1967),
said in January 1970:

“We keep constantly in mind that a just and lasting
peace in the Middle East has necessarily to be based on
secure permanent boundaries freely agreed upon and
negotiated by the neighbouring States . . .“. (1382nd
meeting, para. 127.1

“I have been asked over and over again to clarify,
modify or improve the wording, but I do not intend to do
that. The phrasing of the resolution was very carefully
worked out, and it was a difficult and complicated
exercise to get it accepted by the Security Council. I
formulated the Security Council resolution. Before we
submitted it to the Council we showed it to Arab leaders.
The proposal said Israel will withdraw from territories
that were occupied and not from ‘the’ territories, which
means that Israel will not withdraw from all the territories.”

119. The views of those who criticized certain provisions
of resolution 242 (1967) also throw light on the meaning of
the Soviet
representative,
the resolution.
Thus,
Mr. Kuznetsov, said in the discussion:
“

phrases such as ‘secure and recognized boundaries’.
what does this refer to? What is behind the idea of
‘secure and recognized boundaries’? Who is to decide
how secure these boundaries are and who has to recognize
them? . . . the draft . . . leaves the field wide open for
different interpretations and constructions, . . . which still
make it possible for Israel itself. . . to establish new
boundaries and to withdraw its forces only to those lines
which it considers appropriate.”
f 1373rd meeting,
para. 152.1
.

114. Mr. Harold Wilson, head of the United Kingdom
Government that submitted
the text of resolution
242 (1967), stated on 27 December 1972:
“The Israel interpretation of the resolution was fully
consistent with what the then British Government had
meant. If our Government had meant ‘all’, we would have
said ‘all’. We would have never wanted to say it anyway,
and if we had it wouldn’t have been passed.”

*

.

120. Egypt’s Minister for Foreign Affairs has come to the
Security Council to suggest in fact that resolution
242 (1967), which provided for the establishment of secure
and recognized boundaries through negotiation and agreement, either meant the very opposite of what it said or was
illegal and has to be modified. All those who interpreted
the resolution as members of the Security Council that
sponsored and adopted it, and even those who criticized it
did, were in his view wrong. That is, of course, an utterly
groundless thesis, especially as resolution 242 (1967) was
accepted by both parties. Even if Governments that had
voted for the resolution were to modify their political views
regarding one or another aspect of the situation, they could
not now change the meaning of the resolution without
destroying it.

115. Finally, in an interview on 10 February 1973, just a
few months ago, Lord Caradon, the principal architect of
resolution 242 (1947) declared:
“Withdrawal should take place to secure and recognized
boundaries, and these words were very carefully chosen:
they have to be secure, and they have to be recognized.
They will not be secure unless they are recognized. And
that is why one has to work for agreement. This is
essential. If we had attempted to draw a map, we would
have been wrong. We did not. And I would defend
absolutely what we did. It was not for us to lay down
exactly where the border should be. I know the 1967
border very well. It is not a satisfactory border, it is
where troops had to stop in 1948, just where they
happened to be that night. That is not a permanent
boundary.”

121. Negotiation and agreement to determine secure and
recognized boundaries where none had existed is a necessity. Negotiation and agreement on border changes, even
when secure and recognized boundaries do exist, is not
unusual. That is particularly so in a situation of war. That is
especially so when changes in the old lines are required by
the State which did not initiate the war but has been

116. On 9 November 1967, Mr. George Ignatieff, the
Canadian representative in the Security Council, declared in
the Council:
14

subjected to it for 25 years and now desires to agree on
boundaries that would take into account its vital security
needs. I find few States around the Security Council table
that have not applied these tenets in their own relations
with other countries. It is obvious that Israel cannot be
deprived of the same right. States that try to alter or
unilaterally reinterpret resolution 242 (1967) and to exclude from it the call to establish through agreement
between the parties, for the first time in the Middle East,
secure and recognized boundaries take upon themselves a
grave responsibility, for such an attitude will surely
undermine the prospects of agreement between Israel and
the Arab States and make progress towards peace more
difficult. It is to be hoped, therefore, that members of the
Security Council will not tamper with the only existing
basis for agreement on a just and lasting peace in this
region.

Foreign Minister of the Sudan, the Foreign Minister of
Egypt and the representative of the United Kingdom
shattered by an angry and polemic statement made by the
Israeli representative. That statement consisted primarily of
a lengthy treatise in defence of territorial expansion. It
certainly deserves a more lengthy reply than I intend to
make at this point. I only wish to state that certainly the
lengthy and pseudoarticulate juridical defence of territorial
aggrandizement has not been a reassurance for Jordan, for
one, and therefore has added a blow to the credibility of
Israel’s attempt to pose in defence of Jordan’s territorial
integrity. It is only on this point that I wish to speak at this
stage.
127. Egypt and Jordan are agreed that the Israeli occupation must end and that Israel should withdraw completely
from all the Arab territories occupied. They agree in their
interpretation of the Charter of the United Nations, in their
interpretation of the responsibility of the United Nations
and in their interpretation of the provisions of Security
Council resolution 242 (1967), with respect to both the
non-acquisition of territory by war and the provision for
Israel’s withdrawal from the occupied territories.

122, True, progress towards such agreement has been
slow. But this is not a justification for destroying the only
common ground, unless, of course, one wishes to create a
void that would entail also the undermining of Israel’s
commitments on the basis of resolution 242 (1967). Giving
verbal satisfaction to a partisan view in disregard of its
merits may be a valid consideration in ordinary situations.
It is not in questions of war and peace, especially when an
effort is being made to terminate the most protracted war
in this century in the entire world. Such an effort requires
patience and circumspection, a search for that which unites,
and not the creation or solidification of divisive elements.

128. What one Egyptian editor, or any editor anywhere in
the world, says about the future and about what formulas
shouId be adopted for the future of the area and the
restructuring of relationships among the Arab countries and
the Arab people is the right of any editorial writer or any
spokesman of any point of view. But officially and on the
major principal points, we are agreed that the Israeli
occupation should end.

123. Every State member of the Security Council has its
individual interests in the Middle East. Israel appeals to all
members of the Security Council to allow the paramount
interest of peace to prevail. None of you carries the burden
of a 2,000.year struggle to retrieve freedom and equality
and restore independence, None of you has known what it
means to be under constant assault for 25 years. None has
had to face for a quarter of a century an enemy seeking
total destruction and annihilation of his nation. DO not
make it more difficult for us to terminate this war. Do not
make it more difficult for us to establish secure boundaries,
which had never existed before between Israel and the Arab
States, so that there can be peace at long last in the Middle
East.

129. However, reference made to Jordan’s composition
deserves some brief remarks. Jordan is a unique and special
composition, which is based on objective social, economic,
cultural and geographical realities and on consent and
common popular will. It was the people of East Jordan who
lived with their brothers to the west through every moment
of struggle and agony under the British Mandate. It was the
sense of brotherhood and common destiny which sent the
appeals from the west of the river in 1947 and 1948 and
brought the response from their brothers in the east,
creating on the hills of Palestine and on the walls of
Jerusalem an epic of heroic struggle and martyrdom in the
face of a ruthless foreign invasion. The unity of the East
and West Jordan Arabs in 1949 was not only a natural,
though historic event, but also a response to a common
danger unprecedented in its vehemence and scale.

124. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian):
In
connexion with the comment made by the representative of
Israel on the questions put by the representative of Egypt,
it should be noted that all Members of the United Nations
have the right to put questions, and of course the right of
reply, in any organ of the Organization in whose meetings
they are taking part. Consequently, it is a perfectly normal
procedure for Mr. El-Zayyat to put questions.

130, The Palestinians on the West Bank were pioneers in
the search for Arab unity and in the recognition of the
unfolding menace when they elected to join with their
brothers in the east in a constitutional union. The Jordanians of the east were merging their destiny with the
cause of Palestine when they joined willingly in the great
enterprise, The new Jordan, which emerged in 1949, was
the creation of the Palestinians of the West Bank and their
brothers in the east, While Israel was the negation of the
Palestinian right of self-determination, unified Jordan was
an expression of it, When the cabinet, parliament, the
armed forces, the national administration, the economy and
the social organizations are shared equally without discrimination between the Palestinians of the west and their

125. The representatives of Jordan and Kuwait have asked
to speak in exercise of the right of reply. I call on the
representative of Jordan, to speak in exercise of his right of
reply.
126. Mr. SHARAF (Jordan): It has certainly been a
painful experience for the members around this table to see
the serenity and moderation of the atmosphere created by
the constructive and restrained statements made by the
1.5

of the assailant, then I fear we will have turned back the
clock of international order.” I am afraid that we are on the
verge of upsetting international order. Let those words ring
clearly in the ears of the late President of the United States
resting comfortably in his grave.

Jordanian brothers of the east-this is the unique expression
of common identity and commitment to resist the fearful
foreign invasion. It was in Jordan that the Palestinian
refugees became, without prejudice to their inalienable
rights to return to their own original homes, citizens and
partners with their settled and resident brothers from west
and east. This was a positive Arab response to Israel’s
attempt to dehumanize and de-Arabize the people of
Palestine.

135. In fact it was my original intention to put some
questions to the representative of Israel, the gentleman on
my right, but it is now too late, after the rape, the
pollution, the defiling and the reviling of the most sacred
principle. However, I will speak on one point. Every time
any reference is made to the rights of the Palestinians, all of
a sudden the rights of the Jews emerge. I heard with
interest what the representative of Israel said. This
chamber, I submit, is already congested with vehement
emotionalism about the rights of the Jews. Curiously
enough, no mention was made of the rights of the
Palestinians by the spokesman who ardently, emotionally
and strongly defends Jewish rights. Injustice against Arabs
or against Jews spawns the same bitterness, creates the same
grievances. Is it right to alleviate the Jewish plight by
inflicting another plight on the Palestinians? Are the
Palestinians less human than the Jews? Did the misery of
the Jews justify the misery of the Palestinians? Those are
serious questions which should be properly diagnosed and
settled. The Palestinians have the same right to live in
dignity and in conditions worthy of human beings. There
will not be even a flicker of hope for peace if the rights of
the Jews mean the denial of the rights of the Palestinians.

131. It does not help for the Israeli representative to
ignore these facts. The Palestinian identity has an Arab
content. The Palestinian identity is not a rejection of the
natural link with the Arab nation. It is a rejection of Israel’s
attempt to empty Palestine of its Arabs and to de-Arabize
the remaining subjugated Palestinians. All Arabs are in
favour of the real self-expression of the Palestinian identity
in the land of Palestine. Only Israel is opposed to it.
132. The Jordan Government has repeatedly said since
1967 that, in the context of an Israeli withdrawal from all
the Arab territories in the framework of the Security
Council resolution and a just and lasting peace, its citizens
on the West Bank will be granted their right to a full
constitutional expression of their choice. However, the
important fact before this Council is that the occupation
should end, that territorial aggrandisement should not hide
itself behind outwardly juridical arguments, that the Security Council should take into its hands the case of the people
under occupation and decisively act to end this occupation.
These are the terms of reference of the United Nations and
its various organs. They are also the terms of reference of
the Security Council resolution which we have accepted.
While the juridical aspect of the provision for withdrawal
may be answered by saying that the interpretation of this
concept of “no acquisition of territory by war”-which
we
accept, which Egypt accepts and which the overwhelming
majority of the nations represented in this Organization
accept-is a matter which we may be able to elaborate on at
a later stage, it is clear and obvious to this Council that
territorial aggrandizement should be rejected and that the
immediate issue before the Council is to act positively and
to protect the serenity, the moderation and the construe
tive atmosphere of the Council against any attempt to
divert its attention from the major issue and to detract
from the dignity and restraint with which its affairs must be
conducted. We have a positive task before us. We in Jordan
are looking forward to a positive result from this Organization, a positive result that would establish peace and
justice in our area, and we are committed to that goal.

136. Professor Arnold Toynbee said:
“Right and wrong are the same in Palestine as anywhere
else. What is peculiar about the Palestine conflict is that
the world has listened to the party that has committed
the offence and has turned a deaf ear to the victims.”
137. The New York Times reported on 18 May 1973 that
in an interview with some Palestinians one of them said:
“They say ‘Shalom’ means ‘peace’. They kick you out
and take what you have and say ‘Shalom’. Let them give
me back my house and land, and then I will say
‘Shalom’.”
Another said:
“I went back last year. They told me I couId not go
into the groves, which were in bad shape, because it was a
military area. There was a big fence around it. At my
family house I found Romanian immigrant Jews living
one family to a room. They told me to get out.”

133. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I invite
the representative of Kuwait to take a place at the Council
table to speak in exercise of the right of reply.

138. It is this intensity of feeling of the Palestinian people
for their country that should flutter the dovecote. Any
search for justice is futile unless the sufferings of the
Palestinians are taken seriously into account and eliminated.

134. Mr. BISHARA (Kuwait): It is very unfortunate and
rather inappropriate that I come here and appear on this
solemn occasion immediately after the rape of the most
sacred principle in international law. The sanctity of States
has just been raped. President Eisenhower said in February
1957: “Should a nation which attacks and occupies foreign
territory in the face of United Nations disapproval be
allowed to impose conditions on its own withdrawal?
If we
agree that armed attack can properly achieve the purposes

139. The late Dr. Judah Magnes, who was eulogized by
President Weizmann as a great Zionist and who was at one
time a rector of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem wrote:
“As far as I am concerned, I am not ready to achieve
justice to the Jew through injustice to the Arab. . . , I
16

would regard it as an injustice to the Arabs to put them
under Jewish rule without their consent.”

146. In this connexion, what is the question that should
be put to the Security Council? The question is not one of
interpretation of resolution 242 (1967), but rather whether
the Security Council can sanction the acquisition of
territory by force. Can it partition Egypt, Syria and Jordan
and give sections to Israel? If the principle of territorial
aggrandizement is accepted, I need not emphasize all of the
nefarious consequences for international order as set up by
the Charter which would flow from that decision. Two
world wars have occurred specifically in order to put a halt
to the application of this principle of which Israel has
become the sole champion. I am sure that the members of
the Council will take note of the statements by the
representative of Israel and will condemn that attitude,
which is contrary to the Charter and to the principles of
international law..

140. Mr. Tetley, the Cultural Attach6 in the United States
Embassy in Israel in 1948, wrote on 27 September 1972 in
the Cbristiun Science Monitor:
“The tragedy of Palestine has become a time-bomb far
too serious for the world to be simplistic about or to
accept partisan viewpoints. However reluctantly, we must
today look squarely at the Middle East with open eyes.
To do less is to indulge in fearful folly.
“It is the root-injustice of a people, the Palestinians,
having been deprived of their homeland, which underlies
these acts of horror. We must face this injustice and
eliminate it.”

147, The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): The
representative of Saudi Arabia will be the next to speak in
exercise of the right of reply. I invite the representative of
Saudi Arabia to take a place at the Council table.

141. A reference was made to my country with regard to
resolution 242 (1967) and I think I have never been more
convinced of the soundness of our policy than I am today.
We have always said that resolution 242 (1967) does not
concern us-we are a thousand miles away-and we maintain that policy. Today, I would confirm that we will not
accept, we will not entertain, we will not tolerate the
raping, the violation, of the sacred principle of nonacquisition of territory by force.

148. Mr. BAROODY
(Saudi Arabia): Mr. President, I
thank you for allowing me to take the floor, not to make a
statement on behalf of my Government but to exercise my
right of reply as someone who was a personal witness not
only to the partition of Palestine in 1947 but to the
concoction in this chamber by some members of the
Council of so-called resolution
242 (1967).
Since
Mr. Tekoah waxed long in his muItifarious interpretation of
that resolution, I find myself constrained to tell the Council
what went on behind the scenes, rather than indulging in
the sort of platitudes which were adduced by Mr. Tekoah,
who quoted Presidents, Foreign Ministers, writers, ambassadors-mostly from those countries that were in favour of
the creation of the State of Israel.

142. I would conclude with an interesting quotation from
an article written by Professor Yehoshua Arieli, head of the
Department of History at Hebrew University in Jerusalem.
He wrote-and this was reported in New York Review of 3 1
August 1972:
“It is this policy, it is this short-sighted opportunism
and manipulation of the international situation which is
called by many ‘shrewd realism’ or ‘realpolitik”‘.-Of
course, he was referring to the policy of Israel.-“This
is
the kind of diplomacy that has brought the world in the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries to the threshold of
self-destruction through unceasing war and confrontation,
with unceasing violence on all sides.”

149. I believe, if my memory does not falter, that
Mr. Tekoah mentioned Mr. Arthur Goldberg, our erstwhile
colleague, and also Mr. Rostow, who was an adviser to the
then President of the United States; he was in the State
Department; he held a high position in the United States
Government.

143. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): I now
call on the representative of Egypt, who is the next to
speak in exercise of the right of reply.

150. I do not want to go into great detail, but it fell to me
at one time to attend a meeting with none other than the
late President Johnson in Washington, when one of the
Ministers of His Majesty was asked to see the President on
another crisis in the Middle East. I remember-and this is
for the record-that
His Majesty asked that no one be
present except his Ambassador in Washington and that
Minister who came from abroad and myself.

144. Mr. ABDEL MEGUID (Egypt) (intevretation
from
French): The logic of the representative of Israel surprises
us, to say the least. He speaks about “safe and recognized
boundaries” for Israel. Of what boundaries is he talking:
those of 1947, 1948, 1949, 1956 or 1967? When certain
States recognized the State of Israel they recognized it with
boundaries that were defined in the partition plan-in other
words, within a territory that had been allocated to it by a
United Nations resolution, and nothing more.

151. Pressure was brought to bear on none other than
President Johnson to have one of his aides-and I am not
going to mention names now-present. And that is why the
whole meeting produced nothing, because we could not
even talk in confidence with the President since the one
who attended was a Zionist.

145. The representative of Israel does not understand that.
He talks about boundaries which, 1 believe, are swelling day
by day and year by year. We are faced with a State whose
boundaries are in a constant state of change, and this
change is to be effected at the expense of Israel’s
neighbours-that
is to say, at the expense of Syria, Egypt
and Jordan: that is Israeli logic.

1.52. I must set the record straight. When Mr. Goldbergwhom I have known, and my personal relationship with
him was excellent-was
appointed the Ambassador of the
United States to the United Nations many of my colleagues
17

whole of Asia, until you reach the confines of China. As for
Africa, you want to be the clearing house in banking, in
industry, in trade. You do not want a political peace only,
you want an economic peace. And you are skilful. I mean,
after all, the Jews have always been a minority and they
had the challenge to do well.

told me that Mr. Goldberg was a confirmed Zionist. And I
said to them: “Mr. Goldberg is the representative of the
United States. After all, his ideology or his religion is no
concern of ours”. But there was restlessness amongst my
Arab colleagues, and they told me: “You are our elder;
make sure that Mr. Goldberg, as the representative of the
United States, would not consciously or subconsciously use
his position in order to serve the cause of Zionism in the
Middle East”.

159. I remember a Jew in London who told me a story a
long time ago. He was the son of a tailor. It was not his
father, but he told me that there was a Jewish tailor whose
son, like all Jewish sons, was sent, by the sweat of his
father’s brow, to the university to study. And he went info
the world, and his father told him: “My son, now I worked
hard. Go out into the world and make money. Make it
honestly if you can, but if you can’t, make it anyway”.
And you want to stay there in the Middle East anyway.

153. It was a very difficult task for me. But I remember
that there was a meeting of this Council in an attempt to
broach the question of Viet-Nam or some similar question-1 say that so that I may not be mistaken if my
memory falters-and I spoke to Mr. Goldberg. It was only a
couple of weeks after he was appointed. I met him, and he
assured me that he would not mix his representation of the
United States with any matter that might touch on his own
predilections, and that he was not a Zionist-or at least he
gave me to understand that, but not in so many words.

160. Nobody is chasingyou from the Middle East. YOU
chasedthe people of Palestinefrom the area. Forget that
they areArabs. They are the indigenouspeople of Palestine,
and the last time I told you, Mr. Tekoah, acrossthis table,
that my humble researchof the areahas shown that many
of those Palestinianshad originally been Jews before they
embracedChristianity and subsequentlyIslam, and that the
Diasporaconsistednot of the bulk of the population of
Palestinebut of the influential and wealthy during the time
of Rome,after the Temple wasdestroyed.

154. But later I took issue personally with Mr. Goldberg
and also with my good friend Lord Caradon, who represented the United Kingdom at that time, and with others,
when I was shown a draft of that resolution and I said that
it reminded me of the term “national home”, which in the
days of Balfour was judiciously selected. And what for? So
as to keep the question fluid at that time to suit the
imperialist United Kingdom of those days, because had it
not been for the Zionists, Britain would have been beaten
by Germany in 1917.

161. It is just like what happened,unfortunately, durhg
the days of Hitler. Who left Germany but the influential
and the wealthy? There would not have been any more
Jewsto persecuteor, deplorably, to maltreat and to murder
if they had all left. It is the Diasporawhich you have always
exploited sincethe days of the late Mr. Shertok, who later
calledhimselfSharett-and I knew him. “We are the Jews in
the world that are persecutedand we should come back.”
But as I told you, that movement, Zionism, is not a
movementof our Jews who are Arabs like us, who speak
Arabic and not Yiddish. It is a movement that has a
motivation for a political and economic end, and, as I have
mentioned time and time again, Mr. President, politics
revolvesaround economics.You told me at one time, “This
is Marx,” and I told you, “This was before Marx, it has
nothing to do with Marx”. Thesepeople want Palestine asa
base for developing economically and financially three
continentsand, acrossthe Atlantic, the United States. Why
do you not, my good friend the representative of the
United States, create New York as the 51st State? I am
sure that many Jews in Israel would flock here. Why
support them 6,000 miles away from your shores’? You
think you are servingyour own interests? Of course, the!
permeatedyour legislature. Seventy-eight senators go ant!
kow-tow-to whom? To Israel. Mr. Fulbright was quotcJ
by the Egyptian Foreign Minister-I can cite chapter and
verse. He is a lone voice in the wilderness,What have WC
done to you, the United States? We have not dune
anything to you. Why are you sending Phantoms and atI
those armsto chastisethe Arabs? To keep the balance uf
power? Why keep the balanceof power between you ant!
the Soviet Union? You are on good terms with the Soviet
Union. Mr. Brezhnev is coming here, and I believe we are
interrupting these meetings until Mr. Nixon
anil
Mr. Brezhnevcancome to agreementor no agreement.

155. Who railroaded the United States into the First
World War? Who? The record is there. The historians have
written it. I do not want to rehash what has happened. But
in order not to digress, the term “national home” was
agreed upon by the Rothschilds because they were afraid
that if they bad inserted “a State”, “a Jewish State”, one
day perhaps the British would be fed up with Zionist
activists and they might tell the Rothschilds: “Now you are
a Jew, go to Palestine. You have a State there”.
156. The Rothschtids were wise enough to impress BaIfour
with the words “national home”. And now, instead of
“national
home”, we have a parallel in resolution
242 (1967), in what we call the definite article “the”: “the
territories”,
or “territories”.
That is the crux of the
question, as if the whole question of the Middle East
revolved around “the” territories or the absence of the
“the”.
157. Why do you not tell us, Mr. Tekoah? I do not have
any quotations, I am talking now from memory, having
been seized of this question since I was 17. I need not
quote. I have lived with it. You talk about anti-Semitism.
We are the Semites. This is a European colonial movement
hatched in Eastern Europe and Central Europe. Its protagonists are no more Semites than I am a Buddhist. In fairness
to you, like others, the leaders of Israel are secular.
1.58. But you are playing on the sentiments of your
co-religionists in order to use them,, For what? In order to
establish in that important part of the world a base for
economic expansion, not only of the Middle East but of the
18

162. Why should we be the victims of agreement or
disagreement? And Mr. Jamieson, the platitudes, my good
friend, reminded me of Lord Salisbury in the nineteenth
century. They were so well measured in the best British
tradition. You gave us nothing. I thought you were going to
come here and take Mr. Tekoah by the arm, and
Mr. El-Zayyat, and tell them, “Kiss and the whole thing is
finished”. That is the way you acted. This is not a serious
place any more.

do not know how many miles it flew high into space.What
is a line? This is an excuse, “Secure, secure”.
168. But these people, the Zionists, come from Europe
and America, too, of course, and have permeated all the
scientific milieux and have all the patents and all the
inventions. And they are afraid of us Arabs because if the
frontiers are recognized asthey had been before 1967, then
the security of Israel will dissolve like hot air. Whom are
you fooling? I hear you are manufacturing planes there.
You have missiles. Show your good wilt. But you do not
want to.

163. Sometimes something is said in jest but is meant
seriously. I mentioned this on the question of Lebanon
which was brought here before the Council. It is the duty
of the United States and the Soviet Union to put an end to
that conflict whether or not Mr. Brezhnev and Mr. Nixon
agree on a concerted policy, and I mentioned this on
another occasion when I took the floor, My good friend
Ambassador Huang, who happened to be my neighbour in
the seating, made it clear to me that the Chinese would like
to see the Arabs take their rights. But that, after all, is up to
the two countries. The Chinese do not arrogate to
themselves being a super-Power, but whether you like it or
not you Americans and the Russians happen to be the
super-Powers in our area. Why do you not come to some
agreement? Why should we be the victims? Why, as I said,
should we be the checkerboard on which you play your
chess game, not with wooden pieces but with the destiny of
nations-including
the Jews, because after all the Jews are
human? Do not get me wrong, we harbour no ill-will.

169. The Zionists are bringing pressure on your country,
Mr. President, to send them immigrants. I wonder sometimes whether the Russian immigrants may not become
pilots and man the Phantoms from the United States to
chastise us. Laugh, yes, laugh, you are 6,000 miles away
from us Mr. Representative of the United States. I am an
Arab and I have the right to tell you what we think. I am
representing the ethos of my people.
170. Here you sit smug and complacent. You are all
honourable, asImentioned time and again, wearing the strait
jackets of instruction of those who are behind you. And we
people, not only in the Arab east but in the Moslem
world-draw a line from Morocco to the confines of China,
it is a Moslem world-but for that enclave which was
baptized Israel. You want a raison d’btre for your intervention in the area. You do not have to do that. Ask us for
what you want? You want oil? We are selling you oil. You
make a big issue of that oil in your papers. Oil, oil-1980.

164. Somebody asked me this morning-I do not want to
mention names-“What is happening, is there anything
new? ” I said, “Yes, there is a revolution”. He said,
“Where? “, I said, “In the Security Council, the revolution
of a wheel that turns and turns and turns, and because of
the obstruction of those who usurped the Holy Land, it
draws neither oil nor water for that matter-it is hot air that
is drawn.”

1’71. I told you here in the Council the other time that not
only American currency is eroding but Western currency is
eroding-I do not know about the rouble. But Western
currency is eroding. Why.7 Because of the pressures of the
population; because of two world wars; because after the
Second World War there were two other wars. And here the
press, which to a large extent is manipulated, if not owned,
by the Zionists, says that the Arabs are creating a monetary
crisis and that in 1980 they will be able to throttle the
United States because of the energy crisis.

165. I have been here, my dear friend Ambassador Malik,
since the beginning and I have had the privilege of knowing
you as a person. And 1 must take courage, having known
you, to crave your indulgence in letting me be frank
because words that have been used time and again in
clich&, stereotyped phrases, will later bring down this
Organization unless there is goodwill and a change of policy
among the major Powers who exercise or wield world
power.

172. Your currency, whether in Europe or here, eroded
because you embarked on military adventures that made
you bankrupt as nations, because you had colonial territories which you could no longer control except by great
expenditures. But you create certain impressions to mislead
whom? The people of the world? And the people of the
world will not be misled. The people of the world one day
will wake up. And I would be the first-1 hope I will not be
alive-to ,fmd, because of the pushiness of the Zionists, that
Jews would be made the scapegoat. This is not the first
time in history, although you had nothing to do with
certain ills of the world. Oh, they say, “Those Jews, they
have always been at the base of mischief.” YOU are a
minority in the world and you have created a world
problem. Good Lord, every day when you take the paper
you see nothing except the question of Zionism. Ten,
ftiteen, twenty per cent of the space in the papers, and you
are 16 millions or so in the world. People are fed up. The
whole world over they are fed up.

166. Have we not seen what happened after the First
World War partitioning-partitions
that backfired? Have we
not witnessed what happened before the Second World War
was over, what partition has caused in trouble, in wars such
as in Korea, in Viet-Nam, in Palestine? I do not know
whether it might not one day, unless the world Powers get
wise, do so in Germany, which was partitioned.
167.. If the Zionists are imbued with the desire for
peace-we are not such simpletons. You and I, Mr. President, are laymen in matters military, but we know and
everybody knows that frontiers with five miles more or five
miles less count for nothing with sophisticated modern
weaponry, with missiles, with supersonic planes-such
planes as the one you downed, the U-2, you remember-I
19

173. I have to talk in an unorthodox manner, not in
prepared pre-fabricated speeches or responses, as I often
find we are doing here. What shall we do? I hear rumblings
that you gentlemen are going to create a study group.
Remember what Clemenceau said at one time. He said that
if you want to kill an item or a subject, create a committee
and refer that item to that committee. There will be a study
group. There will be people studying, seeking ways and
means whether resolution 242 (1967) implied “the” territories or “territories”
occupied. That is why we are going in
circles until we get dizzy.

they would have been received with open arms. But they
wanted a flag; they wanted a State; they wanted exploitation; they wanted development. And they talk of the
economic advantages they are bestowing on those Arabs
who happen to remain in Palestine, under their authority.
179. We do not live by bread alone. Progress is not
necessarily human; it may be inhuman.
180. One day you will suffer-I am not saying this by way
of prophecy, because it will come from within, when you
get too drunk with power and wealth. And you are
soliciting contributions from all over the world. I now show
you a publication some Jews have sent me. They are against
the Zionists. I am not going to read all this. These are Jews:
“Neturei Karta of U.S.A. (Guardians of the Holy City)“. I
now quote them: “Zionist propaganda-clever, sustained,
well-financed”. Can anyone refute that? And Jews wrote
this, not Baroody. It says:

174. There will be no peace-and I humbly say that as one
who had hoped that there would be world peace after two
world wars-as long as we have adopted the old pattern of
power politics and balance of power, with all due respect to
countries, big and small. Because after all the small
countries ape the big countries, unfortunately so. There is
no hope for peace, let me warn you, unless the two major
Powers come to some agreement. We do not want you to
coerce, to bring pressure, because we are against pressure.
To bring pressure? I say, no. To persuade the Zionists that
it is neither in their interests nor in the interests of world
peace to keep plugging for what they have done.

“Zionist propaganda-clever, sustained, well-fmancedhas succeeded in misleading many Americans, Jews and
non-Jews alike.” And if you let them, they will do the
same thing in the Soviet Union.

175. After all, the Zionists are no exception. They are
enamoured of power. I mentioned three things in one of
my speeches in the General Assembly, when U Thant asked
me to speak on the twentieth anniversary of the Declaration of Human Rights. Three things that people tight
for-not equal rights, they are privileges. More wealth than
my neighbour. The Zionists are wealthy. They have a
thousand millionaires going to Israel, each one pledging a
million dollars. That is a billion dollars. What for? To put it
in the bank there? To exploit the occupied lands-laying
one’s hands on the land, as we say in Arabic.

“We, as Jews, therefore find it necessary to declare
solemnly:
“(1) Jews do not need a State of their own in our time.
The very establishment of such a modem ‘Jewish’ state is
a grave violation of Jewish tradition and law . . .“.
I shall not read the whole paragraph.
“(2) Jews are enjoined by their religious laws to be
loyal to the country of which they are citizens.”

176. The second thing that enamours people is power.
And the Zionists are drunk with power. They are no
exception. They are human. And then, when there is
power, glory-glory, glory, hallelujah.

181. I once asked a couple of Senators-I shall not name
them, for I do not want to embarrass them; I had known
one of them for many years-“Are you an American or an
Israeli? ” One said, “I am a’Jew, and I am for Israel. l3ut I
am an American.” I said, “How can you split loyalty?”
And the other Senator told me the same thing. I am not
making this up.

177. Seventy-five thousand marched yesterday in the
streets of New York and the Ambassador of Israel to the
United States saluted the parade. United States, open the
doors of New York, draw out a charter and call it “Jew
York”. I wiIl live here and eat kosher food with you. You
sent them to us so that in the long run they and we suffer.
Not I personally, but the common people. Not Mr. Tekosh,
not the leaders of Israel, because when things get hot it is
the influential and the wealthy that give their heels to the
air, as they had done in Germany and as they had done
elsewhere, whether Jew or Gentile. And I am talking simply
from humanitarian motives. Jews are human beings. We do
not want to see them suffer. But we do not want to see
them not only tread on our toes but exploit us. Why are we
afraid of exploitation? Well, I remember I came to this
country in 1939 and I asked a banker, out of curiosity, “Do
the Jews here in this town, where they are great in number,
own real estate? ” He told me, “No, they like to be liquid.”
After 33 years almost three quarters of the skyscrapers are
theirs. More power to them.

182. The publication continues:
“(3) Jews, who are loyal to their faith and tradition,
have nothing to do with Zionist-sponsored
boycotts
against individual enterprises or against entire nations. . . .
“Zionist politicians and their fellow travellers do not
speak for the Jewish people: indeed, the Zionist conspiracy against Jewish tradition and law makes zionismand all its activities and entities-the arch-enemy of the
Jewish people today.”
183. And one last word-time
is running short, but, after
all, I remember us staying here much later on other
questions not of the same momentous impact as this
question of the Middle East. I should like to touch upon
the religious argument. Mr. Tekoah has time and again
said-and I remember Mr. Eban saying the same thing when
he used to orate in the General Assembly, and other

178. The Zionists could have gone peacefully to Palestine.
If they had really been motivated by religious sentiment,
20

colleagues of his have done likewise in this very Council“God gave us Palestine”. I have reminded them that
Palestine was inhabited by Semites-the Canaanites, who
were related to the old Hebrews. The word “Jew” derives
from the fourth son of Jacob, whose name was Judah. That
is why they had been called Hebrews: “Abara”. I may be
corrected, but I believe “abara” means to cross: they
crossed the land and rivers, the “Abranein”, the Hebrews.
They conquered Jericho. I think it was Joshua who took
Jericho. Jerusalem already existed. It was so named before
they came to Palestine-I mean our Jews. Leave aside the
Kazar Jews, who came from Europe and were converted to
Judaism in the eighth century. They had nothing to do with
the area. It was called “Yuru Salim”. “Salim”, “Shalom”,
“Salem”-they
are all from the same root.

Nile Valley.. So we should cross the Canal.” And, as I have
said, maybe you will discover that someone wrote parts of
the Talmud in Khaybar, which is in Saudi Arabia, so it will
be considered hallowed land. WeIl, these rationalizations
and excuses are not valid.
190. And you, Mr. Tekoah and Mr. Eban, you are all well
educated. You know in your innermost hearts that these
are gimmicks, as the Americans say, that are used in order
to brainwash
and indoctrinate-who?
The simpleminded-those of deep faith. In fairness to you, faith for
what? To go and flock there so that you may use them for
the development of Asia, Africa and eventuaUy Europe.
YOU want to use them. The Rothschilds and the Montagues.
I think the Montagues Anglicized their name. In my
younger days they were the governors of the Bank of
England. I have heard-and my colleague from the United
Kingdom can correct me, he is young-that 90 members of
Parliament, more or less, are Jews. Here in the United
States they do not have to be Jews. Seventy-eight senators
brandish the flag of Israel over the Congress of the United
States. Why do you not, my good friend from the United
States, make New York the 51st state and you will see how
many Zionists will come here. The pressure from us wit1 be
relieved, and you may put the Star of David as the Slst
star. What is wrong with that? You had 13 stars during the
Confederacy and then you took Texas from the Mexicans
and you bought Louisiana from the French under the
Louisiana Purchase. Why do you laugh? I would like to
laugh with you to relieve the tension, because it is a tense
situation.

184. The Zionists claim Jerusalem, and Jerusalem had
existed before our Jews-who do not claim to be political
Zionists but are spiritual Zionists, like those people I had
quoted.
185. That is the geographical argument. The religious
argument is, “God gave us Palestine, the Holy Land.” And
they know that Israel and Judah existed a thousand or so
years before Christ as small enclaves, and then the Romans
came. I am not going to go into the history of the area. But
one thing is certain: God does not parcel out land to any
one people. If He did, He would himself be a discriminator.
And then King David, who is the Prophet of all of us in the
area-“Nabi Daoud”, as we call him in Arabic-said, “The
earth is the Lord’s and the fulness thereof’. And some of
you speak here of resolution 242 (1967) as though it is
Moses’ eleventh Commandment. What is this whole chicanery, if I may use the term? Whom are we fooling? Not
ourselves. You are all gentlemen of high intellect. If you
were not, your Governments would not have sent you here
to fill one of the most important posts in diplomacy,
representative at the United Nations.

191. Neither by the religious argument nor by what you
call the democratic argument can the Israelis claim authority over that land. All they want is peace for economic
exploitation. That is why they do not want to withdraw.
They have invested money in the Golan Heights; they have
invested money in Sinai; they have been thinking of
building canals through Egyptian territories. They want to
use Arab labour there, which is cheaper. That is what they
want. Mr. Tekoah says there is nothing wrong in this
“because our standard of living is higher”. So what about
the standard of living? Look at where there is a high
standard of living. Look at the hot pants. Look at the
permissiveness of progress. Progress does not mean civilization or culture. It may mean deterioration and decadence, and we do not want decadence in our midst. It will
come to us, perhaps, sooner or later. We have had enough
of decadence.

186. There happen to be three monotheistic religions:
Judaism, Christianity and Islam. And Jerusalem-the Holy
Land, as many call it-is holy to the three religions.
187. By what yardstick do you talk here about democracy, democracy, democracy? By what democratic yardstick should 16 million Jews have the land and 600 or 700
million Moslems not have the land, and one billion
Christians have no authority over the land? By what
democratic process?

192. If you want to live with us as Jews, you are welcome.
But to lord it over us. . . . It is not for Baroody to say, but
there are young men whom I saw and it breaks my heart to
see that they have been aroused by the Palestinian youth,
and one day they will make it difficult for our own
Governments. They will revolt and anarchy will rule. What
will happen to the oil? What will happen to the markets?
They may go up in flames. No one knows what might
happen-so
that the Zionists may interpret resolution
242 (1967) the way they want. That is the crux Of the
question. So please do not read chapter and verse to US
from prefabricated replies. You are a gentleman who should
know what the truth is in your innermost heart. I stand to
be corrected if I am wrong.

188. And now the Zionists are using Judaism-a noble
religion, mind you-as the motivation for political and
economic ends. “And God gave us Palestine”. Show us the
title deeds; show us the seal. You now say that the United
Nations did not create you. Who created you?
189. “YOU retrieved the land you had lost”. And I have
told YOU that the original Jews hailed from I-Jr of the
Chaldees. What will prevent you from expanding to Western
Iraq one day, saying, “Oh, Abraham, the patriarch of us
all”-and he happens to be the patriarch of the Moslems
too-“came
from there, and therefore it is hallowed land.
We should have Western Iraq.” Or “At one time Moses”he was an Egyptian, mind you; you’ forget that-“was
in the
21

193. Excuse me, Mr. President, for having taken so much
of the Council’s time. Perhaps I have taken advantage of the
personal rapport and friendship that you have with me, so I
beg your pardon. At the same time, I apologize to the
members of the Council for having tried their indulgence,
and if I have in any way, directly or indirectly, touched the
susceptibilities of colleagues, it was not meant to hurt
them. I think that sometimes the truth is like salt on a
wound, and remember that salt is a good antiseptic for a
wound.

who spoke about a continuous process of boundary
expansions and changes in the Middle East. What the
representative of Egypt has failed to understand, to
remember and to base himself on, in his words, is that in
the relations between Israel and the Arab States there have
never until now been State boundaries. There was a period
of truce in 1948, which was followed by a longer period of
19 years of an armistice. During the period of truce, we
were separated by truce lines. During the armistice regime
the lines were armistice demarcation lines, and now we are
separated by cease-fire lines. Those are all military provisional lines. It is precisely because of the absence of State
boundaries in the Middle East until now that the entire
world, I think, expects that the Arab States and Israel will
finally reach agreement determining where the secure and
recognized State boundaries would be.

194. The PRESIDENT (translation from Russian): Before
calling on the next speaker on the list of those who wish to
speak in exercise of the right of reply, I should like to make
a comment as representative of the SOVIET UNION. The
distinguished representative of Saudi Arabia has made very
convincing, I would say sincere and convincing, appeals to
the great Powers. But, as an old friend, I would ask and
advise him to address his appeals instead to the patrons of
Israel. We are not among their number.

198. We are still waiting for an indication on the part of
Egypt and other Arab Governments that they are ready to
enter into negotiations to reach such agreement.

195. Speaking as PRESIDENT, I call on the representative
of Israel, for the second time, to speak next in exercise of
his right of reply.

199. Finally, as the representative of Egypt attributed to
Israel various aspirations regarding the ultimate location of
these State boundaries, I would simply suggest to him that
he look up another article of our good friend, Hassinin
Heykal, a very close confidant, I believe, of Egypt’s
President, who in AZ Ahram of 2 February 1968, wrote as
follows:

196. Mr. TEKOAH (Israel): As you know, Mr. President, I
asked to be allowed to exercise my right of reply before I
realized that the speaker who preceded me would take the
floor. I sm not in the habit of reacting to his statements. I
leave it to his Arab colleagues to take care of them. As
always, his pronouncement was the most convincing testimony of what Israel confronts and why Israel has to act in
defence of its rights as it does.

“What could prevent us from stating that the secure and
recognized boundaries are one Jewish synagogue in Tel
Aviv and 10 metres around it? ”

197. I should simply like to make one observation
regarding the statement by the representative of Egypt,

T%e meeting rose at 7.20 p.m.

22
Litho

in United

Nations,

New York

Price:

$U.S. 2.00 (or equivalent

in other

currencies)

73-82001-May

1979-2,200
