S/PV.8431

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8431st meeting

Tuesday, 18 December 2018, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Cordova Soria
Mr. Wu Haitao
Mr. Edjang Nnaga
Mr. Amde
Mrs. Gueguen
Mr. Tumysh
Mr. Albanai
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Polyanskiy
Mr. Orrenius Skau
Mr. Allen
Mr. Hunter

Agenda
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South Sudan (covering the period from
2 September to 30 November 2018) (S/2018/1103)

.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-44649 (E)
*1844649*

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and
South Sudan
Report of the Secretary-General on South
Sudan (covering the period from 2 September
to 30 November 2018) (S/2018/1103)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representative of South Sudan to
participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Jean-Pierre
Lacroix, Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, and Ms. Pramila Patten, Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict.
Ms. Patten is joining today’s meeting via video
tele-conference from London.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2018/1103, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on South Sudan, covering the period
from 2 September to 30 November.
At today’s meeting, the Security Council will hear
briefings from Mr. Lacroix, Ms. Patten and Ms. Joanna
Wronecka, Ambassador and Permanent Representative
of Poland, in her capacity as Chair of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan.
I now give the floor to Mr. Lacroix.
Mr. Lacroix: I thank you, Sir, for the opportunity
to brief the Security Council on the Secretary-General’s
report on South Sudan (S/2018/1103), as well as on the
peace process and the situation on the ground.
We are encouraged to report that, since the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, there has
been a significant improvement in the general security
situation in the country and the number of incidents
2/25

18/12/2018

among signatory parties has decreased. Commanders
on the ground have reached out to one another, with
and without the facilitation of the United Nations, and
confidence-building measures have been initiated. That
has led to the reopening of roads, the free movement of
civilians, the movement of Government and opposition
groups in areas under the other’s control and the
beginning of the return of some displaced populations
to their areas of origin.
In Upper Nile, routes between Malakal and
Renk and from Fangak to Tonga have been reopened.
According to humanitarian partners in Bunj, Maban
county, South Sudan People’s Defence Forces (SSPDF),
formerly the Sudan People’s Liberation Army, met with
their pro-Machar Sudan People’s Liberation Army in
Opposition (SPLA-IO) counterparts in Beneshowa
and agreed to work together to ensure the unhindered
movement of civilians in their respective areas of
control. Similar arrangements were also agreed in a
trilateral arrangement with the pro-Lam Akol National
Democratic Alliance in the area. In Jonglei, as a result
of similar meetings between the parties, there are
reports that trade resumed from Ayod to Canal and
from Wau to Pagong and Mogok. In Central Equatoria,
a United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
patrol to Mugwo and Morobo in the Yei River area
observed the return of populations from refugee camps
to both places. In greater Bahr El-Ghazal, local state
authorities in Raja town allowed opposition fighters
to return, visit their families and interact with local
authorities. On 8 December, after negotiations between
SSPDF and pro-Machar forces in greater Bagari, road
corridors between Wau town and greater Bagari were
formally opened.
Despite those positive developments, sporadic
clashes also took place, indicating that improvements
remain fragile. Between 4 and 6 December, the proTaban Deng-aligned forces allegedly carried out an
attack on pro-Machar forces in Bil, Guit county, which
resulted in 21 casualties. There are reports of fighting
between the SSPDF and the non-signatory group, the
National Salvation Front, in the Yei/Amadi area. We
also have serious concerns about the attacks against
civilians that continue unabated. More rape cases were
reported following the abhorrent incidents of rape and
sexual assault in areas along Nhialdiu and Guit roads
near Bentiu. Intercommunal violence and criminality
continue to affect the civilian population in general,
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

and women and children in particular, the latter being
the most vulnerable among civilians.
With regard to the horrific rapes in Bentiu,
UNMISS proactively held urgent meetings with
authorities and urged them to take immediate action
to protect women and girls in the area and to hold
the perpetrators of those terrible crimes to account.
UNMISS peacekeepers immediately sent patrols to the
area to provide a protective presence and the UNMISS
human rights team has launched an investigation to
identify the perpetrators. UNMISS engineers are also
clearing foliage from the sides of the road so attackers
will find it harder to conceal their presence. The
Mission has also been urging armed forces in the area
to guarantee command and control over their troops so
as to ensure that rogue elements within their ranks are
not involved in such criminal acts.
The humanitarian situation in the country remains
of grave concern and is a direct consequence of
the conflict. Attacks on humanitarian workers, the
dangers posed to them and the impediments created
by the parties to the conflict are unacceptable. We
remain deeply concerned about the two UNMISS staff
members arrested in 2014, whose whereabouts remain
unknown. It is incumbent upon all parties, in particular
the Government, to ensure a safer and more conducive
environment for humanitarian workers who work
tirelessly to deliver assistance to the most vulnerable of
South Sudanese civilians.
We condemn in the strongest terms the continued
prevalence of sexual violence, of which the recent
attacks in Unity are a stark reminder. Such brutality
is indefensible and the parties must spare no effort in
bringing to justice all those who were responsible for
those atrocities. There can be no meaningful peace
without an end to and accountability for the brutalizing
of innocent civilians. However, that is an issue against
which the international community must also continue
to speak out and remind the parties that with such
prevalent impunity, South Sudan will not be able to
find the place it deserves in the community of nations.
The responsibility to sustain the momentum in
the implementation of the agreement lies solely with
the parties. The positivity generated by the return of
many of the committees and commissions to Juba,
including opposition personnel, is mitigated by their
delays and the lack of substantive discussions so far.
The National Pre-Transitional Committee, the highest-

S/PV. 8431

level implementation committee, has met but, most
recently, failed to achieve a quorum. The Independent
Boundary Commission, which is charged with settling
the critical issue of state boundaries and the subsequent
implementation of the Agreement within them during
the transition period, is yet to meet, although the
Technical Boundaries Committee met in Juba and
discussed modalities before adjourning for the year.
The security-related committees have made little
visible progress, with discussions mainly focusing on
the cantonment of military forces, their sustainment and
subsequent reintegration process, rather than on a more
holistic approach to security-sector reform, focusing on
the requirements for a national army that is right-sized,
affordable, depoliticized and focused on preserving the
territorial integrity of South Sudan against external
threat. They are expected to meet again this week in
Juba and it is nonetheless encouraging that, over the
past weekend, some representatives of SPLA-IO and the
South Sudan Opposition Alliance are reported to have
returned to Juba without force protection to participate
in those meetings.
The initial pessimism and outright rejection of the
national dialogue by the opposition have transitioned
into cautious optimism since President Kiir stepped
down as convener. The national dialogue steering
committee has advanced as an independent and more
credible and transparent mechanism. As a result, the
opposition parties suspicious of the process have begun to
indicate possible willingness to engage in proceedings.
However, we should be under no illusion that the
participation of opposition groups in any subnational or
community-level dialogue remains largely contingent
upon the prospects they see for themselves within the
implementation of the peace agreement at the national
level. It is essential that the parties continue to build
confidence and show the political will to work together
to ensure a protective and inclusive environment that
will allow all South Sudanese stakeholders, including
civil society, women and youth, to meaningfully engage
in the full implementation of the agreement.
Moving forward, we strongly believe that there
are two critical benchmarks that must be given top
priority during the pre-transition period, which
ends in May 2019. First, the parties must come to a
comprehensive agreement on the security sector and on
the establishment of transitional security arrangements.
That is necessary to build confidence among the parties
and to ensure the return and permanent presence of all

18-446493/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the opposition in Juba. A security agreement will be
needed to be communicated within the ranks and to
reassure the commanders and combatants about their
future. Without those, the institutions of transition,
even when established, are unlikely to be functional.
Incidents are likely to occur and the peace process
will remain fragile. I would like to encourage the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD)
to prioritize the finalization of the negotiations,
which the United Nations stands ready to support.
Secondly, a new Chair of the Joint Monitoring and
Evaluation Commission (JMEC) also needs urgently
to be appointed to shepherd the critical pre-transition
negotiations and bring the architecture of the peace
process to start substantive political preparations for
the transition.
We have been made aware of the IGAD Chiefs
of Defence forces proposal to increase the strength
of the Regional Protection Force (RPF) to support
the transitional security arrangements which, as I
mentioned, are yet to be agreed upon by the parties.
The proposal recommends that the Sudan, Uganda,
Somalia and Djibouti be added as troop-contributing
countries to the UNMISS RPF. We have taken note
of that proposal, which we understand will soon be
communicated to the Security Council.
On that issue, I would like to stress that the United
Nations continues to commend the active role of the
countries of the region, IGAD and the African Union,
which made possible the conclusion of the Revitalized
Agreement, and we are fully committed to supporting
its implementation as required and mandated by the
Council. With regard to a possible reconfiguration
of the UNMISS military component, I would like to
reiterate some of the principles that we currently uphold
with respect to all of our peacekeeping operations.
First, the reconfiguration of UNMISS to support
the transition must be preceded by the finalization of
the agreement on transitional security arrangements,
including a clear definition of the tasks that UNMISS
would need to perform, which will then allow us to
identify the capabilities required, their strength, and
possible additional resources needed by the Mission.
The RPF is a constituent part of UNMISS, and we will
have to consider the totality of the Force requirements
for its tasking.
Secondly, unity of command within all blue
helmets cannot be compromised. There can only be one
4/25

18/12/2018

UNMISS force to implement the Mission’s mandate,
and one chain of command for the force.
Thirdly, as a United Nations force mandated by
the Security Council, all future troop-contributing
countries to be considered must satisfy United Nations
standards in terms of training, equipment, human rights
vetting, and political neutrality and impartiality.
Last but certainly not least, in the light of the dire
humanitarian situation and the continued plight of
civilians, additional tasks that UNMISS could be asked
to perform to support the peace process should not be
at the operational or political cost of performing its
protection functions, which remain absolutely essential
in the current environment. In that regard, UNMISS
will need to continue to dedicate adequate resources
to its protection tasks in order to fully implement its
mandate.
In conclusion, as we find ourselves almost to
the day exactly five years after the beginning of this
conflict, I would like to re-emphasize our key message
to the Council here today. The chance for peace in
South Sudan has been created. More progress has
been made in the past four months than in the previous
four years. We need to acknowledge that new political
reality and commend the parties, IGAD and the
region for their efforts and achievement. Nonetheless,
the peace process is not yet assessed as being fully
sustainable and irreversible and will need positive
engagement and compromise from the parties and
continued reinforcement if it is to deliver genuine hope
and relief to the suffering South Sudanese populations.
I also need to reiterate the imperative for IGAD and the
African Union to continue their efforts in support of the
peace process, and I reconfirm the commitment of the
United Nations to assist their efforts.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Lacroix for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Patten.
Ms. Patten: I appreciate this opportunity to brief
the Council on the situation in South Sudan.
The harrowing reports in November of the brutal
mass rapes of women and girls in Bentiu while on their
way to a food distribution site have sent shock waves
around the world. The facts and details of the perpetrators
and those who bear command responsibility for this
latest incident are still being investigated by the United
Nations team on the ground. National authorities have
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

also opened investigations headed by the Minister for
Gender, Child and Social Welfare, deployed to Bentiu
since 15 December. In the course of the investigations,
it is crucial that the Government ensure that victims
and witnesses are fully protected and do not face any
reprisal for coming forward.
Although the investigations are still ongoing, what
is clear is that this latest attack in Bentiu is part of a
systematic trend and pattern of sexual violence that
has escalated dramatically in 2018, despite recent
recommitments by South Sudan’s leaders to a cessation
of hostilities and a revitalized peace agreement.
Since 2013 in particular, we have witnessed
systematic patterns of sexual violence, primarily
against women and girls, as well as reported incidents
against men and boys. Sexual violence remains rampant
in the country, and it is used as part of a strategy to
degrade, shame and humiliate both the victims and
communities, often along ethnic and/or political lines.
Sexual violence has also been used as a driver of forced
displacement and as a tactic and weapon of war by all
the parties to the conflict.
In 2018, there has been a clear and alarming
increase in the documented number of cases and
victims of conflict-related sexual violence. The number
of victims in 2018 has already reached 1,157, making
it the highest number recorded in the past three years.
By comparison, in 2017 the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) documented 196 cases of
conflict-related sexual violence, affecting 128 women
and 68 girls.

S/PV. 8431

fully consistent with the report released on 10 July by
UNMISS and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, on the indiscriminate
attacks against civilians in southern Unity state, which
found that at least 120 women and girls, including
pregnant and lactating mothers, and girls as young
as four years old, had been raped and gangraped. For
example, a six-year-old girl was gang raped by eight
soldiers who continued to violate her even as she
became unconscious. Some victims were raped to
death, not surviving the sexual violence to which they
were subjected. Additionally, the report documented
the abduction of 132 women and girls for purposes of
sexual slavery.
In October, in the Western Equatoria region,
43 cases of rape and gang rape and the abduction of
505 women and 63 girls for the purpose of sexual
slavery were documented. Survivors were reportedly
tied to trees and gang raped until they passed out. In
SPLA-in-Opposition (Machar) transit points or bases,
women and girls as young as 12 were lined up for the
commanders to choose as “wives”. Those who were
not picked were left for other fighters and subjected to
repeated rapes. Sexual violence stopped only after the
abducted women agreed to become fighters, which is
consistent with information that part of the objective
of the SPLA-in-Opposition (Machar) was to forcibly
recruit fighters to bolster its ranks.

In July, I heard the first-hand testimony of
survivors and witnesses during my mission to South
Sudan. I visited protection of civilians sites in Juba
and Malakal and spoke with women who had survived
sexual violence and continue to live in situations of
acute vulnerability, both inside and outside the camps.
Their accounts indicate clearly that rape was used
by the attackers to exercise power over their victims,
impose extreme humiliation, destroy their dignity and
fracture families and the community.

Sexual violence leaves deep physical, psychological
and social scars. All the survivors I met desperately
asked for greater support to restore their physical
and psychological well-being. They face enormous
challenges to receiving appropriate medical treatment.
The humanitarian facilities that provide treatment are
often inaccessible. Given the collapse of health-care
systems due to the conflict, those living in rural areas
often have nowhere to go. The total breakdown of State
public and service-provision infrastructure means that
women and girls are at a greater risk of unplanned
pregnancy and severe sexual and reproductive injuries.
They are also prone to contracting sexually transmitted
infections, including HIV/AIDS.

In a protection of civilians site in Juba, I met with
a group of deeply traumatized women and men who
had recently arrived from Unity state, displaced as a
result of the military offensives of April and May. The
survivors recounted brutal and shocking patterns of
conflict-related sexual violence occurring alongside
other atrocity crimes. Their horrific testimonies were

In addition to the physical effects, feelings of
shame and stigma and rejection by spouses and family
members add to their distress. I met several women
with their babies born of rape and saw how they are set
on a trajectory of poverty, discrimination and violence.
All the survivors demanded that the perpetrators be
brought to justice and punished. They all felt that this

18-446495/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

was the only way to break the cycle of violence and
secure a peaceful future for South Sudan.
During my visit, I met with the Minister of Defence,
the Minister in the Office of the President and other
senior Government officials, all of whom acknowledged
the high prevalence of sexual violence and reiterated
that these violations are unacceptable and shameful.
However, this sense of outrage must be translated into
concrete action. A zero-tolerance policy cannot be
underpinned by a zero-consequence reality. The fact is
that rape in South Sudan is still largely cost free for the
perpetrator. Until we raise the cost and consequences for
committing, commanding or condoning these crimes,
we will not end the prevailing impunity that is a driver
of sexual violence. Therefore, consistent prosecution
and accountability of perpetrators is central to the
prevention of sexual violence in South Sudan.
At the same time, the international community
must be prepared to use all the compliance tools at its
disposal to send the signal of our zero tolerance for
these crimes. We cannot underestimate the importance
of sanctions and other targeted measures as a potential
deterrent for perpetrators and would-be perpetrators.
On 24 October 2018, I briefed the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan. In terms of those who
are believed to bear command responsibility for sexual
violence in the southern Unity offensives of July 2018,
verified reports of the United Nations mainly attribute
responsibility for violations to the national army — the
SPLA — and SPLA-in-Opposition (Deng) and youth
militia. It is believed that three senior officials are
among those who bear command responsibility.
Regarding the Western Equatoria offensives of October
2018, three commanders of the SPLA-in-Opposition
(Machar) identified by victims and witnesses are
believed to bear command responsibility.
In follow up to my briefing to the Sanctions
Committee, yesterday my Office, together with the
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner on
Human rights, submitted a confidential joint letter to
the Chair of the South Sudan Sanctions Committee that
includes the names of the three alleged perpetrators
from southern Unity state, for the Committee’s
consideration. I wish to conclude with the following
recommendations.
First, I urge the Government of South Sudan to
rigorously and expeditiously investigate all incidents
6/25

18/12/2018

of sexual violence, share the results with the United
Nations, and hold all perpetrators accountable
regardless of rank or seniority. Furthermore, I urge
the Government to establish the Hybrid Court of South
Sudan without delay and to ensure that it prosecutes
all cases of sexual violence. My Office stands ready
to provide support to the Government of South Sudan,
pursuant to the joint communiqué signed with President
Salva Kiir in 2014.
Secondly, I urge the Security Council to consistently
apply sanctions for crimes of sexual violence as a
critical aspect of deterrence and prevention, utilizing
the stand-alone designation criteria on sexual violence
that are articulated in resolution 2428 (2018).
Thirdly, comprehensive services must be provided
to survivors, especially medical and psychosocial care.
I urge all parties to the conflict to grant unhindered
access to humanitarian organizations and UNMISS
to reach victims and displaced civilians. I also call on
the international community to maintain resources for
life-saving services.
Finally, given the scale and consequences of these
violations, conflict-related sexual violence should
be addressed as a central aspect of the revitalized
peace agreement of 2018. This includes ensuring that
crimes of sexual violence are not amnestied and that
victims receive the reparations and livelihood support
that they need to rebuild their lives. Sexual violence
considerations should be part of any peacebuilding,
reconstruction, transitional-justice and truth-andreconciliation arrangements.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Patten
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Wronecka.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): In my capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015), concerning South Sudan, I
have the honour to brief the members of the Council
on developments in the Committee since my previous
briefing in this Chamber in May (see S/PV.8249).
I intend to first focus on the visit that I made to
South Sudan and the region in June. Secondly, I will
elaborate on the recommendations set out in the interim
report of the Panel of Experts, which was submitted
to the Committee on 2 November and published as a
document of the Security Council on 26 November
(S/2018/1049). The Committee had an opportunity
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

to engage with the Coordinator of the Panel on its
findings and recommendations on 15 November, and
subsequently to consider various follow-up actions in
an effort aimed at improving the implementation and
effectiveness of the regime. Thirdly, I will provide a
brief overview of the developments in the Committee
since my briefing in May.
From 16 to 26 June, I had the opportunity to visit
South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda and Kenya, in that
order. The objective of my visit was threefold: first, to
obtain a first-hand account of the implementation of the
sanctions measures; secondly, to provide information
for the Council’s review of the mandate, pursuant to
paragraph 2 of resolution 2353 (2017): and, thirdly,
to strengthen dialogue and engagement with the
States concerned regarding the implementation of the
measures, including any needs for assistance. The visit
coincided with the review period set out in resolution
2418 (2018) and preceded the imposition of the arms
embargo on 13 July, through the adoption of resolution
2428 (2018). My visit also preceded the adoption by the
parties of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution
of the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan,
concluded on 12 September.
Before turning to the Committee’s actions taken
in response to the observations made during my visit,
I would like to highlight the key issues observed and
raised during the visit.
First, with regard to the humanitarian and human
rights situation in South Sudan, I personally observed
the pressing need for us all to continue our efforts
to find a resolution to the crisis in the country. I am
particularly concerned about the environment in which
South Sudan’s next generation is growing up and the
effect of the acts of sexual violence on the victims and
their communities. I acknowledge and support the calls
by community leaders for accountability in that regard.
I further wish to recall the press statement of
7 December (SC/13611), in which members condemned
in the strongest terms the brutal incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence against women near Bentiu in
northern South Sudan in recent weeks. Members also
underlined the Council’s request for the Government of
South Sudan to condemn the attacks, to ensure that a
full investigation is carried out and those responsible
are held accountable, and to break the cycle of
impunity for sexual and gender-based violence. I also
recall that the members of the Council reaffirmed

S/PV. 8431

their willingness to impose targeted sanctions against
individuals or entities responsible for actions or policies
that threaten the peace, security or stability of South
Sudan including the targeting of civilians, including
women and children, through the commission of acts
of violence, including killing, maiming, torture or rape
or other sexual violence. The Committee counts on the
Panel of Experts to present to it relevant information
in that regard. It also counts on all parties and all
Member States to ensure cooperation with the Panel, in
accordance with paragraph 21 of resolution 2428 (2018).
In connection with paragraph 22 of resolution 2428
(2018), as Chair of the Committee, I will also continue
to strengthen the Committee’s cooperation with the
Special Representatives of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict and on Sexual Violence
in Conflict and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights in order to facilitate
the sharing of information relevant to the Committee’s
mandate. In relation to paragraphs 18 and 25 of the
same resolution, I will also continue to engage with
the Ceasefire and Transitional Security Arrangements
Monitoring Mechanism and the Joint Monitoring
and Evaluation Commission to allow for information
sharing.
Secondly, I am encouraged by the progress made on
the political front since my visit. I strongly hope that the
Revitalized Agreement signed on 12 September signals
the beginning of the end of the cycles of violence that
have permeated the lives of the people of South Sudan,
such that the parties honour their responsibilities in
respecting and implementing the Agreement. As noted
by many counterparts during my visit, that struggle for
power has resulted in inconceivable suffering and must
end without any further delay.
Support from the region and the wider international
community will remain essential for the establishment
of peace and stability in the country. I am encouraged
by the common ground identified in my conversations
with senior officials in the countries neighbouring
South Sudan. I remain hopeful that the international
community will stand united in implementing the
sanctions regime as part of its overall efforts to support
the people of South Sudan in achieving peace, stability
and security.
In that regard, I intend to continue my efforts
to clarify to the leadership of South Sudan that the
sanctions regime has been put in place in support of the

18-446497/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

political process to achieve peace. With regard to the
region, I propose to continue efforts to encourage the
regional States to keep the Committee informed of their
efforts to implement the sanctions in place, including
by submitting implementation reports on the targeted
measures of the asset freeze and the travel ban and
inspection reports in connection with the newly imposed
arms embargo, as well as by observing the procedures in
place for notifying and seeking exemption requests for
the three sanctions measures in place concerning South
Sudan. Without its full implementation, the sanctions
regime risks losing its significance and impact, and the
Committee its legitimacy, to the potential detriment of
the civilian population of South Sudan.
In an effort to further strengthen the
implementation of the sanctions regime, and in
response to the recommendations emanating from my
visit, the Committee agreed to eight different actions,
one of which was the briefing to inform the Council
of my observations during the June visit to the four
countries. The Committee also agreed to write to the
four countries, thanking them for their hospitality and
reflecting the matters discussed in connection with the
South Sudan sanctions regime. It further agreed to send
a note verbale to all Member States, reminding them of
their obligations under the expanded sanctions regime
established by resolution 2206 (2015), which was
transmitted on 23 November, and to convene a briefing
open to all Member States to allow those not members
to also engage with the Committee. It is envisaged that
that meeting will take place in January 2019.
The Committee also invited the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict to brief it again this year, pursuant
to her last briefing in March last year, and to ask the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General for
Children and Armed Conflict to keep the Committee
informed of relevant information, pursuant to her
last briefing in April. In reference to paragraph 22
of resolution 2428 (2018), the Committee invited the
Assistant Secretary-General for Human Rights to
also share any relevant information with it. Lastly, in
connection with paragraph 18 of the same resolution, the
Committee invited the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) to brief the Committee following
the next IGAD summit on South Sudan.
Let me now turn to the second focus of my
briefing — the interim report of the Panel of Experts
on South Sudan submitted pursuant to resolution
8/25

18/12/2018

2428 (2018) and, more specifically, the actions taken
by the Committee in response to the findings and
recommendations of the Panel.
I will not repeat in detail the contents of the
interim report given that it was transmitted to the
members of the Council and is now available as
document S/2018/1049. Let me remind members only
that the Panel of Experts has presented its findings with
regard to the political and security situation in South
Sudan; violations of human rights and international
humanitarian law; obstruction of humanitarian and
peacekeeping missions; the illicit exploitation of natural
resources by armed groups or criminal networks; arms
procurement and the transfer of arms and provision of
related technical assistance in violation of resolution
2428 (2018); and the implementation of the sanctions
measures in South Sudan, which, for the first time in
such a report, include the arms embargo introduced in
July of this year, in addition to the targeted financial
and travel measures that were originally imposed by
resolution 2206 (2015) in March 2015. Based on its
findings, the Panel made five recommendations in its
interim report, consistent with the Panel’s conclusion
that, in spite of the progress on the political front, the
patterns of the conflict reported to the Council earlier
have persisted, with a humanitarian crisis, violence and
instability still prevailing across most of the country.
The recommendations and subsequent Committee
actions were the following.
First, with the aim of ensuring the effective
implementation of the arms embargo introduced by
resolution 2428 (2018), the Panel recommended that the
Committee develop and make available on its website
an Implementation Assistance Notice to assist Member
States in the implementation of the arms embargo,
including by further detailing the process by which
exemptions may be sought. The Committee agreed to
revert to that recommendation upon the adoption of
updated guidelines for the conduct of its work, which
will take into account the provisions of resolution 2428
(2018).
Secondly, in order to ensure compliance with the
targeted measures in place against the eight individuals
who are currently on the sanctions list under resolution
2206 (2015) and in order to ensure their effectiveness,
the Panel recommended that the Committee issue a press
release reiterating the obligation of all Member States
to enforce the travel ban and the asset-freeze measures
on individuals designated pursuant to resolution 2206
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

(2015) and extended by resolution 2428 (2018). The
Committee agreed in principle to that recommendation
and is currently considering a draft text of the press
release.
The Committee took note of the third and fourth
recommendations of the Panel, which were aimed at
discouraging the misappropriation and diversion of
public resources posing a risk to the peace, security and
stability of South Sudan, and at preventing the illicit
exploitation of or trade in natural resources in ways that
may destabilize South Sudan, as described in paragraph
14(j) of resolution 2428 (2018).
In its fifth, and final, recommendation, the Panel
encouraged the Committee to urge the immediate release
of all child soldiers and recommended strengthening
coordination among all relevant agencies working on
the demobilization of child soldiers, especially during
the cantonment process described in the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in South
Sudan. The Committee agreed to that recommendation
and, in the interest of harmonizing the work and
messaging of the Council’s subsidiary organs, intends
to discuss a text upon the adoption of new conclusions
on children and armed conflict in South Sudan by
the Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict,
which are currently under discussion.
Turning to the third, and final, element of my
statement today, I would like to provide a brief
overview of the Committee’s work since my briefing to
the Council in May.
On 25 July, in connection with the establishment
of an arms embargo on the territory of South Sudan
pursuant to paragraph 4 of resolution 2428 (2018) and in
the absence of an arms expert on the Panel and related
reporting on the situation of arms in South Sudan at the
time, the Committee received a briefing by the United
Nations Mine Action Service.
During informal consultations held on 27 August,
the Committee discussed the report of the Chair’s
visit to South Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda and Kenya,
which was elaborated on earlier. On 14 September, the
Committee heard a presentation by the Coordinator of
the Panel of Experts pursuant to resolution 2428 (2018)
in connection with the Panel’s work programme.
On 24 October, the Committee received a briefing
by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict. Again, the chilling

S/PV. 8431

facts presented to the Committee on that occasion,
including the finding that the number of victims of
sexual and gender-based crimes recorded in 2018 at
that time constituted the highest number recorded in
the past three years, underscore the imminent need
for the Government of South Sudan to act now, put an
end to those brutal crimes and hold accountable those
responsible for crimes committed as soon as possible.
On 15 November, the Committee heard a
presentation by the Coordinator of the Panel of
Experts on the Panel’s interim report and discussed the
recommendations contained therein, which was also
earlier elaborated on.
Lastly, I wish to acknowledge and welcome the
increased engagement by countries in the region in
contacting the Committee to seek clarification on the
measures and related exemption procedures. Since
my previous briefing, the Committee received, for
the first time, two exemption requests from Member
States for travel by designated individuals, both of
which were approved. Information supporting one such
request allowed the Committee to update information
in the sanctions list under resolution 2206 (2015) on
21 November, thereby facilitating the implementation
by Member States of the targeted measures on the
sanctioned individual Gabriel Jok Riak Makol.
Looking ahead, apart from the regular Committee
meetings, it is my intention to continue convening
informal informals for interested members of the
Committee at the Permanent Mission of Poland.
Also, other than the usual work of the Committee, I
aim to return to South Sudan in 2019, and possibly
to neighbouring countries, on which occasion I truly
hope to see some progress in the daily lives, safety and
security of South Sudan’s people, as a reflection of the
high-level progress made on the political front.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Mr. Hunter (United States of America): We thank
Under-Secretary-General Lacroix for his updates on
the situation in South Sudan, which, along with the
briefing by Special Representative Patten, reminds us
why the international community needs to strengthen
calls for accountability for horrific atrocities. We thank
them very much for their work and for giving a voice to

18-446499/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

those who cannot always speak for themselves. We also
greatly welcome the briefing by Ambassador Wronecka
and thank her for her tireless work on the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
2206 (2015), on South Sudan sanctions, which now, more
than ever, is a key pillar of the Council’s commitment to
peace in South Sudan.
Let me begin by commending the Council for
reaching consensus on the Security Council press
statement of 7 December (SC/13611) regarding the
horrific sexual and gender-based violence in northern
South Sudan. The United States remains deeply
concerned, particularly by the inadequate response
from the Government of South Sudan. Although those
incidents of coordinated sexual violence occurred
weeks ago, the Government has neither condemned the
attacks nor held anyone accountable.
Three months since the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in
South Sudan, the international community and, most
important, the South Sudanese people have seen some
progress on the implementation of pre-transitional
arrangements. As we said last month in this Chamber
(see S/PV.8403), we welcome the reduction in
violent clashes and the formation of some of the
pre-transitional committees. We are pleased to observe
some confidence-building measures between the
parties, including at the local level. The inclusion of
women’s groups, civil-society organizations and other
stakeholders in the implementation is a positive step,
and we urge the effort to continue and to be even more
expansive. However, the United States is concerned that
the parties have shown little progress in negotiating
a solution on security arrangements. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to commit fully to making
those tough decisions, which proved to be a significant
obstacle to the implementation of the previous peace
agreement.
In the spirit of implementing the peace agreement,
the United States reiterates its call for the release of
those who have been arbitrarily detained and the
prisoners of war. Many individuals, including Peter
Biar Ajak, remain imprisoned without the ability to
seek legal review of their detentions. The failure to
release all political detainees runs counter to the letter
and spirit of the latest peace agreement and previous
agreements.
10/25

18/12/2018

The United States strongly condemns the
bureaucratic and physical impediments imposed by
the Government of South Sudan, opposition forces and
others that prevent the United Nations and humanitarian
and development actors from providing life-saving
assistance and security to the most vulnerable. Even one
incident of the Government restricting the movement
of United Nations personnel is one too many. But 19
incidents, as reported in the Secretary-General’s latest
report (S/2018/1103), is completely unacceptable. The
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS)
must have full and unrestricted movement throughout
South Sudan, in accordance with the status of forces
agreement between the United Nations and the
Government of the Republic of South Sudan concerning
the United Nations Mission in South Sudan.
With nearly 2 million South Sudanese internally
displaced and over 6 million facing food insecurity,
denying access to those working to protect and save
lives is unconscionable. Most parts of the country will
continue to face severe hunger through January, with
famine a real possibility in many conflict-affected areas,
should insecurity or access denial continue to disrupt
the delivery of emergency assistance to people in need.
We call on the Government and opposition groups
to provide the United Nations, ceasefire monitors,
humanitarian actors and development partners with
free and unhindered access throughout the entirety of
South Sudan in order to provide life-saving assistance
to all those in need.
South Sudan’s taxation policies present another
impediment to humanitarian and development actors.
We noted the recent taxation circular published on
5 December, and we urge the Government to institute a
temporary waiver on taxes and fees for all international
staff of humanitarian and development organizations
for the duration of the crisis.
If the recent peace agreement is to have any chance
of success, South Sudan’s leaders must be willing to
break the cycle of impunity for those responsible for
atrocities, as well as any actors who fuel the conflict
in South Sudan. In support of the commitment of the
United States to peace and stability in South Sudan, on
14 December the United States Government imposed
sanctions on three individuals. Sanctions were imposed
on Israel Ziv and Obac William Olawo for their roles in
expanding or extending the conflict, and on Gregory
Vasili for actions that have undermined peace, stability
and security in South Sudan.
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

We commend regional actors for their leadership
and commitment to supporting peace in South Sudan,
and we are counting on the region to maintain pressure
on the parties to implement the peace agreement and
uphold the United Nations arms embargo aimed at
preventing the flow of weapons into South Sudan, which
would further destabilize the country and the region.
In conclusion, the United States continues to
support the people of South Sudan and their aspirations
for freedom, peace and prosperity. We call on South
Sudan’s leaders to make those aspirations a reality by
implementing the revitalized Peace Agreement, ending
the cycle of impunity for perpetrators of atrocities and
allowing UNMISS to operate freely, in accordance
with its mandate.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): We thank the Under
Secretary-General, Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix, and the
Special Representative of the Secretary-General,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their respective briefings.
We would also like to add our voice in condemning
in the strongest terms the incidents of sexual and
gender-based violence against women near Bentiu, and
we call for the perpetrators of those egregious crimes to
be held to account as a matter of urgency. We hope that
the expressed commitments of the parties to combating
sexual and gender-based violence will be translated
into action by conducting a thorough investigation into
the incidents.
The prolonged conflict in South Sudan has brought
about huge devastation in the country and exacerbated
the already dire humanitarian situation and the economy
there. Pondering over who to blame or dwelling on the
failures of past attempts to bring about peace will not
get South Sudan out of the quagmire it is in or bring a
sigh of relief to its people, who have suffered so much
for far too long. As the Secretary-General has rightly
pointed out in his 90-day report,
“the Revitalized Agreement provides an
unparalleled opportunity to end the conflict in
South Sudan” (S/2018/1103, para. 71).
It was concerted regional efforts and the dedication
of the parties to turning the tide that led to the signing
of the revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan. That is
exactly why we have been stressing for quite some time
and reiterate once more before we finish our tenure on
the Council, that all of our collective efforts should be

S/PV. 8431

directed towards ensuring the full implementation of
this revised Agreement.
We truly appreciate — in fact, we are extremely
grateful for — the steadfastness of the African Union
and the United Nations, including at the highest
leadership level, to work hand in hand with the region in
order to resolve the conflict. We have been advocating
throughout our tenure on the Council for the three
organizations to maintain their unity of purpose in the
search for lasting peace in South Sudan, and we would
be the first to affirm that the progress achieved so far in
the peace process would not have been possible without
that generous support. Maintaining that unity of purpose
still remains vital during the post-revitalization period.
The support of the two organizations should be extended
to the implementation of the revised Agreement as well.
It is unfortunate that the same cannot be said of
the Security Council. In recent memory the Council
did not heed the call of the region protesting the
timing of the imposition of an arms embargo on South
Sudan. We have all heard, either directly or indirectly,
including from the Secretariat, the repercussions of that
unfortunate timing. Yet again, the Council failed to
pronounce itself on the revised peace agreement. That
is very regrettable, and we have not seen a valid reason
for that. Ironically, the Council’s members are the first
to demand its implementation and ask the region to do
more. That raises the question how it can be reasonable
for an entity to fiercely advocate the implementation of
an agreement when that entity did not go the extra mile
in welcoming the agreement in the first place.
Of course, we understand that there may have been
doubts among Council members with regard to the
commitment of the parties to the implementation of the
agreement, but being a bystander is not the solution. We
believe that the Security Council has a particular role
to play in supporting the implementation of the revised
peace agreement. The Intergovernmental Authority
on Development summit requested the support of the
Council with regard to ensuring the full deployment of
the Regional Protection Force and a further review of
its mandate so that it might be in a better position to
support the implementation of the revised agreement.
We still hope that the Council will respond positively
to that request.
As I said earlier, I would like to make it clear that
it was mainly the determination of the parties to be
flexible and accommodate one another that led to the

18-4464911/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

signing of the peace agreement. The positive trends
and developments that followed the peace agreement
have further strengthened our faith in the parties and
encouraged us to redouble our efforts in supporting
them to fully implement the revised agreement. We are
also encouraged by the confidence-building measures
being taken by the parties. However, time is not on
our side. The parties should accelerate their efforts so
as to compensate for the time lost. By implementing
the pre-transitional period tasks, as stipulated in the
peace agreement, the implementation matrix would
lay the foundations for a successful transitional period.
The longer the pre-transitional period, the smaller
the chances will be of making meaningful progress.
We hope that the parties will stay committed to the
agreement signed, and we encourage them to do so.
In conclusion, ensuring the further reduction of
conflict and the total cessation of hostilities is critically
important. That will facilitate the unhindered delivery
of much-needed humanitarian assistance. The parties
need to prioritize the implementation of the permanent
ceasefire on the cessation of hostilities, the protection
of civilians and humanitarian access. The restoration
of a permanent ceasefire is essential for unhindered
access to the affected population and the safety of
humanitarian personnel and aid delivery.
Mrs. Gueguen (France) (spoke in French): At
the outset, I wish to express our gratitude to the three
briefers for their enlightening briefings and for their
ongoing commitment to peace in South Sudan.
I would like to focus on three main points: the peace
process, the humanitarian situation and the Regional
Protection Force of the United Nations Mission in
South Sudan (UNMISS). My first point is that we must
give the peace process a full chance.
The signing on 12 September of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan presents a historic opportunity
to emerge from the conflict. That opportunity must
not be missed. The current pre-transitional phase is a
moment that is crucial to the success of the Revitalized
Agreement. The pre-transitional structures have
begun to meet, which is a step in the right direction.
The ceasefire is generally being respected, which is
encouraging.
But I want to be very clear — the hardest part of the
process still lies ahead. The pre-transitional institutions
must become fully operational in order to ensure the
12/25

18/12/2018

success of the pre-transitional phase and the formation
of the new unitary Government. Those institutions must,
during the transition phase, set security arrangements,
which include the cantonment of armed groups and the
training of the joint security force. Further anticipated
efforts include concrete progress on the drafting of a
transitional constitution and the redrawing of internal
borders. France encourages the parties to address all of
those issues head-on and to seek political agreement on
them. The ongoing suffering of people underlines the
urgent need to move forward in the peace process.
That brings me to my second point, concerning our
outrage at the suffering of the peoples of South Sudan,
especially the women. The humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains unbearable. The figures speak for
themselves — 2 million people have been displaced,
7 million people in South Sudan require humanitarian
assistance and nearly half of the population suffers
from severe malnutrition. South Sudan is now the
most dangerous country for humanitarian workers.
That seriously hinders the delivery of humanitarian
assistance. We must therefore do everything we can to
protect humanitarian workers, who continue to be the
target of attacks, and we must continue our efforts to
ensure that those heinous crimes do not go unpunished.
It is also essential that we ensure safe and unimpeded
humanitarian access throughout the country so that we
can meet the extensive needs of the population. The
efforts of UNMISS to protect humanitarian convoys
are crucial in that regard. The Council can count on
France’s constant commitment to those issues.
The level of sexual violence that Ms. Patten has
described is also deeply appalling. The mass rapes
that took place in Bentiu at the end of November are
atrocious, and those despicable crimes must not go
unpunished. Following the Council’s press statement
of 7 December (SC/13611), France condemns in the
strongest terms the use of sexual violence against
civilians, which can constitute a war crime, especially
when it used as a tactic of war. My delegation calls
once again on the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan to fully
mobilize itself against those who commit and sponsor
sexual violence. South Sudan must take all necessary
measures to ensure that the crimes committed do not go
unpunished. That is essential if we are to put an end to
the cycle of violence and counter-violence, and it is key
to any national reconciliation process. In that regard,
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the establishment and operationalization of a hybrid
court for South Sudan must remain a priority.
My third point concerns the Regional Protection
Force. I would like once again to commend the valuable
contribution that the region — in particular the Sudan
and Uganda — has made to the peace process in South
Sudan. The Revitalized Agreement would not have
been possible without the investment and commitment
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD). We understand that the IGAD countries want
to participate in the implementation of the Revitalized
Agreement by deploying troops to the UNMISS
Regional Protection Force, but we must recognize that
the safe return of opposition leaders and the cantonment
of armed groups can be ensured only through a political
agreement. The deployment of additional troops to the
UNMISS Regional Protection Force cannot compensate
for the lack of political agreement on those issues.
We must also ensure that we maintain a single chain
of command within UNMISS and that the Regional
Protection Force is part of that chain of command.
Finally, the rules and requirements — particularly those
relating to capacity, training, the prevention of sexual
violence, the provision of care for victims of sexual
violence and the respect for human rights — must apply
to the troops deployed in the Regional Protection Force.
In conclusion, I would like to pay tribute to the
women and men who have been deployed in UNMISS
for their important work, particularly in the area of
civilian protection.
Mr. Tumysh (Kazakhstan): We thank UnderSecretary-General Jean-Pierre Lacroix and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Pramila Patten, for their
comprehensive updates on the latest developments
in South Sudan. We also commend Ambassador
Wronecka for her enormous efforts and valuable
insights on the work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan. We also welcome Ambassador Akuei Bona
Malwal, Permanent Representative of South Sudan,
to the Chamber. Additionally, we welcome the 90-day
report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1103), as well
as his monthly assessment on obstructions facing the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
would now like to make some observations.
First, with regard to the political situation, we
acknowledge that the signing on 12 September of

S/PV. 8431

the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was a major
step towards peace in the country. We welcome the
progress made with regard to the implementation that
Agreement and have high expectations that it will lay
the foundations for durable peace and stability in the
country. We therefore call on the signatory parties in
South Sudan to demonstrate a spirit of compromise
and genuine political will to implement, in a timely
manner, the outstanding provisions of the Revitalized
Agreement on cantonment and the integration of forces,
in order to ensure that the Agreement will not meet the
fate of other failed attempts at peace in South Sudan.
We also call on the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD), the African Union, the United
Nations and neighbouring States to continue their
concerted efforts to build trust and confidence among
the parties and assist in the implementation of the
provisions of the Revitalized Peace Agreement, as
the representative of Ethiopia has just proposed. We
welcome the signing of the Revitalized Agreement by
the members of the African Union Ad Hoc Committee
on South Sudan on 21 November and reiterate the need
to urge non-signatories to join the peace process.
Secondly, despite the overall improvement in the
security situation and the reduction in the number of
human rights violations, the humanitarian situation in
South Sudan remains fragile and volatile. Civilians,
especially women and children, continue to bear
the brunt of the crisis, suffering from violence,
displacement and critical levels of food insecurity. We
therefore call on all parties in South Sudan to implement
the permanent cessation of hostilities, completely stop
the violence by bringing their forces under control,
halt attacks against humanitarian workers and strictly
comply with international humanitarian law.
We strongly condemn the series of attacks against
women in Bentiu between 19 and 29 November. It
is important to investigate those attacks and hold
perpetrators accountable. We also encourage donor
countries to provide adequate and sustained funding
for humanitarian assistance to the population. In order
to genuinely address the fragile situation in South
Sudan, humanitarian assistance should be accompanied
by development efforts and the addressing of the root
causes of conflict. Conflict can be somewhat resolved
or minimized by reducing tribal rivalries, implementing
confidence-building measures among local populations,
providing basic services and increasing job creation.

18-4464913/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Women and youth need to play an important role in
those processes.
Thirdly, regarding UNMISS, our delegation
is concerned that some violations of the status-offorces agreement persist. We call on all parties to the
conflict to take all appropriate measures to ensure the
safety, security and freedom of movement of UNMISS
personnel. We welcome the initiative of the IGAD
countries to participate in the Regional Protection
Force. At the same time, we underscore the importance
of preserving a unified command and control structure
of UNMISS and ensuring that the Regional Protection
Force complies with United Nations standards.
In conclusion, Kazakhstan commends UNMISS for
implementing its mandated tasks under very difficult
circumstances, and we reaffirm our unfailing support
for its efforts aimed at achieving peace and stability in
South Sudan.
Mr. Allen (United Kingdom): Five years ago,
fighting broke out in South Sudan. Over the past five
years, nearly 400,000 people have been killed. Lives
have been lost and futures have ended. But in 2018 we
have seen significant progress. A year ago, the peace
process was stalled. In September, the parties signed the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict
in the Republic of South Sudan. We have consistently
welcomed that as an important step towards bringing
peace to South Sudan. We also welcome the efforts
made by the region, the parties to the conflict and our
colleagues in the United Nations for their contribution
to securing this important progress.
We have been encouraged by the drop in the
overall levels of violence in South Sudan as a sign that
the Agreement is beginning to make life better for the
people of South Sudan, although we are concerned by
the continuing outbreaks of fighting and breaches of
the ceasefire. In addition, although progress has been
slow, we are also encouraged by the progress made
by the parties in establishing some of the technical
committees and processes required to implement the
agreement.
Our sincere hope is that 2019 will see this progress
sustained and built upon, but we should be under no
illusion that this will be easy. We must not divert
our attention from South Sudan. More than ever, the
unified action of the Council to support peace is needed
to translate hope into real change.
14/25

18/12/2018

The Council has made clear its revulsion at the acts
of rape and brutalization of women and girls reported
near Bentiu last month and set out so movingly by
Special Representative of the Secretary-General Patten
in this Chamber today. This is, sadly, not unprecedented
in South Sudan, as seen by the reports that 900 civilians
were abducted in Western Equatoria between April
and August, included for sexual slavery. The sexual
violence against girls as young as 8 near Bentiu was
truly horrendous and was committed while the parties
claimed to be implementing peace. The victims deserve
accountability for the crimes committed against them.
Full and thorough investigations must be carried out,
support provided to survivors and those responsible
held to account. Like Special Representative of the
Secretary-General Patten, we urge that the hybrid court
be established as soon as possible.
The Council, for its part, should continue to
maintain the pressure on those who act against peace
in South Sudan and end the culture of impunity that
has endured for too long. All Member States should
uphold in full the sanctions in place already as a clear
message that those who work against peace will not
succeed. In that light, I welcome the briefing delivered
by Ambassador Wronecka and her activism over the
past year.
Despite the commitments made in the 12 September
peace deal, humanitarian workers continue to face
obstruction to the delivery of aid by all sides. The
2019 humanitarian response plan released last week
highlights the fact that 7.1 million people will need
humanitarian assistance in 2019. It is absolutely vital
that free and unhindered access be granted. However,
restrictions continue. A total of 52 access incidents were
reported in November; 39 per cent of these involved
violence against humanitarian personnel and assets,
more than a third caused by State groups. We call on the
leaders of South Sudan to allow humanitarian work to
proceed unencumbered by threat or hindrance in 2019.
Our partners in the region have been key to
the progress seen in 2018. We applaud the role of
the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
and its members in this respect and urge continued
engagement, as it is essential to helping ensure that this
latest Agreement delivers a lasting peace. We reiterate
our call on the region to engage fully with the United
Nations and the members of the Security Council on any
proposal to deploy troops in support of the Agreement.
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

I would echo the comments made by the SecretaryGeneral in his report (S/2018/1103) that any deployment
of troops by the region in support of the deal cannot
compensate for the lack of political action by the South
Sudanese on security issues. We support the comments
made by Under-Secretary-General Lacroix during our
most recent meeting (see S/PV.8403) that any forces
deployed to support would need to be under a unified
United Nations chain of command and comply with
United Nations peacekeeping standards.
In conclusion, I hope that we can look to 2019
with optimism for the people of South Sudan. To make
a reality of their hopes for peace and progress, their
leaders will need to demonstrate their commitment and
will to implement the agreement. This includes putting
the mechanisms for peace in place, including finalizing
the transitional security arrangements and forming
the revitalized Transitional Government of National
Unity, as highlighted by the Secretary-General. It must
also include putting an end to the fighting completely;
prioritizing protection from violence, including sexual
violence, for the people of South Sudan; pursuing
accountability for those that commit violations;
and enabling unhindered access to the delivery of
humanitarian assistance for all those in need and for
human rights and Ceasefire and Transitional Security
Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism monitors, who
were blocked several times in November. If we make
progress on these fronts, the people of South Sudan
may begin to believe that their hopes can be realized.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We
are grateful to you, Mr. President, for having convened
this meeting and for the important briefings of Mr. JeanPierre Lacroix, Ms. Pramila Patten and Ambassador
Joanna Wronecka.
Just a few months after the signing of the revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan and its ratification by the
transitional national legislature, we await expectantly
the initial measures to carry out pre-transition tasks.
We deem positive the meetings held by the various
committees over the past two months, including that
of the National Pre-Transitional Committee and the
National Constitutional Amendment Committee, which
agreed on working modalities and the manner in which
pre-transition tasks will be carried out. We would also
highlight the joint visits of the South Sudan People’s
Defence Forces and the Sudan People’s Liberation
Movement/Army (SPLM/A) in Opposition. We believe

S/PV. 8431

that these are important steps in fostering the trust
needed to build sustainable peace in South Sudan.
Nevertheless, we must express our concern at
the fact that the ceasefire is not being fully respected
throughout the territory of South Sudan, especially in
Yei, Central Equatoria and the Wau triangle, in Western
Bahr el-Ghazal. We stress the importance of regional
forums for dialogue and the need for them to be
inclusive and impartial. We call on opposition groups to
participate in national dialogue, as true peace in South
Sudan will be possible only through political will and
inclusive dialogue involving all parties.
We support the call of the Secretary-General on the
leaders of South Sudan to establish transitional security
arrangements and to form the revitalized Government
of National Unity.
With regard to the formation of the Government,
we deplore and call for a review of the appointment of
Mr. Malek Reuben Riak as Deputy Minister of Defence,
as he is the subject of sanctions imposed by the Council
and must be accountable to justice for having armed
groups of young people involved in atrocity crimes.
Peru condemns most emphatically the countless
cases of sexual violence against women and girls in
South Sudan, as described for us by Ms. Patten. The
recent brutal attacks on more than 150 women and girls
in an area close to Bentiu, in the northern part of South
Sudan, cannot go unpunished. This is happening in
a context of ongoing violations of human rights. The
United Nations country task force on monitoring and
reporting on children in armed conflict documented 90
grave incidents, including recruitment, sexual violence,
killings and mutilations.
For this reason, we believe that the visit of the
Working Group on Children and Armed Conflict last
November was timely. We hope that it will contribute
to the South Sudanese authorities making progress
and drawing up a comprehensive action plan aimed at
putting an end to the grave violations of human rights
taking place in that country. We also deplore the gravity
of the humanitarian situation and condemn the acts of
violence committed against humanitarian workers and
their assets.
We were saddened by the deaths of three
humanitarian workers in September and October,
and call on the Government of South Sudan to make
every effort to put an end to the violence and restore

18-4464915/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

the dignity of women and girls, as well as punish those
responsible for these atrocity crimes. We are certain
that the setting up of a hybrid court will contribute to
peace and reconciliation. We also note with concern
violations of the sanctions imposed by the Council,
including the arms embargo imposed last July. We
call on the countries responsible for these violations,
as indicated by Ambassador Wronecka, to meet their
obligations.
We acknowledge the work done by the United
Nations Mission in South Sudan, particularly the
positive results achieved by the mobile courts, which
will contribute to ensuring justice and security in
protection-of-civilians sites.
Lastly, I would highlight the work and the efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) and the African Union. We reiterate the
importance of the Council remaining united in the
process of ensuring the support and political followup necessary to continue making progress in the South
Sudanese peace process, as well as that of working
closely with the African Union and IGAD.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to join other
colleagues in thanking the Under-Secretary-General for
Peacekeeping Operations, Mr. Lacroix, and the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General on Sexual
Violence in Conflict, Ms. Patten for their briefings. We
also thank the Secretary-General for his latest report on
South Sudan (S/2018/1103). We share its observations
and recommendations.
Allow me to complement my statement as Chair of
the Committee established pursuant to resolution 2206
(2015) concerning South Sudan with two additional
points on the political and security situation and the
situation of the civilian population.
Three months after the signing of the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan, we have seen some encouraging
developments. However, the peace process remains
fragile, and clashes between parties to the conflict still
occur. There must be an end to the violence. We call
on South Sudanese actors to immediately observe the
provisions of the cessation of hostilities agreement of
December 2017 and disengage and separate their forces.
We also believe that transitional security arrangements
need to be put in place without any further delay.
16/25

18/12/2018

We are deeply concerned about the recent reports
of the targeting of civilians and serious human rights
violations and abuses, some of which may amount to
war crimes and crimes against humanity. Poland is
appalled by the recent incidents of sexual violence
against women and girls near Bentiu. We call on all
parties in South Sudan to hold the perpetrators to
account and to ensure that transitional justice and
accountability mechanisms are put in place. We also
believe that the Security Council should stand ready to
impose targeted sanctions against those who threaten
the peace and stability of South Sudan and target the
civilian population, including those who are most
vulnerable — women and children.
Despite years of war and disappointment, the people
of South Sudan have faith in the Revitalized Agreement.
They believe that it may be a stepping stone towards
rebuilding their lives and putting the conflict behind
them. With the Revitalized Agreement, the leaders of
South Sudan have a unique opportunity to restore peace
and rebuild the country. It is their sole responsibility
to ensure the full and timely implementation of the
agreement. It also provides them with a chance to
demonstrate real commitment and political maturity
and — by proving that they are finally putting the
people of South Sudan first — to restore the confidence
of the international community.
Last but not least, let me seize this opportunity to
convey my country’s appreciation to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan and to the humanitarian actors
on the ground for their tireless efforts and sacrifice.
Mr. Edjang Nnaga (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, allow me to express my thanks
to the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Jean Pierre Lacroix, for the hard work
he has undertaken within the scope of his mandate
and especially for the excellent briefing he gave us
today. I am also grateful for the briefings delivered by
Ms. Pramila Patten and the Ambassador of Poland.
The Government of Equatorial Guinea welcomes
the recent joint field visits between the South Sudan
People’s Defence Forces and opposition forces. We
call on the Government of South Sudan to continue
organizing such joint visits to all areas of the country
in order to promote peace and reconciliation among the
South Sudanese people. That will enable the parties to
help silence the guns in South Sudan.
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

With regard to the conflict there, my country
welcomes the positive political atmosphere that has
prevailed in South Sudan since the signing of the
Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan in September.
We praise all parties to the conflict for their political
will and commitment. However, we are concerned
about the latest reports of sexual abuse against women
and girls. We strongly condemn those events and call
on the Government of South Sudan to identify the
perpetrators of these terrible actions and hold them
accountable.
We are also concerned about the humanitarian
situation, which remains precarious. That is why we
want to respectfully remind all parties involved that,
in addition to seeking peace, there is an obligation to
alleviate the humanitarian needs of the population,
who are facing poverty, food insecurity and a shortage
of basic services. The successful fulfilment of that
obligation will be achieved only if humanitarian
operations are facilitated and the threats and risks
faced by humanitarian organizations and their brave
personnel are eliminated. Attacks on humanitarian
workers are unacceptable.
I express my gratitude to the United Nations
Mission in South Sudan staff, the police and the
other organizations that work courageously to protect
civilians in vulnerable situations, facilitate the delivery
of humanitarian aid, protect human rights and support
the peace process. I once again commend the United
Nations team and non-governmental organizations
for their immense bravery and sacrifice in providing
humanitarian aid.
In conclusion, my Government thanks the
Special Envoy of the Intergovernmental Authority on
Development (IGAD) for his efforts in directing the
peace process and supporting the first steps of the
implementation process. We also commend the tireless
efforts of the Heads of State and Government of IGAD
for the steadfast manner in which they have guided the
peace process.
I express my sincere thanks to the Chairperson of
the African Union for his valuable efforts for peace in
South Sudan, and I offer him my country’s full support.
Mrs. Cordova Soria (Plurinational State of
Bolivia) (spoke in Spanish): We thank the UnderSecretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations,
Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix; Special Representative of

S/PV. 8431

the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten; and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka,
in her capacity as Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, for their detailed briefings on the current
situation in South Sudan.
The people of South Sudan have endured a long
and painful process until now. Today, we are witnessing
encouraging progress towards a political solution. That
is thanks mainly to the great commitment of the leaders
of neighbouring countries, regional organizations and
the parties involved. It is clear that the latter face
the main challenge in moving towards the proper
implementation of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan.
The signing of the Revitalized Agreement
represents a fundamental step towards peace in the
country. Despite major challenges, the Agreement
has allowed the ceasefire to be respected in most
of the South Sudanese territory; progress is being
made in the establishment of various committees and
mechanisms for the implementation of the agreement;
and macroeconomic indicators are becoming relatively
stable, as indicated by the Secretary-General in his
report (S/2018/1103). However, Ms. Patten’s report
leaves us deeply indignant, throwing a bucket of cold
water over the kindling of the cautious optimism that
we might have had for progress at the political level.
As long as the bodies of women and girls are seen as
spoils and weapons of war, there can be neither peace
nor justice nor a future.
Just as we recognize that the situation in South
Sudan remains complicated, we cannot but highlight
the positive achievements made. At the same time,
we must be clear that the road ahead — towards
the implementation of peace — will surely present
challenges that must be overcome with the political will
of the leaders of South Sudan. In the same vein, the
continued support of the Intergovernmental Authority
on Development (IGAD), the African Union and the
Security Council is fundamental to efforts to follow up
on implementation. Much effort has been invested in
the promotion of the political process, and it is therefore
vital to work together in harmony so as to continue
advancing towards the building of sustainable peace,
alongside justice, accountability and respect for human
rights, particularly those of women and girls.

18-4464917/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

As almost everyone in the Chamber has expressed
on several occasions, there is no other solution than
a political one. Dialogue aimed at addressing the
fundamental problems, reconciliation, capacitybuilding in several areas, support for development,
and the definition of security measures, inter alia, are
important steps to follow. The Agreement presents a
unique opportunity to address several of those problems
prior to, during and after the transition period. To that
end, the active participation of civil society, young people
and, of course, women is essential. We must continue
to work to encourage the presence and participation
of women in the implementation of the agreement and
reach at least 35 per cent of representation by women,
as established in the agreement.
Despite progress in the political field, it is undeniable
that the population is still affected by the terrible effects
of the conflict, especially on the humanitarian front.
There is a lack of basic services for the almost 2 million
displaced persons and refugees. The civilian population
also continues to fall victim of violent attacks. My
delegation condemns in the strongest possible terms
the sexual violence that more than 100 women and girls
recently fell victim to in northern South Sudan. Those
attacks are unacceptable and must be investigated, and
the perpetrators must be brought to justice. We urge the
parties to take concrete action in that regard. Impunity
when it comes to that kind of brutal action against the
civil population prevents the achievement of genuine
peace.
We thank the Special Representative on Sexual
Violence in Conflict for her efforts to shed light on
that issue and combat it. We reiterate our support for
the work that her Office is carrying out. As mentioned
in resolution 2428 (2018), the work of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015)
concerning South Sudan will be very important in that
regard.
The time has come for South Sudan to create an
environment of protection for women, to combat
sexual violence and to develop transitional justice in
the interests of accountability. In that connection, the
establishment of a hybrid tribunal, under the leadership
of the African Union, will be critical.
It is clear that, at this stage, all our efforts must be
directed towards the implementation of the Agreement.
The cooperation of the international community is
needed to mobilize political and financial resources
18/25

18/12/2018

to assist in the implementation of the Agreement.
Similarly, it is very important that the Security Council
remain united and work in harmony with the African
Union and IGAD, especially in restoring confidence
among the parties. We must therefore maintain a neutral
and constructive position. In order to do that, we must
coordinate our actions with those of the region. It is
also very important that the parties ensure an optimal
operational environment for the United Nations Mission
in Southern Sudan (UNMISS) and the humanitarian
workers, in compliance with international law and
international humanitarian law.
We reiterate our gratitude to the countries of
the region for the leadership that they have shown,
especially Ethiopia, the Sudan and Uganda, which
have made important progress in the political process
possible. Similarly, we emphasize and appreciate the
committed work of UNMISS.
Lastly, we thank IGAD and the African Union, in
particular, for the vital role they are playing in bringing
peace to South Sudan.
Mrs. Gregoire Van Haaren (Netherlands): On
behalf of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, Mr. Lacroix; Her Excellency Ms. Joanna
Wronecka; and the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict,
Ms. Pramila Patten, for their valuable briefings. We pay
tribute to the commitment of each one of them to the
promotion of peace, justice and development in South
Sudan.
It has been little over three months since the parties
to the conflict in South Sudan signed the Revitalized
Agreement on the Resolution of the Conflict in the
Republic of South Sudan. Since the signing, we have
been able to welcome some important developments. In
particular, we welcome the convening of pre-transitional
committees and mechanisms and the implementation of
confidence-building measures, such as joint field visits
and the release of some political prisoners. However, as
stated many times, the strength of a peace agreement
will be determined by its ability to deliver safety and
stability to the people of South Sudan. In that context,
we are concerned by the continuing ceasefire violations,
in particular around greater Baggari. In addition, the
recent attacks on civilians near Bentiu, where at least
125 women, including elderly and pregnant women and
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

minors, were raped within the space of one week, were
cowardly and horrendous.
These events represent a serious setback to the
peace process and demonstrate the ongoing need for
further progress on the following three points: first,
full implementation of the Peace Agreement; secondly,
accountability; and, thirdly, priority for the protection
of civilians by the United Nations Mission in South
Sudan (UNMISS).
My first point is about the need for the full
implementation of the peace agreement. That is the
only sustainable way to protect the people of South
Sudan, but as deadlines are slipping by, continued
action is necessary to maintain the existing momentum.
We therefore call for an immediate stop to the ongoing
fighting, the finalization of negotiations for the
transitional security arrangements and a greater effort
to reach the 35-per cent quota for women’s participation.
We also call on all sides to facilitate, and not frustrate,
humanitarian access and put an end to the bureaucratic
impediments that humanitarian actors currently face.
In addition, we look to the Intergovernmental
Authority on Development (IGAD) to continue to
demonstrate leadership and unite the international
community in order to provide the necessary support
and pressure needed during the implementation process.
The United Nations, the African Union, the African
Union High-level Ad Hoc Committee for South Sudan
and the European Union have stated their commitment
to supporting the process, and we sincerely hope IGAD
will seize that opportunity.
My second point is about the need for accountability.
There is a clear need to show that there are consequences
for those who continue to attack civilians, commit sexual
violence or violate human rights. It is the responsibilities
of the parties, in particular the Government of South
Sudan, to show leadership on that issue. That includes
holding perpetrators accountable and making concrete
progress towards the implementation of all of the chapter
V provisions of the Peace Agreement. In particular,
the Commission for Truth, Reconciliation and Healing
and the Hybrid Court for South Sudan are essential to
guaranteeing justice and reconciliation. At the same
time, we all have a responsibility to do what we can to
deter such heinous crimes. We remind everyone that the
Council has decided on a specific designation criterion
for sexual violence, and we reaffirm the readiness of
the Kingdom of the Netherlands to act on that criterion.

S/PV. 8431

That brings me to my third point, concerning
the ongoing need for the protection of civilians by
UNMISS. The ongoing sexual violence is a painful
reminder that UNMISS remains the primary source
of protection for the people of South Sudan. It also
demonstrates the importance of a robust, nimble and
forward-leaning presence by UNMISS outside the
protection-of-civilians sites. Equally important is close
coordination on security issues among UNMISS and
humanitarian actors and local communities, especially
women. The Kingdom of the Netherlands invites the
Secretary-General to proactively and consistently share
with the Council the steps that the Mission continues
to take to implement and sustain the lessons on those
issues.
In conclusion, an even greater, sustained and united
effort by all of us is necessary, but in the end, only the
leaders of South Sudan determine whether there will
be sustainable peace in the country. They told us that
they are serious about peace, and now we ask them to
show us.
Mr. Albanai (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): I would like
to thank the Under-Secretary-General for Peacekeeping
Operations, the Permanent Representative of Poland
and the Special Representative of the Secretary-General
on Sexual Violence in Conflict for their briefings.
Today, I will address the subject of the debate
from three perspectives: political developments, the
humanitarian situation and justice.
Our meeting today is different. Three months ago,
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan was signed
and the National Pre-Transitional Committee held
its meetings. That gave us hope that peace will be
sustained and the vicious cycle of the conflict in South
Sudan will be broken.
We welcome the meeting of the Special Envoy
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) with non-signatory parties to the agreement.
Those parties managed to join their forces in South
Sudan under State sovereignty and a unified command,
while they renamed the armed forces. All of that gives
us more hope that the mistakes of the past will not be
repeated, and that the country’s citizens should play the
major role in protecting their country, while the United
Nations and regional forces play a complementary role
in protecting its citizens.

18-4464919/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

Despite the positive political developments, the
humanitarian situation remains a major source of
concern. There are still more than 4 million displaced
persons and refugees even after the signing of the peace
Agreement. Food insecurity remains high in one of
the country’s most fertile regions, reminding us of the
importance of advancing the political solution while
simultaneously providing support to reconstruction,
development and the continued unimpeded delivery of
humanitarian assistance. In that connection, I welcome
yesterday’s announcement of a cooperation framework
between the United Nations and South Sudan for the
next three years.
I would like to recall the Arab-African Summit
held five years ago in Kuwait at which Kuwaiti and
South Sudanese officials agreed to launch a new phase
of development cooperation. The eruption of the war
in December 2013 prevented the implementation of the
agreement, and we hope that the transitional period will
now provide an opportunity to renew that cooperation.
We firmly condemn crimes of sexual violence in
conflict, whether in Wau state or anywhere else. We
look forward to achieving justice for the survivors
from those heinous crimes and holding the perpetrators
accountable. We thank our colleague the Permanent
Representative of South Sudan for stressing his
country’s commitment to holding the perpetrators
accountable, and we look forward to seeing the efforts
to end impunity continue, as was the case with the
perpetrators in the incident at the Terrain Hotel. The
courts play an important role in ensuring that citizens
feel that their country is stable, and that was the case
with the mobile court in Malakal, which recently
moved to Bentiu. We look forward to the launch of
the Hybrid Court. We also appreciate the central role
of Ms. Patten’s Office, in cooperation with the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, in
helping us fight violations of human rights law and
international humanitarian law, and in ensuring justice
for all.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank our
colleagues in the Ethiopian delegation for their efforts
to help neighbouring countries, including South Sudan,
during Ethiopia’s term on the Security Council. I also
thank our brothers in the Sudan for their prominent
role in helping to achieve peace for their brothers in
South Sudan, and the other States members of the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development for
20/25

18/12/2018

their exemplary modelling of coexistence and goodneighbourly relations this year.
Another issue I would like to address is that
today, 18 December, is International Arabic Language
Day. On this very day in 1973, the General Assembly
adopted resolution 3190 (XXVIII), by which Arabic
became an official language of the United Nations. I
would like to take this opportunity to express our deep
appreciation and gratitude to all of the interpreters and
translators in the United Nations, particularly those
working in the Arabic language services. They have
made an enormous contribution to bringing the voice
of my country and every Arab country in this Chamber
to the rest of the world, and we would like to express
our deep appreciation and respect for them.
Mr. Wu Haitao (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
would like to thank Under-Secretary-General Lacroix,
Special Representative Patten and Ambassador
Wronecka, Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, for
their briefings.
At the moment the situation in South Sudan remains
generally stable. The parties are working to implement
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and have
made progress. The ceasefire has taken hold in most
areas. In recent months, the Ceasefire and Transitional
Security Arrangements Monitoring Mechanism, the
National Pre-Transitional Committee and the National
Constitutional Amendment Committee have begun their
work. The Joint Defence Board, the Joint Transitional
Security Committee and the Strategic Defence and
Security Review Board have also been established as
security mechanisms. The South Sudanese Government
has mobilized resources and allocated funds to support
the implementation of the Agreement. Activities for
raising awareness about the Revitalized Agreement are
continuing across the country.
China welcomes the efforts and progress made by all
parties, including the Government. In the meantime, we
note that some opposition factions have not yet agreed
to support the Revitalized Agreement. Intercommunal
tensions persist and the humanitarian situation remains
serious. All of those issues pose challenges to long-term
peace in South Sudan. The international community
and the Security Council should be fully aware of the
complexity of the situation in South Sudan and should
provide the country with constructive assistance in
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

addressing the problems on the ground. The task now at
hand is implementing the Revitalized Agreement, and
the Security Council and the international community
should focus on the following two points to that end.
First, the political will of the South Sudanese
parties must be maintained, as it is critical to the
implementation of the Agreement. On the one hand, we
should fully respect the prerogative of the leadership
of South Sudan to deal with its own issues, encourage
the parties to use their initiative and avoid imposing
solutions on them. On the other hand, we should
continue to support the mediation efforts of regional
organizations such as the African Union and the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development, and
focus on helping the South Sudanese parties build
mutual trust, take on their commitments in earnest and
achieve a full cessation of hostilities. We agree with
the recommendations in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1103) that establishing the transitional security
arrangements and forming a transitional Government
should be priorities for the pre-transitional period.
That will be conducive to confidence-building and
maintaining the political will of the parties.
Secondly, international partners should work
quickly to provide South Sudan with assistance and
support. There is a great deal to be done in a country
emerging from a prolonged conflict. Implementing
the Revitalized Agreement and relaunching economic
development require a great deal of money and
support. We call on the international community to
provide funding for the Revitalized Agreement as
soon as possible. At the same time, we should step up
humanitarian assistance and economic support to South
Sudan, enhance its recovery and development capacity,
help it to rebuild and prioritize investments in sectors
such as agriculture, energy, infrastructure, education
and health so that people can enjoy peace dividends as
soon as possible.
China commends the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan for its significant contribution to
maintaining peace and stability in South Sudan and
supports the Mission in its continued implementation
of the tasks mandated by the Council’s resolutions in
support of South Sudan’s political and peace processes.
It has been China’s consistent position that
sanctions are a means, not an end. The Security
Council should be prudent in its use of sanctions
to ensure that the measures taken are helpful to the

S/PV. 8431

political settlement in South Sudan. China has always
supported South Sudan’s peace and development. In
line with our commitment made at the Beijing Summit
of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation, China has
provided the country with ¥300 million in aid and the
equivalent of ¥100 million in emergency humanitarian
food assistance. As always, China will continue to be
an active supporter and constructive participant in the
South Sudan peace process, and will play a constructive
role in South Sudan’s achievement of lasting peace and
sustainable development.
Mr. Orrenius Skau (Sweden): I thank UnderSecretary-General Lacroix and Ms. Pramila Patten,
Special Representative of the Secretary-General on
Sexual Violence in Conflict, for their briefings to the
Security Council today. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Wronecka for her briefing and for her
professional leadership of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning
South Sudan.
Three months have passed since the signing of
the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of the
Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan, which was
a watershed moment in returning South Sudan to a
path to peace and stability. We again commend the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
facilitators for that achievement. We are now seeing
promising steps being taken to implement it, albeit
behind schedule, and progress being made on the
various pre-transitional institutions and mechanisms.
We are also encouraged by signs that the ceasefire
has been upheld in most parts of South Sudan. I note
the assessment by the United Nations that the security
situation has significantly improved. The efforts by the
South Sudan People’s Defence Forces and the Sudan
People’s Liberation Movement/Army in Opposition to
open direct communication lines have contributed to
important confidence-building measures.
What is needed now is sustained political will on the
part of the parties to implement what has been agreed
on, including making progress on a comprehensive
agreement on security arrangements and engaging in
genuine peacebuilding and reconciliation. We agree
with the point made earlier today by the representative
of Ethiopia that it is now important to ensure that
the Council remains actively engaged in support of
the region, acting firmly on shortcomings but also,
and importantly, recognizing and acknowledging
progress when it is made. The Council can do better

18-4464921/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

18/12/2018

at recognizing progress as a means of contributing to
further progress.

so as to end the prevailing impunity, which is a driver
of sexual violence today.

The peace process remains fragile, however, and
fighting has continued in some parts of the country, with
unacceptable consequences for civilians. A complete
cessation of hostilities by all parties, the Government
and armed groups alike, must be unconditional in order
to enable a meaningful political process as we move
forward. There must be consequences for violations
of the Agreement. We welcome the region’s continued
engagement in monitoring its implementation and hope
that a new Chair of the Joint Monitoring and Evaluation
Commission will be appointed soon. Holding the parties
to account will be vital, and the United Nations and the
African Union must continue to support and engage in
the regional effort. As we advance the political process,
it will be essential to ensure the effective participation
of all stakeholders, including women, young people
and civil society. Gender issues are central to peace
and security, and we call on the parties to ensure that
the 35 per cent quota for women outlined in the peace
agreement is met, not just at the national and State level
but for all pre-transitional and transitional structures.

We remain very concerned about the grave
humanitarian situation, which is affected directly
and indirectly by the conflict. We call on the parties,
particularly the Transitional Government of National
Unity, to address the dangerous conditions facing
humanitarian workers. All impediments to the rapid,
safe and unhindered delivery of relief across South
Sudan must be removed. We commend the efforts of
UNMISS, the World Health Organization and other
humanitarian partners to conduct Ebola preparedness
contingency planning in response to the outbreak in the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Attacks on health
care continue to be reported from South Sudan. We
must redouble our efforts to implement the UNMISS
mandate and resolution 2286 (2016). The Arria Formula
meeting to be held on Friday will be an opportunity to
further discuss the matter with representatives of the
Sudan and other affected countries.

We welcome Special Representative Patten’s
engagement on South Sudan and thank her for her
efforts to break the cycle of impunity for sexual and
gender-based violence. I almost choked listening
to her moving accounts of the heinous sexual and
gender-based attacks on women near Bentiu in recent
weeks, which must be condemned in the strongest
terms. We very much welcome the Council’s swift and
clear statement (SC/13611) on those incidents, which
underline the critical importance of taking firm action
to advance accountability and bring those responsible
to justice, which in itself is also a way to prevent further
such attacks. The transitional justice mechanisms of
the peace agreement, including the Hybrid Court, are
important in that regard, and the United Nations Mission
in South Sudan (UNMISS) must be given access to
investigate alleged human rights violations and abuses.
In the face of such horrific acts of sexual violence
against women and girls as reported from Bentiu, the
Council must also act and consider targeted measures
against those responsible, in line with the stand-alone
sanctions criteria on sexual and gender-based violence.
We fully agree with Special Representative Patten
that we must raise the costs and consequences for
committing, commanding and condoning such crimes,
22/25

We fully agree with Ambassador Wronecka’s
assessment of her visit earlier this year, which is very
similar to the conclusions that Ambassador Skoog
arrived at following his visit last month in his capacity
as Chair of the Working Group on Children and Armed
Conflict. We also very much appreciate her efforts
to ensure the immediate release of all child soldiers,
as the conflict in South Sudan has had a devastating
effect on children there. The shocking recruitment and
use of children by armed groups or forces must come
to an end. Only today the Working Group adopted its
conclusions on children and armed conflict in South
Sudan, in which we welcomed the peace Agreement as
an opportunity to turn a corner and make the protection
of children a priority as the country moves forward.
In conclusion, as the implementation of the
Agreement is now heading in the right direction,
upholding that momentum will be crucial. All parties
must sustain their political will and make every effort
to translate commitments into reality. That also holds
true for the Security Council, which must remain
closely and constructively engaged and continue to
offer its united and active support to regional efforts.
Mr. Polyanskiy (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Under-Secretary-General JeanPierre Lacroix and Special Representative Pramila
Patten for their information on the progress of the
settlement in South Sudan. We took note of the briefing
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

by Ambassador Wronecka, Permanent Representative
of Poland and Chair of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South
Sudan, about that subsidiary body’s activity for the
second half of 2018.
The Russian Federation considers the signing on
12 September of the Revitalized Agreement on the
Resolution of the Conflict in South Sudan to be very
significant. What is most important is that the South
Sudanese parties showed a willingness to compromise
and a desire to settle their differences. We would again
like to pay tribute to the coordinated mediation efforts
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD), which initiated and ensured the resulting
productive negotiations in Khartoum between June and
August, as well as the signing of documents that were
crucial to the peace process. We greatly appreciate
the ongoing personal contribution by President Omer
Al-Bashir of the Sudan to the peace Agreement. We
note that the regional actors involved have continued
to maintain their united approach to the settlement in
South Sudan, which is essential to the future progress
of the peace process.
We welcome the desire of the Agreement’s
guarantors to assist in its implementation by providing
national contingents from the Sudan, Uganda, Djibouti
and Somalia to the Regional Protection Force. We see
that as an example of the realization in practice of the
principle of African solutions to African problems,
as well as an opportunity for effective cooperation
between the United Nations, its Security Council and
regional organizations. We are aware of the recent
contacts that have taken place between the Chiefs of
Staff of the IGAD countries on issues related to the
implementation of the Agreement, and we are ready to
consider substantive proposals from IGAD regarding
the Regional Protection Force.
We welcome the considerable progress that we
are beginning to see in implementing the Agreement,
including in that regard the formation and launch of the
operations of the structures and mechanisms provided
for in the Agreement. We consider it important that there
has been a considerable drop in the level of violence
and the numbers of human rights violations since the
Agreement was signed. We have noted the intention of
opposition leader Riek Machar to return to Juba at the
beginning of 2019 at the latest.

S/PV. 8431

We join the Secretary-General in his call to the
South Sudanese parties to finalize their agreements
on cantonment, the reintegration of former combatants
and other security-related issues. In our view, it is
only the full and comprehensive implementation of
the commitments that have been made that can help to
increase the trust between the parties and prevent them
from repeating the mistakes that occurred during the
settlement process in South Sudan in the past.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I thank Mr. Jean-Pierre Lacroix for his very
informative briefing on the evolving situation in South
Sudan and the implementation of the mandate of the
United Nations Mission in South Sudan (UNMISS). I
also thank Ms. Pramila Patten, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in
Conflict, and Ambassador Joanna Wronecka, Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 2206 (2015) concerning South Sudan, for
their informative briefings. Those briefings compel
Côte d’Ivoire to comment on various political, security,
humanitarian and human rights issues, as well as on the
implementation of the sanctions regime in South Sudan.
With regard to the political situation, my country
welcomes the clear willingness of the South Sudanese
parties to implement the Revitalized Agreement on
the Resolution of the Conflict in the Republic of South
Sudan, the sole frame of reference for a political solution
to the crisis that has afflicted this country for five
years. The appointment by the South Sudanese parties
of their representatives to the various mechanisms and
institutions of the pre-transition phase, as well as the
launch of the work of those mechanisms, is a clear
demonstration of their determination to contribute
positively to the implementation of the peace Agreement.
It is now a matter of urgency to ensure that
the parties to the conflict take advantage of the
pre-transitional phase to establish the conditions
for a successful transition leading to the speedy
holding of elections. In that regard, my country, like
the Secretary-General, calls on the parties to make a
firm commitment to drafting a revised version of the
transitional security arrangements and establishing
a transitional Government of national unity. Besides
that, in our firm belief in the important role that women
play in peace processes, my delegation also encourages

18-4464923/25

S/PV.8431

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

South Sudanese leaders to ensure the meaningful
representation of women in the institutions responsible
for implementing the Revitalized Agreement.
On the security front, we welcome the ceasefire
that is being maintained in some parts of the country,
as the report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1103)
so rightly emphasizes. We also welcome in that regard
the confidence-building measures introduced by the
Government of South Sudan and the opposition groups
following the signing of the Agreement. My delegation
urges both parties to work to consolidate that peaceful
and virtuous attitude so that peace and stability can
be restored to the regions still affected by armed
clashes and intercommunal violence. In that context,
Côte d’Ivoire believes that the process of national
dialogue, the unification of the South Sudanese army
and the implementation of terms relating to security
arrangements will make a major contribution to the
gradual improvement of the situation throughout
the country. My delegation also welcomes the
multifaceted engagement of the member countries
of the Intergovernmental Authority on Development
(IGAD) in resolving the conflict in South Sudan. We
urge the leadership of IGAD and the United Nations to
rapidly deploy the UNMISS Regional Protection Force
to ensure the protection of civilian populations.
Côte d’Ivoire remains concerned about the
humanitarian situation in South Sudan, where there
are large numbers of internally displaced persons and
refugees, food insecurity issues and health risks related
to the outbreak of the Ebola virus in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. The situation is aggravated by
continuing deliberate efforts to obstruct humanitarian
assistance throughout the country. Despite repeated
appeals from the international community, humanitarian
workers continue to be victims of violence, assault and
detention in the exercise of their duties, among other
things. Côte d’Ivoire firmly condemns all acts of violence
against humanitarian workers and the looting of their
equipment and once again calls on the South Sudanese
parties to create a safe environment that is conducive
to the provision of humanitarian assistance and the safe
and dignified return of displaced persons to their areas
of origin. We commend the invaluable support of the
World Health Organization to the Government of South
Sudan in strengthening its national capacities for Ebola
preparedness and response.
Regarding the human rights situation, we are
pleased with the significant drop in human rights
24/25

18/12/2018

violations and acts of violence by the parties to the
conflict since the signing of the Revitalized Agreement.
However, we strongly condemn the continuing sexual
and gender-based violence against women and girls
and the recruitment and use of child soldiers by
parties to the conflict. We urge the South Sudanese
leaders to implement the principle of accountability
in order to bring the perpetrators of such acts before
the appropriate courts. We therefore call for the
Hybrid Court for South Sudan to be established as
soon as possible, in accordance with the terms of the
Revitalized Agreement.
With regard to the sanctions regime in South
Sudan, we would like to commend Ambassador Joanna
Wronecka’s remarkable work and reiterate our support
to her as she carries out her duties, and we encourage
the Government of South Sudan, the countries of the
region, the Sanctions Committee and the Panel of
Experts to collaborate further in order to support the
ongoing peace efforts.
In conclusion, my delegation commends the work
done by UNMISS in extremely difficult circumstances
and reaffirms that only a genuine commitment on the
part of the South Sudanese authorities and continued
support from the United Nations, the African Union
and the international community can bring this crisis
to a definitive end.
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I now give the floor to the representative of
South Sudan.
Mr. Malwal (South Sudan): I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, on your leadership
of the Council for the month of December. I also
want to thank Mr. Lacroix and Ms. Patten for their
briefings today.
My delegation would like to express its appreciation
to the Secretary-General and to welcome his report
(S/2018/1103). The period it covers has indeed been
marked by several momentous and historic events in
South Sudan. Prominent among them were the signing
of the Revitalized Agreement on the Resolution of
the Conflict in the Republic of South Sudan and the
peace celebration in Juba, which was attended by the
leaders of the opposition parties, and the meetings of
the various pre-implementation committees in Juba,
Addis Ababa and Khartoum. In that regard, I would
18-44649

18/12/2018

Reports of the Secretary-General on the Sudan and South Sudan

like to remind the Council that we are still in the
pre-implementation phase, and the peace process has
not yet been implemented.
The implementation is admittedly behind schedule,
but not because the parties are not committed to what
they have signed. The delays are due to technical
challenges. It is because of those challenges that our
delegation agrees with the Secretary-General that what
is needed now in South Sudan for the signed peace
Agreement to be implemented on time is political
will, and specifically international political will in
support of the Agreement. We know that the technical
challenges can be overcome with the political will
of the international community. We would like to
take this opportunity to thank the region, led by the
Intergovernmental Authority on Development and the
African Union, for their steadfast determination to see
to it that South Sudan is peaceful and that the refugees
are returned to their homes and communities as soon as
it is logistically possible.
As we look forward to the full implementation
of Peace Agreement in the next few months, the
Government is taking reports of sexual attacks on women
in the country seriously. The recent report of a sexual
attack on 150 women is disturbing, and the culprits
must not be allowed to get away with this criminality.
Accordingly, the investigating team formed by the

S/PV. 8431

Government, which is led by the Minister of Gender,
Child and Social Welfare, Ms. Awut Deng Acuil, has
just returned to Juba from Bentiu and will soon make
the team’s findings public. Quick condemnation may
be good public relations for some, but investigating
and getting to the facts and bringing the rule of law
to bear upon the alleged criminals is more prudent. I
believe that in some countries it is called due process.
Sanctions alone have never brought peace to any
conflict in the world.
In conclusion, allow me to bid farewell to the
non-permanent members that are finishing their terms
at the end of this year. My delegation will miss their
wise advice and the opportunities for close working
relations they have extended to us. In particular, we
want to wish Ethiopia, Bolivia and Kazakhstan success
in their future endeavours in the international arena.
In the same vein, we look forward to welcoming the
new members, especially the Republic of South Africa,
upon the start of their tenure early next year.
(spoke in Arabic)
Lastly, I would like to congratulate Kuwait and all
Arabic-speaking countries on the occasion of World
Arabic Language Day.
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m.

18-4464925/25
