S/PV.8418

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-third year

8418th meeting

Wednesday, 12 December 2018, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Adom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Côte d’Ivoire)

Members:

Bolivia (Plurinational State of). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ethiopia. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kazakhstan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Netherlands. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Sweden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mr. Llorentty Solíz
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Ndong Mba
Mr. Amde
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Umarov
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Van Oosterom
Mr. Meza-Cuadra
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Nebenzia
Mr. Skoog
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Pompeo

Agenda
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 30 November 2018 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/1070)
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089)
.

Letter dated 11 December 2018 from the Security Council Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/1106)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

18-43369 (E)
*1843369*

Non-proliferation

S/PV.8418

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.

At this meeting, the Security Council will
hear briefings by Ms. DiCarlo, Mr. Christiane and
Ambassador Van Oosterom.

Adoption of the agenda

I now give the floor to Ms. DiCarlo.

The agenda was adopted.
Non-proliferation
Letter dated 30 November 2018 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/1070)
Sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089)
Letter dated 11 December 2018 from
the Security Council Facilitator for
the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/2018/1106)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Germany
and the Islamic Republic of Iran to participate in this
meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs;
and Mr. Serge Christiane, Chargé d’affaires ad interim
of the Delegation of the European Union to the United
Nations.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
the following documents: S/2018/1070, which contains
the text of a letter dated 30 November 2018 from the
Security Council Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) addressed to the President
of the Security Council; S/2018/1089, which contains
the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015); and S/2018/1106, which contains the text of
a letter dated 11 December 2018 from the Security
Council Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) addressed to the President of the Security
Council.
2/26

12/12/2018

Ms. DiCarlo: Resolution 2231 (2015) endorsed the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), which
came into effect on 16 January 2016. The SecretaryGeneral welcomed the Plan as a demonstration of
successful multilateralism and a major achievement of
nuclear non-proliferation, dialogue and diplomacy. Last
month, as it has done since implementation day, the
International Atomic Energy Agency reported to the
Council that Iran continues to implement its nuclearrelated commitments.
The Secretary-General welcomes the reaffirmation
by JCPOA participants of their commitments to its full
and effective implementation. It is essential that the
Plan continue to work for all participants, including by
delivering tangible economic benefits for the Iranian
people. The Secretary-General regrets the reimposition
by the United States of its sanctions lifted pursuant to
the Plan, after its withdrawal from the JCPOA. The
Secretary-General believes that issues not directly
related to the Plan should be addressed without prejudice
to preserving the agreement and its accomplishments.
At the same time, he calls on Iran to carefully consider
and address the concerns expressed by Member States
about its activities in relation to the restrictive measures
contained in annex B to the resolution. The SecretaryGeneral notes that the Plan remains in effect and that
the Security Council has called upon all Member States
and regional and international organizations to support
implementation of the Plan and to refrain from actions
that undermine it.
I thank you, Mr. President, for this opportunity to
brief the Security Council on the sixth report of the
Secretary-General on the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089). As guided by the Security
Council, and consistent with our previous reports, the
report before the Council today is focused on annex B
to the resolution.
First, on the implementation of the nuclear-related
provisions, the Secretariat has received additional
information on two dual-use items destined for Iran,
which were seized by the United Arab Emirates.
The States that manufactured those items informed
the Secretariat that, in their assessment, they did not
require prior approval by the Security Council through
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

the procurement channel process. In addition, the
Secretariat continues to examine information related to
the possible transfer of other items, undertaken contrary
to the resolution, which were brought to its attention by
the United Arab Emirates and the United States.
It is our assessment that the procurement channel
remains a vital transparency and confidence-building
mechanism. It ensures that the transfers of certain
goods, technology and/or related services to the Islamic
Republic of Iran are consistent with resolution 2231
(2015) and the Plan. Forty-two proposals have been
submitted to the procurement channel since January
2016, of which 28 have been approved. The SecretaryGeneral encourages all States and the private sector to
fully utilize and support the channel.
Secondly,
on
the
ballistic-missile-related
provisions, the report reflects information provided to
the Secretary-General and to the Security Council by
France, Germany, Iran, Israel, the Russian Federation
and the United Kingdom on additional ballistic-missile
flight tests reportedly conducted by Iran since January
2018, as well as on the launch of several ballistic
missiles at targets in Syria on 1 October 2018. The
Security Council met on 4 December to consider the
reported test firing of a further medium-range ballistic
missile by Iran on 1 December.
Since our previous report (S/2018/602), the
Secretariat has examined the debris from three more
ballistic missiles launched at Riyadh by the Houthis in
March and April. That debris was consistent with that
from the five missiles examined previously, which the
Secretariat assessed shared key design features with the
Iranian Qiam-1 ballistic missile and had components
parts manufactured in Iran. However, the Secretariat
has not been able to determine whether such missiles,
or parts thereof, or related technology, had been
transferred from Iran after 16 January 2016, the date
when annex B provisions came into effect.
Thirdly, in terms of the arms-related provisions,
during the reporting period the Secretariat examined
two container launch units for anti-tank guided missiles
recovered in Yemen. The Secretariat found that they had
characteristics of Iranian manufacture and that their
markings showed production dates in 2016 and 2017.
The Secretariat also examined a partly disassembled
surface-to-air missile seized by the Saudi-led coalition
and observed that its features appeared to be consistent
with those of an Iranian Sayyad-2C missile. The

S/PV. 8418

Secretariat is still analysing available information
on additional unmanned aerial vehicles recovered in
Yemen, including some that appear to have the same
design features as the Iranian-made Ababeel-2.
The report also reflects the fact that the Secretariat
examined a shipment of about 2,500 assault rifles seized
by the United States in the Gulf of Aden in August.
The Secretariat observed that those weapons did not
have the characteristics of Iranian production. The
Secretariat will further analyse that seizure and report
back accordingly should new information become
available. In addition, the report includes information
received from Israel and Iran regarding the alleged
transfer of an Iranian-produced Khordad air defence
system to the T-4 airbase in Syria in April.
The report also highlights the continued participation
of Iranian entities in another foreign arms exhibition,
held in Baku in September. In relation to the travel-ban
provisions, the report provides additional information
on previous travel by Major General Qasem Soleimani
to Iraq in May.
In conclusion, I would like to thank His Excellency
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands
for his tenure as Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015). I would also like to take this
opportunity to congratulate His Excellency Mr. Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve of Belgium, who will assume
the functions of Facilitator on 1 January 2019. I assure
him of the Secretariat’s full support. I would also like
to thank the Coordinator of the Procurement Working
Group of the Joint Commission for our continued
cooperation.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. DiCarlo for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Mr. Christiane.
Mr. Christiane (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo for her briefing.
(spoke in English)
I am honoured to again address the Security
Council today on behalf of Ms. Federica Mogherini,
High Representative of the European Union for Foreign
Affairs and Security Policy, in her capacity as the
Coordinator of the Joint Commission established by the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA).
First, I would like to thank Secretary-General
António Guterres and His Excellency Mr. Karel van

18-433693/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

Oosterom, Ambassador of the Netherlands, who is
serving as the Facilitator for the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), for the excellent cooperation
throughout the year. Let me also express my gratitude
to our colleagues in the Secretariat for their unwavering
support and their excellent cooperation, in particular
regarding the running of the procurement channel. I
would also like to note my appreciation for their work
in the preparation of the latest report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1089) on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015).
As we approach the third year after implementation
day of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, we
should remind ourselves of the essence and scope of that
agreement. The JCPOA is a nuclear agreement — one
that is working and delivering on its goal, which is no
other than ensuring the exclusively peaceful nature
of Iran’s nuclear programme. This third anniversary
should also remind us that diplomacy does work,
and that international agreements can deliver results,
even on the most sensitive issues. The International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has confirmed in 13
consecutive reports that Iran continues to implement its
nuclear-related commitments.
On that issue, our position remains unchanged.
As long as Iran continues to implement its nuclearrelated commitments in full, the European Union
(EU) will remain committed to the continued full and
effective implementation of the agreement. For us, the
non-proliferation benefits of the JCPOA are clear and
based on comprehensive scientific analysis and breakout
time calculations. The JCPOA has significantly rolled
back the Iranian nuclear programme and ensures that
Iran does not acquire material or equipment to develop
a nuclear weapon. That is why the JCPOA continues
to enjoy the wide and full support of the broader
international community.
However, the JCPOA faces considerable challenges
following the withdrawal of the United States and the
reimposition of sanctions against Iran. The EU and all
28 member States deeply regretted those decisions made
by the United States. At their last Council meeting on
10 December, the 28 EU Foreign Ministers reiterated
their full commitment to the continued implementation
of the deal as long as Iran continues to implement its
commitments in full. The EU also does not see any
other credible, peaceful alternative. Dismantling the
agreement would not only destroy years of diplomatic
efforts, endorsed by this very organ in resolution 2231
4/26

12/12/2018

(2015), but would also undermine other key multilateral
negotiations in the nuclear field and beyond.
While the EU strongly welcomes Iran’s continued
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments,
it is essential that the agreement continue to work for
all its participants, including by delivering tangible
economic benefits to the people of Iran. That has also
been echoed by the other remaining participants in the
JCPOA, and I would like to express sincere thanks for
their unwavering commitment to the nuclear deal.
It is in that spirit that the JCPOA participants
acknowledged, at the recent ministerial Joint
Commission meetings, on 6 July in Vienna and
24 September in New York, that sanctions-lifting is
an essential part of the deal, and they reiterated their
commitment to the preservation and maintenance
of effective financial channels with Iran and the
continuation of Iran’s export of oil and gas.
The EU is very concerned about the deteriorated
economic situation of the people of Iran. The Iranian
economy is facing strong challenges. We are also
concerned about the challenges that the Iranian people
face in terms of access to basic goods, including vital
medicines. We are also fully cognizant of the fact that
this situation may lead to a difficult domestic debate in
Iran on the JCPOA and its future.
In that context, EU High Representative Federica
Mogherini and the Foreign Affairs and Finance
Ministers of Germany, the United Kingdom and France
(E3) stated their commitment in their joint statement
of 2 November to advance the intensive work led by
the E3, with the support of the EU, to set up a special
purpose vehicle. The aim of that initiative is to facilitate
trade payment and provide the necessary sovereign
reassurances to the market participants engaged in
legitimate business with Iran. That is in addition to
a number of EU measures that were taken in August
regarding the update of the Blocking Statute and the
lending mandate of the European Investment Bank. I
want to be very clear that the European initiative to
set up a special purpose vehicle is about respecting the
nuclear deal’s commitments, including on sanctionslifting, in full accordance with resolution 2231 (2015)
and European law. It is not directed against any State or
meant to circumvent unilateral measures.
While
the
JCPOA
deals
with
nuclear
non-proliferation aspects, a number of serious issues
outside of the deal continue to cast a shadow. The
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

EU notes with concern the findings of the SecretaryGeneral’s report regarding Iranian activities in relation
to the restrictive measures contained in annex B of
resolution 2231 (2015), and in particular restrictions on
ballistic missile-related activities and transfers. Those
actions feed regional tensions and threaten safety and
stability in the region.
As members of the Council know, the EU has a longstanding track record of expressing its concern over
the regional military build-up, including Iran’s missile
programme. The EU has repeatedly called upon Iran to
refrain from activities that may deepen mistrust, such
as ballistic missile tests, which are inconsistent with
resolution 2231 (2015), and the statements associated
with them. The situation in the region, including the
proliferation of ballistic missiles, needs to be addressed
as a priority, and the EU welcomes the Secretariat’s
further examinations. The EU still has restrictive
measures in place to that effect, but those issues are
distinct from the JCPOA. Dismantling a nuclear deal
that is working would certainly not put us in a better
position to discuss other issues or provide an immediate
solution. The EU also strongly believes that addressing
those difficult issues can be done in a more effective
manner through dialogue.
The EU hosted the fourth round of EU/E4 discussions
on regional issues with Iran on 10 December. The main
focus was Yemen and Syria, with both sides publicly
acknowledging the importance of the United Nationsfacilitated talks in Sweden and agreeing to work on
confidence-building measures in support of the United
Nations Special Envoy. That indicates that our dialogue
with Iran is yielding concrete results.
Annex III of the JCPOA addresses civil nuclear
cooperation with Iran. That annex was carefully
crafted and it plays a key role in the overall balance
of the agreement. The JCPOA is not just about
constraints on Iran’s nuclear programme. It is also
about cooperation — broader long-term re-engagement
with Iran — through which we can understand Iran’s
civil nuclear needs better and gradually increase our
confidence in Iran’s nuclear programme. That makes
the agreement more durable in time.
Cooperation is the right path for us, and for that
reason, every step in the implementation of annex III
is a positive one. The EU has launched several projects
and actions in support of annex III since implementation
day. To that effect, we recently organized the third

S/PV. 8418

EU-Iran high-level seminar on international nuclear
cooperation. The objective of the seminar was to
build on previous discussions and the understanding
that international nuclear cooperation and nuclear
governance are mutually reinforcing.
Established under annex IV of the JCPOA, the
procurement channel remains a unique non-proliferation
and confidence-building instrument. It can help prevent
the misuse of nuclear or dual-use items and ensures that
exports of such items are consistent with the JCPOA.
We expect that all Security Council members will
continue to support the preservation of that channel, in
line with resolution 2231 (2015). It is a positive signal
that the channel has also received proposals after the
reimposition of United States sanctions.
Transparency remains a guiding principle and
cornerstone of the JCPOA. According to paragraph
6.10 of the JCPOA annex IV, the Joint Commission
reports to the Security Council every six months on the
status of the Procurement Working Group’s decisions
and on any implementation issue. In that context, on
30 November, the Coordinator of the Procurement
Working Group submitted to the Facilitator, on behalf
of the Joint Commission, its sixth biannual report. The
report has been circulated as a document of the Security
Council (S/2018/1070).
An impressive amount of outreach has been
conducted during the past few years, and countries
around the world are aware of the channel’s procedures.
We will continue our outreach efforts, together with
colleagues from the Security Council secretariat and
the Facilitator.
As I already said, we should not forget that the
JCPOA is a nuclear agreement. It is working and
delivering on its intended goal. That is why the EU is
united with so many countries in support of this deal
and calls once again on the international community
to continue to support this internationally endorsed
agreement.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to Ambassador Van Oosterom.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): Let me begin by
thanking United States Secretary of State Pompeo for
gracing us with his presence in the Chamber today. We
welcome him to the Security Council.

18-433695/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

I speak in my capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
In July 2015, the Security Council adopted
resolution 2231 (2015) (see S/PV.7488). Three months
later, the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA)
came into effect. The agreement aims to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme remains exclusively
peaceful. Resolution 2231 (2015) terminated the
previous Security Council resolutions on the Iranian
nuclear issue and urged the full implementation of
the JCPOA. It also established specific restrictions
in relation to Iran. This year, as Security Council
Facilitator for the resolution, we have aimed to support
its implementation. We have built on the excellent
work of Italy, which we succeeded as Facilitator in the
context of our split term on the Council for the period
2017-2018. We consider three elements to be key to the
role of Facilitator and to that of the format: first, talks;
secondly, transparency; and thirdly, trade.
My first point concerns talks. Our ambition has
been to facilitate talks about the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). As Facilitator, we have
facilitated such talks through communication with all
parties, through the discussion of the Security Council
in the 2231 format and through smooth correspondence
within the format. The Security Council met on
10 December under the 2231 format. We discussed
the findings and recommendations contained in the
sixth report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) on
resolution 2231 (2015) prior to its public release. UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo already pointed to some of
his findings and recommendations in her statement.
The format held an open discussion on ballistic missile
launches by Iran, as well as on broader developments
related to resolution 2231 (2015). During the reporting
period, several Member States sent communications to
the Security Council alleging transfers and activities
by Iran that fall under the restrictions under resolution
2231 (2015). Those communications are listed in detail
in my report (see S/2018/1106), together with the replies
received from the Permanent Mission of Iran. Iran also
sent several letters in which it laid out its concerns with
the United States withdrawal from the JCPOA and the
reimposition of all its national sanctions that had been
lifted or waived pursuant to the JCPOA.
I now turn to my second point — the facilitation of
transparency concerning the work of the 2231 format.
6/26

12/12/2018

Our reports have given a comprehensive overview of the
work of the format this year, the continued monitoring
activities of the International Atomic Energy Agency
and the discussion on activities related to annex B to
resolution 2231 (2015). The reports have also included
key aspects of the functioning of the procurement
channel.
That brings me to my third point — the facilitation
of trade by encouraging the use of the procurement
channel. The channel reviews proposals by States
seeking to participate in or permit certain transfers of
nuclear and dual-use goods, technology or services to
Iran. Since the beginning of 2016, 42 proposals have
been submitted to the procurement channel by five
Member States from three different regional groups.
They include States that are not participants in the
JCPOA. On average, proposals were processed in
fewer than 50 calendar days. Since the withdrawal
of the United States from the JCPOA, five additional
proposals have been submitted through the Security
Council. The channel is operational and effective. We
encourage all States and the private sector to fully
utilize and support it.
In conclusion, the unanimous adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), which endorsed the JCPOA, marked a
fundamental shift concerning the Iranian nuclear issue.
As Security Council Facilitator for the resolution, we
have aimed to support and improve its implementation
through the facilitation of talks, transparency and trade.
In that effort, I would also like to thank the Secretariat
for its hard work in support of both myself and the
format this year. We would also like to commend the
leadership of Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and the
European Union. As this is my last Security Council
briefing in my capacity as Facilitator, I would like to
wish my successor, Ambassador Marc Pecsteen de
Buytswerve of Belgium, every success.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ambassador Van Oosterom for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
I call on His Excellency Mr. Michael Pompeo,
Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Mr. Pompeo (United States of America): I thank
representatives for the kind words. I appreciate them.
Just two days ago, the Head of the Aerospace
Force of the Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, Amir
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

Hajizadeh, boasted that Iran is capable of building
missiles with a range beyond 2,000 kilometres. He said,
“We have the ability to build missiles with broader
ranges. We don’t have limitations from a technical
perspective.”
He also said that there are many enemy bases
within 800 kilometres of Iran — in other words, within
striking distance of Iranian missiles. He bragged that
Iran carries out 40 to 50 tests per year.
As I will talk about further, it is clear that the Iranian
regime ballistic missile activity has grown since the
nuclear deal. Iran has exploited the goodwill of nations
and defied multiple Security Council resolutions in its
quest for a robust ballistic missile force. The United
States will never stand for that; no nation that seeks
peace and prosperity in the Middle East should either.
The Council has been telling Iran to stop testing
and proliferating ballistic missiles in one form or
another since 2006. From 2010 to 2015 Iran was subject
to resolution 1929 (2010), the strictest resolution
addressing the Iranian ballistic missiles to date. In that
resolution, the Security Council decided that Iran shall
not undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including
launches using ballistic missile technology, and that
States shall take the necessary measures to prevent
the transfer of technology or technical assistance
to Iran related to such activities. That provision of
resolution 1929 (2010) imposed a legal prohibition on
Iran’s ballistic missile activity. There was the force of
law behind those words. Nevertheless, Iran conducted
multiple ballistic missile launches between 2010 and
2015, in flagrant violation of that resolution.
What did we do in response? Did we increase
accountability in Iran for serial violations of
international law? We did quite the opposite. In fact,
the level of accountability in Iran has diminished, while
the risk has increased. In connection with the Iranian
regime’s engagement in nuclear talks and at the Obama
Administration’s urging, the Security Council replaced
resolution 1929 (2010) with resolution 2231 (2015).
The latter calls upon Iran not to undertake any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
delivering nuclear weapons. Notwithstanding that
change in language, the world’s concerns remain.
When we collectively call on Iran to cease its
ballistic missile activity, we must agree to stop it

S/PV. 8418

now. But Iran is as defiant of the world’s insistence
as ever — because here we are, for the twelfth year
in a row, meeting about Iran’s ballistic missiles
and addressing an incredibly problematic data set.
Iran’s pace of missile activity, including its missile
launches and tests, has not diminished since the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) was adopted.
In fact, Iran’s missile testing and proliferation is
growing. Today Iran has the largest arsenal of ballistic
missiles in the Middle East. It has more than 10 ballistic
missile systems in its inventory or in development. It
has hundreds of missiles, and they pose a threat to our
partners in the region.
More recently, in 2016, while the JCPOA was in
effect, Iran unveiled two new short-range ballistic
missiles that it claims are capable of striking targets
between 500 and 700 kilometres. In January 2017, while
the JCPOA was in effect, Iran launched a medium-range
missile that was designed to carry a payload greater
than 500 kilograms and that could be used to carry
nuclear warheads. Its suspected range also approaches
2,000 kilometres, which is far enough to target Athens,
Sofia, Bucharest and other major European cities. If
the Commander of the Aerospace Force of the Islamic
Revolutionary Guard Corps is telling the truth and Iran
does have capabilities beyond a 2,000-kilometre range,
other European capitals are at risk as well.
In July 2017, when United States was still a party to
the JCPOA, Iran tested a Simorgh space-launch vehicle.
The United States, France, Germany and the United
Kingdom all assessed that the launch was inconsistent
with resolution 2231 (2015) because space-launch
vehicles use a technology similar to intercontinental
ballistic missiles. Iran has exported ballistic missile
systems as well — most recently to Yemen. We have
hard evidence that Iran is providing missiles, training
and support to the Houthis and that the Iranian-Houthi
missile arsenal is fully engaged. That poses a threat
to innocent civilians, including Americans living in
Riyadh, Abu Dhabi and Dubai, as well as people of
all nationalities who travel on civilian aircraft in that
region. Iran is also transferring ballistic missile systems
to Shia militias in Iraq. Just look at the past two weeks.
The Iranian regime test-fired a medium-range ballistic
missile that is capable of carrying multiple warheads.
Our goodwill gestures have been futile in correcting
the Iranian regime’s reckless missile activity and its
destructive behaviours. No nation can dispute that Iran
openly defies resolution 2231 (2015).

18-433697/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

The United States is not alone in raising these
concerns. I would like to thank France, Germany and
the United Kingdom for raising concerns about Iranian
missile proliferation to the Secretariat. I would also
like to thank our partners from Saudi Arabia and the
United Arab Emirates, who are working with United
Nations inspectors to recover material debris of the
Iranian-supplied missiles, rockets and unmanned
aerial vehicles launched into their countries by Houthi
forces in Yemen. Our Israeli allies have brought further
evidence to the Security Council about Iran’s continued
launches of ballistic missiles that are inherently capable
of carrying nuclear weapons. Israel has also given
evidence to the Secretariat of Iran’s transfer of weapons
systems to its proxies all over the Middle East — in
defiance of what we have insisted that they should do.
We must now ask ourselves which steps we must
take to confront that malign Iranian activity. If Iran
continues stocking up on ballistic missiles, the security
of our people will be at risk. If we fail to restore
deterrence, we will run the risk of conflict escalating
in the region. If we do nothing, we will convey to all
other malign actors that they, too, can defy the Security
Council with impunity. As all members of the Council
know well, the Charter of the United Nations bestows
upon the Security Council the primary responsibility
for the maintenance of international peace and security.
We all take that responsibility seriously. The United
States seeks to work with all other members of the
Council to reimpose on Iran the ballistic missile
restrictions outlined in resolution 1929 (2010).
Beyond addressing Iran’s ballistic missile
activities, the Council should not lift the arms embargo
on Iran in 2020. That country is in non-compliance with
multiple Security Council resolutions, including those
related to Al-Qaida, Afghanistan, Lebanon, Yemen and
Somalia. Even as we sit here today, Iran is harbouring
Al-Qaida, supporting Taliban militants in Afghanistan,
arming terrorists in Lebanon, facilitating illicit trade
in Somali charcoal to benefit Al-Shabaab and training
and equipping Shia militias in Iraq, even as we sit here
today. It is also stoking conflict in Syria and Yemen.
The Council must address those malign activities; it
cannot reward Iran by lifting the arms embargo. We
also call on the Council to establish inspection and
interdiction measures in ports and on the high seas
to thwart Iran’s continuing efforts to circumvent the
existing arms restrictions.
8/26

12/12/2018

Some have questioned our decision to withdraw
from the JCPOA. We reply that it is self-evident why we
did so: they are based on the very conversation we are
having here today. Prior to the deal, Western leaders
made grand claims about how the JCPOA would usher
in a new era of moderation from the Iranian regime.
Indeed, America’s own President said that
“ideally we would see a situation in which Iran,
seeing sanctions reduced, would start focusing on
its economy, on training its people, on re-entering
the world community, to lessening its provocative
activities in the region.”
But what we actually see is that, to date, the JCPOA
has without a doubt shielded the Islamic Republic of
Iran from being accountable for the risks it presents
to the world. The Iranian regime is pursuing the same
destructive, revolutionary goals that it has for the past
39 years, except now it has more money to achieve them
thanks to the nuclear deal.
I am here today first and foremost in my capacity as
the Secretary of State of the United States of America.
Under President Trump, the security of our people and
our allies comes first. But, in the finest traditions of
American leadership, the United States will continue to
unite sovereign nations in their responsibility to work
for the peace and security of their own people and a
stable international order. The United States is going
to continue to be relentless in building a coalition of
responsible nations that are serious about confronting
the Iranian regime’s reckless ballistic missile activity,
as well as the way it treats its own people. That type of
malign activity is something that the United States will
continue to stand side by side with the people of Iran.
They have been the worst victims of the regime for
nearly 40 years, and they have the unwavering support
of the United States.
Finally, in May the Trump Administration clearly
defined the 12 areas on which we are demanding
change from Iran. If Iran makes a fundamental
strategic shift and honours those demands, we would
be prepared to ease our pressure campaign and support
the modernization and reintegration of the Iranian
economy into the international economic system. But
relief from our pressure will come about only when
we see tangible, demonstrated and sustained shifts in
Tehran’s policies.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): First of
all, let me thank the Ivorian presidency of the Security
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

Council for convening today’s meeting and welcome
in particular the presence of Mr. Mike Pompeo,
Secretary of State of the United States of America. I
also thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, and Mr. Serge Christiane,
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations. I would like
to warmly thank our Dutch colleague Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom, Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, and his team for their work this year as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
The past year has shown that our work is not finished
with regard to the regime on the non-proliferation of
weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery.
It has also shown how it is now more important than ever
that we maintain our constant collective mobilization
in strengthening it. Today’s meeting on resolution 2231
(2015) is therefore very timely, since it concerns one
of the most significant non-proliferation achievements
of recent years. That resolution was supported by all
the permanent members of the Security Council and
unanimously adopted; it was brought to fruition both
by the perseverance of the international community
and by the leadership role of the Council. And it sealed
the major agreement reached in Vienna after years
of negotiations. In other words, it is a resolution that
embodies the unity of the international community, the
Security Council and all its members, especially its
permanent members.
However, the paths of the States parties to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) have diverged
since 2015 and, as the Secretary-General does in his
report (S/2018/1089), we have expressed our regret and
concern about the implications of the United States
withdrawal and the reimposition of American sanctions.
Yet we all share the same objective — to prevent Iran
from acquiring nuclear weapons and to ensure, through
strict international monitoring, the peaceful ends of its
programme. That is what made it possible put in place
the JCPOA for 10 years, to which there is no credible
alternative today. The collapse of that agreement would
mark a serious step backwards, for which we would all
pay the price.
While we have seen a serious crisis of confidence
this year, the agreement remains in place and is
working — Iran continues to comply with its nuclear
obligations, as confirmed to us for the thirteenth
consecutive time by the International Atomic Energy

S/PV. 8418

Agency. We welcome that fact. The situation must be
strengthened through respect for all our commitments,
which applies to all United Nations Members, not only
the parties to the Plan. No external developments should
affect the implementation of those commitments. In
that regard, France will actively continue to support the
agreement as long as Iran strictly and fully respects its
nuclear obligations and makes efforts to preserve the
economic benefits of the JCPOA.
France commends the rigorous work of the
Secretariat through its balanced report, prepared
in full compliance with its mandate. Our collective
commitments do not stop at the JCPOA, and Iran
must comply with all the provisions of resolution 2231
(2015). However, the report identifies several elements
of Iranian actions that are not in conformity with
those provisions, which gives us cause for concern. In
conjunction with Germany and the United Kingdom,
France has expressed its concern on several occasions
concerning ballistic missiles. I would recall that the
missiles in question are technically designed to be
capable of carrying nuclear weapons, and it is that type
of activity, which runs counter to resolution 2231 (2015),
that we have collectively called on Iran not to carry out.
The issue of ballistic transfers to State and non-State
actors, in particular the Secretariat’s conclusions on
ballistic missiles fired by the Houthis, is also a great
source of concern for France. Whether in Yemen or
in the Syrian theatre, such actions violate resolution
1540 (2004), which is also an essential element of the
international non-proliferation architecture.
Let us be clear: for the sake of regional stability
and international security, Iran must immediately cease
all destabilizing activities. We have already expressed
our concern on that issue, including directly to the
Iranian authorities. Each of us must clearly convey
that message, and France, for its part, will continue its
robust dialogue with Iran.
In conclusion, I would like to echo the SecretaryGeneral’s appeal to all States, whether or not they
are parties to the Plan, to ensure the continuity of
the JCPOA as a pillar of international and regional
peace and security. Rest assured that France, which
has worked tirelessly to make the agreement robust
and endow it with rigorous verification mechanisms,
remains fully committed to that goal. Only in that way
can we together draw up a long-term strategy in the
region, which cannot be reduced to a policy of pressure
and sanctions. Such a strategy must also include a

18-433699/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

firm and frank dialogue with the Iranians about our
concerns. That is the only way that the international
community can lay the foundation for a new agreement
on a framework for Iranian nuclear power beyond 20252030, Iranian ballistic activity and regional stability.
There is no other way to achieve lasting stability in
the region and ensure that Iran never acquires nuclear
weapons.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank you,
Mr. President, for scheduling this debate. We are very
grateful to United States Secretary of State Pompeo for
taking the time to be here today. This debate comes at a
very important moment. The world is an unpredictable
place right now. The developments that we are going to
discuss today risk making it more so. I would also like
to join others in thanking the Under-Secretary-General
and the Dutch representative and his team for all their
work concerning resolution 2231 (2015).
Today’s agenda is the implementation of that
resolution, which was an endorsement of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA). Yet,
throughout the negotiations and at the adoption of the
resolution, we were clear that the Council was not only
addressing nuclear issue, but continuing to impose
binding restrictions to curb Iran’s ballistic missile and
proliferation activity because it threatens the region
and beyond.
I want to stress that ballistic missile proliferation
is not solely about nuclear missiles, although there
is a link with nuclear capability. Any conventional
payload would cause extensive harm to civilians and
infrastructure, and Member States in the region will
naturally be deeply concerned about confronting such
a threat from Iran. It heightens instability in the region
and increases the risk of miscalculation. As Secretary
Pompeo said, the international community has been
trying to curb that activity since at least 2006.
If I may, I would like to set out the policy of my
Government towards Iran. We are motivated by three
objectives — first, and most critical, to uphold the
global non-proliferation regime and prevent Iran from
achieving nuclear capabilities that would threaten the
Middle East region and Europe beyond; secondly, to
constrain Iran’s destabilizing actions in the region; and,
thirdly, to encourage Iran to normalize its economic
and diplomatic relations with the region and the West
and assume its rightful role as a responsible Power
constructively engaged.
10/26

12/12/2018

The United Kingdom participated in negotiations
on a nuclear deal with Iran to secure the first of those
objectives, and we believe the JCPOA has done so.
It remains critical for our national security and, we
believe, for the shared security of our partners and
allies. I agree with what the French Ambassador said
with regard to the way forward. We were also clear
that the nuclear deal contained elements designed
to encourage Iran on a path to normalcy in its trade
and diplomatic relations with the outside world. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2018/1089) records
that Iran continues to comply with its nuclear-related
obligations, as confirmed by the International Atomic
Energy Agency in its 12 November report. We expect
that commitment to continue, and we look to Iran to
continue to fully abide by its obligations under the deal.
Because our first objective continues to be met,
the United Kingdom — together with France and
Germany — has been working to ensure that Iran
continues to receive the economic benefits from
sanctions relief agreed as part of the nuclear deal. To
that end, in September we announced the creation of a
European special purpose vehicle to help facilitate that.
That work continues and we hope to announce further
progress soon.
There remains, however, much work to do
towards the second objective — the ending of Iran’s
destabilizing regional behaviour. No one should have
any doubt about the strength of our concern and our
commitment to tackling that issue. Compliance with
the JCPOA, important as it is for all of the reasons
that the French Ambassador set out, is not a license to
engage in destabilizing behaviour elsewhere, whether
or not that has a nuclear link.
Iran cannot expect to improve its relations with the
rest of the world or ensure its economic prosperity and
security while pursuing its current path. Businesses will
not invest there, and public finances should be spent at
home, not diverted to adventurism abroad. The UnderSecretary-General’s briefing today was very clear, and
the findings in the Secretary-General’s report should
continue to trouble the Council. As the report notes,
the United Kingdom, along with its E3 partners France
and Germany, raised concerns about the recent Iranian
ballistic-missile launches into Syria in a letter to the
President on 20 November (S/2018/1062). Since then, as
the Security Council discussed on 4 December, Iran has
tested a medium-range ballistic missile with a capability
that falls under category I of the Missile Technology
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

Control Regime (MTCR). Like those referred to in our
letter, that latest launch is inconsistent with resolution
2231 (2015).
We heard a number of arguments when we met to
discuss this issue in consultations, and I am sure we
will hear many of them again today, so I would like to
address them briefly now. Some colleagues have made
the point that the language in paragraph 7 of resolution
2231 (2015), and in paragraph 3 of the resolution’s annex
B, is not binding. The second part of that argument is
that the Council should therefore not concern itself with
Iran’s behaviour because we argue that it is inconsistent
with it.
We believe that this is both an extraordinary and
a flawed argument for two reasons. Leaving aside the
question of whether the language is legally binding or not,
the Council has the power to make recommendations to
Member States with a view of resolving any matter that
threatens the maintenance of international peace and
security. It is clear that those recommendations should
be taken seriously by Member States rather than openly
flouted. The call to Iran to comply with the request not
to undertake any activity related to ballistic missiles
capable of delivering nuclear weapons has a clear
purpose, and that purpose is to reduce international
and regional tension. In defying the Council’s clearly
expressed view, Iran is not contributing to the stability
of the region, to say the least, but is rather ignoring the
Council’s express wishes. Tendentious arguments that
seek to diminish the Council’s voice in that regard serve
only to undermine its prerogative and authority and
encourage other States to disregard its resolutions. We
should all be deeply concerned about such irresponsible
behaviour.
Another fallacious argument that I am sure we will
hear today is that the MTCR is irrelevant and is only an
arms-export regime. The MTCR is itself an important
part of international efforts against proliferation. Its
category I describes a platform of first-generation
nuclear weapons commonly defined as capable of
delivering a payload of at least 500 kilogrammes to
a range of at least 300 kilometres. So it matters that
Iran test-fired a ballistic missile with a capability that
falls under MTCR’s category I. Those missiles are not
harmless tools of self-defence. They are a source of
concern and they are included in resolution 2231 (2015)
because if Iran were to develop a nuclear weapon, those
missiles would be its delivery vehicle. They therefore
threaten not only the region but Europe, and potentially

S/PV. 8418

others beyond. Testing them is provocative and the
Council should respond. We therefore demand that Iran
cease the activity that defies resolution 2231 (2015)
and that it and all Member States fully comply with
the resolutions prohibiting the proliferation of missile
technology to and from Iran — and by the way, there is
no doubt that those are indeed legally binding.
On our second objective, we note with deep regret,
and also concern, that Iran continues to play a negative
role throughout the region in support of non-State actors
that undermine the stability of its neighbours. In Syria,
Iran has been the key supporter of Bashar Al-Assad’s
murderous seven-year campaign. Militias funded and
controlled by Iran have been integral to Al-Assad’s
military campaign to retake opposition-held territory,
committing gross abuses of human rights in the process.
Iran has proactively shipped weapon systems into
Syria, inflaming tensions with its neighbours as well as
violating the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015). For
example, in just the past week, Israel has had to take
action to prevent Iranian-backed Hizbullah militants
from tunnelling under its borders. Those Hizbullah
activities are a clear violation of resolution 1701
(2006) and are further evidence of Iran’s destabilizing
activity. The United Kingdom condemns the existence
of those tunnels, which threaten the security of Israel
and Lebanon. The violation of Israeli sovereignty is
deeply worrying, and moreover it literally takes Iran’s
destabilizing activity to new depths.
In Yemen, we are watching the ongoing talks in
Stockholm carefully and we welcome the attendance of
the Houthi delegation. I accept the fact that it is important
to note that Iran has expressed its strong support for the
talks in Sweden, but the situation in Yemen remains
of serious concern and the Secretary-General’s report
today includes information about ballistic missiles
fired at Saudi Arabia by the Houthis as well as anti-tank
and surface-to-air missiles recovered in Yemen. Those
weapons had characteristics and components consistent
with those known to be manufactured in Iran.
In the course of my work I have recently been to
Tehran to discuss many of those issues with the Iranian
leadership. I have made it clear every time that Iran’s
habit of testing weapons that threaten its neighbours,
and defying the Council by exporting weapons and
militias around the regions, makes it very difficult to
see how Iran can play a constructive role in its region
and means that its complaints when the Council puts
such behaviour on its agenda have no legitimacy.

18-4336911/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

I have long said that Iran has legitimate security
interests in the region. We recognize that, but the way
Iran goes about pursuing those interests is leading to
increasing destabilization and is simply not legitimate
in the modern world. Iran has a different approach
available to it, one that concentrates on reintegration
into the global economic community and into diplomatic
engagement. We support Iran in its quest to benefit
from economic development and we want it to fulfil
its undoubted potential as a vibrant economy and an
important Power. But those are not unconditional goals.
Iran can never achieve them without a vital change in
its approach to the issues that I have mentioned. It must
take steps to address the Council’s concerns seriously
and recognize that its expeditionary and expansionist
security doctrine will only provoke more challenge
and lead to greater instability within the region. That
is why, together with its European partners, the United
Kingdom continues to participate in the JCPOA. We
will continue to work with everyone to convince Iran
to take a radically different approach to the region and
help secure a more prosperous future for itself.
Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): I would like to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo for her briefing on the latest report
of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) on the
implementation of Security Council resolution 2231
(2015), which endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA), on Iran’s nuclear programme. We
also note the effective work carried out by Ambassador
van Oosterom, the Permanent Representative of the
Netherlands, in his capacity as Security Council
Facilitator for the implementation of the resolution.
We fully share the Secretary-General’s assessment
in the report that the decision of the United States to
withdraw from the JCPOA and reimpose unilateral
sanctions on Iran constitutes a serious challenge that
does not contribute to the goals outlined in the JCPOA
and resolution 2231 (2015). We join the SecretaryGeneral’s general call to ensure the preservation of
a unique agreement of fundamental importance to
international and regional security. We agree with
the report’s conclusion that issues not included in the
scope of the agreement should not serve as a reason for
dismantling it.
The Russian Federation has repeatedly warned
against attempts to torpedo the JCPOA and expressed the
hope that reason will prevail nonetheless and that issues
of global security and stability will no longer be held
12/26

12/12/2018

hostage to domestic political processes. Unfortunately,
our calls have not been heard. We are now faced with
a paradoxical situation in which a Council member is
not only openly refusing to implement resolution 2231
(2015), which it had itself endorsed, it is also trying to
punish every other Member State for implementing the
decisions of the Council and the Joint Commission of
the JCPOA. Right now, the only way to preserve the
agreement is through the conscientious implementation
of their voluntary commitments by all its participating
States. In that context, we should point out that the
Secretary General’s report presents clear evidence
of Iran’s unconditional compliance with its JCPOA
obligations, which has been consistently confirmed
not only by the International Atomic Energy Agency
but also by the Secretariat, which, as the document
testifies, has no verified data to the contrary.
We are once again obliged to remind the Council
of the inadmissibility of any so-called investigations
by the Secretariat of possible violations of resolution
2231 (2015) without a clear mandate from the Security
Council. Let us leave aside the level of technical
expertise of the representatives of the Secretariat,
who on a basis of components and debris find it easy
to opine on the tactical and technical characteristics of
various types of missiles and hint at their Iranian origin.
Legitimate questions arise as to the mandate of those
specialists, the status of their visits and their authority
to draw far-reaching conclusions. The attempts to
use the authority of the United Nations to reinforce
various countries’ unfounded accusations that Iran is
in violation of resolution 2231 (2105) are baffling. And
yet the Secretariat’s representatives themselves admit
in the report that they were working exclusively with
information provided to them by third countries. Any
inspections or monitoring activities by the Secretariat
that have not been agreed to, whatever the reasons for
them, must end once and for all.
We continue to insist that the report should not
contain information from open sources or references
to unverified or deliberately unverifiable information
provided by individual countries, especially when it is
not brought to Council members’ attention. We want
to once again draw the Secretariat’s attention to the
fact that paragraph 7 of the note by the President dated
16 January 2016 (S/2016/44) provides for the preparation
of semi-annual reports on the implementation of
the resolution 2231 (2015) in its entirety, not its
individual parts.
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

Today we have heard a great deal about ballistic
missiles. We would like to remind the Council that
paragraph 3 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015) only
calls on Iran not to undertake any activity related to
ballistic missiles designed to be capable of delivering
nuclear weapons. Rocket launchers generally are not
prohibited, and there is no evidence supporting the
possibility that they might have nuclear components.
The withdrawal of the United States from
the JCPOA has seriously damaged both the
nuclear-non-proliferation regime and security interests
in the Middle East as a whole. It is time to abandon
unilateral action. History shows that it is doomed to
failure. And contrariwise, when States genuinely unite
their efforts to counter regional challenges they can
achieve long-lasting results in terms of resolving crises
and stabilizing situations. We consider the JCPOA just
such an achievement. It has become a keystone of our
joint work in the region to create conditions conducive
to strengthening an overall atmosphere of trust. It has
given rise to hopes of progress towards the realization
of an important goal, the creation of a zone in the
Middle East free of weapons of mass destruction.
Russia supports the preservation of the JCPOA.
We urge for a rejection of efforts to artificially create
situations in which some Member States label the
Governments of others as rogues. Not only does that
not help to solve the region’s many problems, it creates
many new ones. It is clear that if we are to reduce the
potential for crisis we must bring international and
regional efforts together, including in the framework of
effective, inclusive formats where the United Nations
and its Security Council play a central role.
With enviable predictability, many of our Council
colleagues are trying to use the format of today’s
meeting to discuss Iran’s so-called regional behaviour,
which is presented as being virtually the exclusive
source of all the Middle East’s troubles. However, and
despite the fact that Iran is prepared for that dialogue,
they have produced no substantive proposals of any
kind in that regard. At times one gets the impression
that their only goal is to further intensify anti-Iranian
hysteria and Iran’s demonization, which in fact serve
merely to aggravate the already difficult situation in
the Middle East.
The Russian Federation supports developing a
positive and unifying agenda on the Middle East for the
Security Council and the entire international community

S/PV. 8418

that takes into account the legitimate interests of all the
States of the region, including Iran. The cornerstone of
our shared efforts in the region should be the creation
of conditions conducive to strengthening a general
atmosphere of trust. That is extremely important to the
relations between the Arab States, Israel and Iran. We
would like to remind members that in its resolution 598
(1988), the Security Council instructed the SecretaryGeneral to work with regional parties on measures for
strengthening security and stability in the region. This
is a difficult issue, but work on it must begin. And we
are ready to provide every possible assistance through
our contacts with our regional partners.
The ultimate goal should be the establishment of a
regional security architecture that is truly inclusive and
presupposes the involvement of every State in that part
of the world. Our concept for strengthening security in
the Persian Gulf under international guarantees remains
relevant and could begin to be implemented through a
conference with the participation of the States of the
subregion. In the future, such a conference could be
expanded to include other Middle Eastern countries.
Russia is ready to work on all of these aspects and
more, with interested partners, openly and impartially,
and without threats or negative pressure.
In conclusion, I want to note once again that
the Russian Federation remains committed to the
unconditional and comprehensive implementation of
the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA,
which continues to be implemented by all its other
participants despite the withdrawal of the United States.
Mr. Skoog (Sweden): I thank Secretary of State
Pompeo for his presence here today and his engagement
on the subject. I also want to thank Under-SecretaryGeneral DiCarlo and Mr. Christiane for their briefings,
and of course to express our great appreciation to our
Dutch colleague and his team for their very diligent
work in facilitating the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015).
This is the fifth briefing on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015) during Sweden’s tenure on the
Council and probably the last, so I would like to reiterate
our principled position on this agenda item. The Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a prime
example of finding successful multilateral solutions
to collectively shared challenges. It has effectively
ensured the exclusively peaceful nature of the Iranian
nuclear programme and made our world a safer place

18-4336913/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

in that regard. It should also be seen in the broader
non-proliferation context. The undermining of the Plan
of Action risks undermining our efforts elsewhere.
Together with its European Union partners, Sweden
continues to strongly support the full implementation
of the agreement. We welcome Iran’s continued
engagement and implementation of its nuclear-related
obligations under the Plan of Action, as reported by
the International Atomic Energy Agency. I want to
equally welcome Iran’s participation in this meeting,
since Iran is a party to the JCPOA and directly affected
by resolution 2231 (2015). Iran’s early ratification
of the Additional Protocol would be a significant
confidence-building measure. It is very important to
respect both sides of the deal. The procurement channel
must be kept functioning and the Joint Commission
should continue to discuss any outstanding issues under
the agreement. It is also important that the Iranian
people continue to experience the economic benefits of
the deal. The withdrawal of the United States and its
reimposition of sanctions is therefore regrettable. We
fully support the efforts within the European Union to
protect and preserve the JCPOA in all its aspects.
Like many others, we continue to express our
serious concerns about ballistic-missile activity that
is inconsistent with annex B of resolution 2231 (2015),
including the most recent test, on 1 December. That
matter, however, should be addressed separately and
not at the expense of the JCPOA. Iran must heed the
Council’s call and refrain from any actions that put
its commitment to resolution 2231 (2015) in doubt.
All parties must contribute to further de-escalation in
the region. With respect to other alleged transfers and
possible arms shipments, we thank the Secretariat for
its thorough analysis and reporting so far in relation to
the information at hand. We appreciate today’s update
by Under-Secretary-General DiCarlo and look forward
to further analysis, as appropriate, in due course.
As our term on the Council comes to an end, we
note that divisions in the region remain deep, to the
detriment of international peace and security both in the
region and beyond. We believe that the Council should
intensify efforts to bridge those divides. All actors
in the region must now come together to de-escalate
tensions and make common efforts to achieve political
solutions to the ongoing conflicts and crises in the
region. It is also crucial to continue the important
political dialogue with Iran on its role in the region,
as well as on the human rights situation in the country.
14/26

12/12/2018

We will continue that dialogue through our established
channels, including through the European Union.
In conclusion, at a time when multilateralism
is often described as under pressure, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action remains a model for
successful multilateral negotiations and reaffirms the
principle of the peaceful settlement of disputes under
the Charter of the United Nations for our common good
as the norm. It is important to hold on to it.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to join others in welcoming the
participation of the United States Secretary of State,
Mr. Mike Pompeo, in today’s meeting. I also thank
Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General
for Political Affairs, for her comprehensive briefing
on the sixth report of the Secretary-General on the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089),
as well as the Facilitator for the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), and the observer of the
European Union on behalf of the Joint Commission, for
their briefings to the Council.
Three years ago, Kuwait welcomed the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action and the Security
Council’s subsequent adoption of resolution 2231
(2015). It is true that the agreement does not address
all of the concerns of the countries of the region, such
as deteriorating security conditions and interference
in their domestic affairs. However, we welcomed the
agreement because we fully support all United Nations
resolutions, efforts and endeavours that seek to achieve
security and stability in the Middle East. We maintain
a principled and firm position on all non-proliferation
issues in general, and on a Middle East free of weapons
of mass destruction in particular.
We have taken note of the sixth report of the
Secretary-General, drafted in accordance with annex B
of resolution 2231 (2015), which provides an overview
of the nuclear-related provisions and ballistic-missile
and arms-related provisions geared to strengthening the
resolution’s implementation. In that regard, we welcome
the contents of the report on Iran’s implementation of
its commitments related to its nuclear programme, as
verified by the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA). We reiterate that Iran should stay on that
positive course, in accordance with the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT) and the
IAEA Comprehensive Safeguards Agreement. Iran’s
early ratification of the Additional Protocol would
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

guarantee that it is continuing to maintain its status as
a non-nuclear-weapon State.
The provisions of resolution 2231 (2015) are
not limited to nuclear issues alone. They extend
to controlling activities related to ballistic-missile
technologies and the transfer of traditional weapons.
In that regard, we are concerned about the continued
firing of ballistic missiles into the Kingdom of Saudi
Arabia, as the report states. The report also mentions
the transfer of weapons and military equipment to other
countries in the region. The Secretariat could not verify
the dates on which such transfers took place but is
continuing to investigate the issue of ballistic missiles.
We still consider the matter very serious and a possible
threat to international peace and security.
Kuwait condemns the recurring firing of ballistic
missiles into our sister Kingdom of Saudi Arabia,
threatening its national security and jeopardizing
civilians’ lives. We stress our firm position in that
regard, which calls for maintaining security and stability
in the region and the safety of its peoples. It is also
important to refrain from interfering in the domestic
affairs of countries and to respect their sovereignty in
accordance with the provisions of the Charter of the
United Nations, international law and the principles
of good-neighbourliness, as well as to work to settle
disputes by peaceful means, refrain from the threat or
use of force and reject sectarianism.
In conclusion, the State of Kuwait reiterates that
the Security Council should continue to shoulder its
responsibilities and follow up on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) in a comprehensive manner
that guarantees compliance by Iran and other States
with their commitments, not only in the area of
nuclear non-proliferation but also with regard to other
issues mentioned in the resolution. I would also like
to take this opportunity to express our appreciation
to Ambassador van Oosterom, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), and to the members of his delegation for their
efforts in the past year. We wish them and their friendly
country every success.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would first like to thank Under-Secretary-General
DiCarlo and Ambassador van Oosterom for their
briefings. I welcome Secretary of State Pompeo to the
Security Council today.

S/PV. 8418

The Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA),
as a multilateral agreement endorsed by the Security
Council, has the effect of international law, and as
an important achievement of multilateralism is in
the common interest of the international community.
It has played a significant role in upholding the
international nuclear-non-proliferation regime and
maintaining peace and stability in the Middle East.
It also serves as a model for addressing international
and regional hotspot issues by political and diplomatic
means. Despite the significant changes that have
occurred in the international situation in the past
six months, the current parties to the JCPOA, given
their sense of responsibility, have continued to focus
on implementing the agreement while maintaining
normal economic and trade cooperation with Iran, and
have received broad support from the international
community. The International Atomic Energy Agency
has confirmed Iran’s compliance with its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA 13 consecutive
times. The coordination between the Council and the
procurement channel is functioning normally. Practice
has shown that the JCPOA is an effective agreement
and should be fully and effectively implemented.
The implementation of the JCPOA is now at a
critical juncture. China appreciates Iran’s efforts to
implement resolution 2231 (2015) and the JCPOA. We
hope that Iran can continue its implementation and
that the other parties to the agreement will continue
to honour their commitments as well. China deplores
the fact that the United States has withdrawn from the
JCPOA and made a decision to reimpose sanctions. It
calls on all parties to work to find the right solution
to the difficulties in maintaining normal economic and
trade cooperation with Iran. We believe that all parties
concerned must bear the overall long-term interests in
mind, adhere to multilateralism, uphold multilateral
agreements, fulfil their responsibilities and obligations
and facilitate the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015) and the JCPOA.
The report of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089)
emphasizes the need for all parties to adhere to
multilateralism, cooperate in responding to challenges
and work together to preserve the JCPOA. It supports
the initiatives of the parties to the JCPOA to protect
the freedom to pursue legitimate business with Iran,
in accordance with resolution 2231 (2015), and calls
on all parties to support the procurement channel.
China expresses its appreciation for those elements.

18-4336915/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

12/12/2018

At the same time, China also believes that the report
of the Secretary-General should be balanced and
objective, comprehensively reflect the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015) and fully address Iran’s
legitimate concerns. The Secretariat needs to act
strictly in accordance with its mandate and functions so
as to avoid including unverified elements in the report.

Action (JCPOA), on the Iranian nuclear programme.
We believe that that agreement and the subsequent
follow-up and monitoring regime reflect the value of
multilateralism and diplomacy in peacefully resolving
international disputes and maintaining international
peace and security, and that it must be preserved for
that reason.

In the current circumstances, the parties should
exercise caution in dealing with Iran’s missile launches
and accurately interpret resolution 2231 (2015). On
several occasions, Iran has stated that it is committed
to fully complying with its obligations under the
JCPOA, that it has no intention of developing nuclear
weapons and that its missiles are not designed to be
capable of delivering nuclear weapons. Such a stance
deserves attention. China commends Ambassador Van
Oosterom, in his role as Facilitator, and his team for
their efforts in facilitating the 2231 format. China has
taken note of the recent report of the Joint Commission
to the Security Council on the status of the Procurement
Working Group’s decisions and on any implementation
issues (see S/2018/1070) and will continue to participate
in its work.

With regard to the sixth report (S/2018/1089)
of the Secretary-General on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), we welcome the progress made
in the implementation of the JCPOA and commend the
monitoring activities carried out by the International
Atomic Energy Agency. It has been verified once again
that Iran is complying with all the provisions of the
agreement, including the Additional Protocol to its
Safeguards Agreement. We must nevertheless express
our concern about allegations of an alleged violation of
paragraph 2 of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015), which
refers to activities involving the supply, sale, transfer
or export of dual-use items, materials, equipment,
goods and technology. We stress the need for strict
compliance with all restrictive measures contained in
annex B, which include transfers related to nuclear
energy, ballistic missiles and weapons to or from Iran,
as well as provisions on asset freezes and travel bans.

China has always advocated for a political and
diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue and
remains committed to consolidating the international
nuclear non-proliferation regime and the maintenance
of international and regional peace and stability. China
will continue to uphold the principles of impartiality
and objectivity with a firm sense of responsibility and
work with the international community in its tireless
efforts to uphold the JCPOA.
Mr. Meza-Cuadra (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): At
the outset, we welcome the presence of the Secretary of
State of the United States of America, Mr. Mike Pompeo.
We are grateful for the convening of this meeting
and the important briefings by Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo and Ambassador Karel van
Oosterom, to whom we express our special thanks for
his work this year as Facilitator on the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015). We are also grateful for the
briefing by the observer of the European Union.
As a country committed to multilateralism,
international law and the non-proliferation regimes
for weapons of mass destruction, Peru gives high
priority to compliance with and the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), through which the Security
Council endorsed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
16/26

In relation to that and to the arms embargo imposed
by the Council in connection with the conflict in Yemen,
we must also express our concern about reports of the
alleged transfer of Iranian-made ballistic missiles,
their parts and related technology to the Houthi rebels
in Yemen. We encourage the Iranian authorities to
carefully consider and address those concerns with a
view to fostering greater confidence in their readiness
to comply with their international commitments
and obligations, thereby generating new dynamics
conducive to the promotion of sustainable peace in the
Middle East.
In that regard, we share the Secretary-General’s
view of the need to address issues not directly
related to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
without prejudice to preserving the agreement and its
accomplishments. Specifically, in accordance with
paragraph 3 of annex B to resolution 2231 (2015), we
urge the Iranian authorities not to engage in any activity
related to ballistic missiles designed to be capable of
launching nuclear weapons, including launches using
such ballistic-missile technology. We believe that it is
of the utmost importance that the Iranian authorities
act prudently and with self-restraint, given that the
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

development of their ballistic missile programme is
perceived as provocative and/or an armed escalation
capable of increasing tensions in a particularly unstable
region.
In conclusion, I underscore the importance of
the Council remaining united in shouldering its
responsibility to ensure the full enforcement and
implementation of the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015) with a view to ensuring the validity of the
non-proliferation regime and maintaining international
peace and security.
Mr. Umarov (Kazakhstan): I thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo; the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, Serge Christiane; and
Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for their informative
briefings. I would also like to welcome the participation
of Secretary of State Pompeo in our deliberations here.
My delegation is pleased to note the following positive
elements of the sixth report of the Secretary-General
(S/2018/1089) on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015).
First, the report very correctly and accurately
notes the great importance and historical role of the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA), as
delineated in resolution 2231 (2015), which was adopted
unanimously. My country is proud to have contributed
to that historic negotiation process by organizing two
rounds of constructive negotiations in Almaty in 2013.
Secondly, the report very clearly notes Iran’s
unwavering commitment to its nuclear obligations in the
framework of the JCPOA, which has been confirmed 13
times by the relevant reports of the International Atomic
Energy Agency. We welcome the Secretary-General’s
view and appeal to all parties, including the people of
Iran, that everyone should benefit from this agreement.
In that regard, we join in the welcome accorded to the
aspirations of the parties to the agreement to ensure the
freedom of their economic operators to cooperate with
Iran, as stipulated in the JCPOA.
Thirdly, the report very appropriately notes the
confident support of the majority of the international
community for further preserving and implementing the
JCPOA. That is a very clear signal that its success has
justified the means, and current achievements should
be consolidated and built upon. In that regard, we once
again agree with the Secretary-General that issues
not directly related to the Plan should be addressed

S/PV. 8418

without prejudice to and with a view to preserving the
agreement and its accomplishments.
Let me point out other aspects that are of concern
to us. First, we unfortunately continue to observe that
the Secretary-General’s report contains notifications
and claims from Member States that do not allow us
to reach the unconditional conclusion that Iran has
violated the requirements of resolution 2231 (2015). In
our opinion, such points only dilute the content of the
report and weaken its validity. All paragraphs about
such notifications conclude with the provision that the
relevant claim requires further analysis and verification
by the Secretariat. The mechanism of interaction of
the Secretariat with the Security Council regarding
the checking of such notifications from Member
States, as well as special trips for examining physical
evidence, remains unclear. As the Secretariat does not
have a direct mandate to carry out such actions, we
should seriously consider how to deal with responses
to Member States’ notifications of alleged violations
of resolution 2231 (2015) in the future. Secondly, we
would like to see in the report a full reflection of both
annexes of resolution 2231 (2015). That issue has also
been raised by Council members for several years.
Turning to notifications of alleged violations, we
advocate that issues not involving clear restrictions or
prohibitions under resolution 2231 (2105), including
controversial issues related to Iran’s ballistic-missile
activities, should be discussed, in case of serious need,
separately and without prejudice to prospects for the
further implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015).
Kazakhstan reiterates its support for the JCPOA,
as stipulated in President Nazarbayev’s policy address,
which we presented to the Security Council last year
(see S/PV.7857). We believe that it plays a very vital
role in ensuring primarily nuclear security in the
region, and thereby opens up prospects for cooperation
with Iran in many other areas. That is not in violation
of the current restrictive measures of the Security
Council, which are respected and strictly executed by
Kazakhstan. We are interested in developing active
cooperation with all countries of the region, owing to
our geographical location and transit potential. Thanks
to our multilateral agreements, we are observing a
revival of trade and economic cooperation, leading to
regional development.

18-4336917/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

To conclude, I would like to congratulate the
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015), Ambassador Karel van Oosterom of the
Netherlands, on the completion of his duties, and
commend his committed and tireless efforts to ensuring
that resolution 2231 (2015) fulfils its objectives. As we
come to the end of our term on the Council, we remain
hopeful that the JCPOA and resolution 2231 (2015) will
continue to make their contributions to strengthening
the non-proliferation regime and ensuring stability and
peace in the region.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): I would like to thank
today’s briefers: the Under-Secretary-General for
Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo; Mr. Serge
Christiane; and Ambassador Karel van Oosterom for
their respective briefings. I welcome the presence
among us today of the Secretary of State of the United
States, Mr. Mike Pompeo.
Poland welcomes the sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1089) on the implementation of Security
Council resolution 2231 (2015), which we find to be
objective and balanced. The Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action (JCPOA) has been an important achievement
of multilateral diplomacy, the objectives of which have
been concurrent with our shared goal of strengthening
nuclear non-proliferation.
We note that the International Atomic Energy
Agency (IAEA) has reported that the Islamic Republic
of Iran is implementing its nuclear-related commitments
under the Plan and that the Agency itself continues to
verify the non-diversion of declared nuclear material
and the absence of undeclared nuclear material and
activities in Iran. We welcome the efforts of the IAEA
to strictly monitor and verify Iran’s commitments in
order the guarantee that the Iranian nuclear programme
remains peaceful and that Iran fulfils all of its nuclearrelated commitments under the JCPOA and the Treaty
on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. We call
on Iran to continue to apply the Additional Protocol to
its Safeguards Agreement and to formally ratify that
Protocol in the near future.
At the same time, the stabilization of the situation
in the Middle East is crucial to global security. For
that reason, we should strive not only to guarantee the
peaceful nature of the Iranian nuclear programme, but
also take steps to develop a comprehensive solution
to the security problems in the region. It is necessary
to take a broader perspective on the matter. Iran’s
18/26

12/12/2018

activity cannot be seen only from the point of view
of its compliance with the nuclear deal. That nuclear
agreement does not deal with all of the contentious
issues related to Iran’s regional policy and its capacities
related to delivery systems.
Taking into account the current tensions in the
Middle East, Iran’s policy — including the development
of ballistic missiles — is causing justified concerns.
Ballistic missile tests and some of Iran’s activities
in the region, including reported missile transfers
to non-State actors in Lebanon, Yemen and Syria,
may deepen mistrust and are inconsistent with the
provisions of relevant Security Council resolutions,
including resolutions 1540 (2004), 2216 (2015) and 2231
(2015). The launching of Zolfaghar short-range ballistic
missiles and Qiam missiles against targets in the town
of Hajin in Syria on 30 September and 1 October, as
well as the testing of medium-range ballistic missiles
conducted by Iran on 1 December and other testing of
ballistic missiles, constitute unnecessary escalation.
Declarations by the Iranian authorities on the
continuation of their missile testing in order to
build up its defence capabilities may be perceived as
provocative, threatening and contrary to the provisions
of annex B of resolution 2231 (2015). Such actions are
counterproductive to the stabilization of the situation in
the Middle East, as well as efforts to prevent the further
proliferation of nuclear weapons. We call on Iran to
refrain from actions that could undermine the further
implementation of both the JCPOA and resolution 2231
(2015).
Poland supports the procurement channel and
the Procurement Working Group, as well as the
coordinating role of the European Union within the
format, as we believe that that transparency measure
ensures the conformity of relevant transfers with
resolution 2231 (2015) and contributes to supporting
the non-proliferation regime.
Last but not least, I would like to thank Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom of the Netherlands for his excellent
work as Facilitator for the implementation of resolution
2231 (2015). Both the Ambassador and his team have
shown the professionalism and necessary transparency
in promoting the efficient work of this difficult format
of the Council.
Mr. Llorentty Solíz (Plurinational State of Bolivia)
(spoke in Spanish): My delegation wishes to join other
members of the Council in welcoming the United States
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

Secretary of State, Mr. Mike Pompeo, who is with us in
the Chamber today. I also wish to express our gratitude
for the briefings delivered by the Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political Affairs, Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo;
the Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of
the European Union to the United Nations, Mr. Serge
Christiane; and, of course, the Facilitator for the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom. We also welcome the presence
among us today of the representatives of Germany and
the Islamic Republic of Iran.
As this is likely to be the final time that my delegation
will participate as a member of the Council in a meeting
in this format on the topic of non-proliferation, I wish to
reiterate that Bolivia is part of the world’s first densely
populated region to be completely free of nuclear
weapons and, as provided for in the Treaty for the
Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and
the Caribbean, of which Bolivia is a signatory, we have
assumed the responsibility of contributing to putting
an end to the arms race — especially the nuclear arms
race — and to consolidating a peaceful world. In that
regard, we reiterate our call for a world free of nuclear
weapons, which is a view we have consistently promoted
in our efforts on the Security Council to ensure that the
Middle East joins the world’s five nuclear-weapon-free
zones.
Bolivia strongly reaffirms its commitment to the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), given that it
represents an unmistakable achievement of diplomacy
and multilateralism and is an expression of the ability
of States that respect international law to carry out
research, produce and use nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes without discrimination, in accordance with
articles I and II of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons. In that vein, I wish to emphasize
a point raised in paragraph 2 of the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2018/1089), which has been introduced today
and is the sixth report since the adoption of resolution
2231 (2015), to the effect that,
“the Islamic Republic of Iran continues the
implementation of its nuclear-related commitments,
as verified by the International Atomic Energy
Agency, in the face of considerable challenges
brought about by the withdrawal of the United
States of America from the Join Comprehensive
Plan of Action and its subsequent decisions to
reimpose all its national sanctions that had been
lifted or waived pursuant to the Plan”.

S/PV. 8418

In that regard, we once again express our regret over
the decision of the Government of the United States of
America to withdraw from the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action and its imposition of unilateral sanctions
against the Islamic Republic of Iran. We believe that
we should be able to generate an atmosphere of mutual
trust among States so that aspirations to a total and
verifiable denuclearization of the Middle East can be
made a reality as early as possible. The clearest symbol
of victory for multilateralism and political dialogue is
indeed the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, and
full compliance with it should serve as a guarantee for
the strengthening of other denuclearization plans, such
as that of the Korean peninsula.
For my delegation, the 12 years of intense
diplomatic activity that achieved an overall, longterm and appropriate solution to the Iranian nuclear
issue through the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action,
which the Security Council endorsed unanimously in
resolution 2231 (2015), cannot be postponed by the
unilateral decision of a Member State or a group of States
of a region that jeopardizes the very implementation of
the Plan.
In light of this, Bolivia welcomes the resolve of the
Plan participants that have renewed their commitment
to its fully and effectively implementation. At the
meeting of the Joint Commission, held in Vienna on
6 July, and at the ministerial meeting of the E3/EU+2
and the Islamic Republic of Iran, held in New York
on 24 September, they outlined initiatives aimed at
protecting the freedom of economic agents wishing
to maintain legitimate trade relations with the Islamic
Republic of Iran, in accordance with resolution 2231
(2015).
In that understanding, it is the responsibility of the
Security Council to preserve the Plan of Action as it was
conceived, guaranteeing reciprocal commitments to its
full implementation, in good faith and in a constructive
atmosphere based on mutual respect. In this context,
the Council membership is the main guarantor in terms
of avoiding any action that threatens to undermine
the Plan. We therefore express our full support and
welcome for any future initiative of the SecretaryGeneral to ensure the validity of the Plan.
Bolivia once again expresses its interest in seeing
future reports providing more in-depth information
regarding annex A, since both annexes — A and B — are

18-4336919/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

comprehensive and complementary for the effective
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015).
Finally, as a pacifist country, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia, reaffirms its commitment to preventive
diplomacy, multilateralism, non-interference and
respect for the sovereignty, independence and territorial
integrity of States, in the understanding that these are
universal principles recognized by the international
community.
Mr. Ndong Mba (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): At the outset, my delegation would like to
express its gratitude and satisfaction to Ms. Rosemary
DiCarlo, Under-Secretary-General for Political
Affairs; Ambassador Karel van Oosterom, Permanent
Representative of the Netherlands, in his capacity as
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for his excellent work; and Mr. Serge Christiane,
Chargé d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the
European Union to the United Nations, in his capacity
as Coordinator of the Joint Commission of the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action. We thank them all for
the comprehensive and detailed briefings they have just
presented.
Furthermore, we welcome His Excellency Mr. Mike
Pompeo, Secretary of State of the United States, and
wish him a wonderful stay in New York. His presence
among us this morning reflects the great importance
of the topic we are discussing. I therefore congratulate
Côte d’Ivoire for having foreseen it in its programme
of work.
The Republic of Equatorial Guinea would like
to thank the Secretary-General for his balanced
and comprehensive sixth report (S/2018/1089) on
the implementation of resolution 2231 (2015). The
resolution, which was adopted unanimously by
the Security Council, is the faithful result of the
international community’s commitment to providing
a collective response to the non-proliferation regime,
and remains a key element of the global architecture of
multilateral diplomacy.
Our delegation joins others in commending the
work of the International Atomic Energy Agency, under
the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, to ensure that
the Iranian nuclear programme continues in accordance
with the measures imposed by the Plan itself. The
International Atomic Energy Agency has confirmed
in more than a dozen consecutive reports that Iran is
fulfilling its commitments under the agreement. We
20/26

12/12/2018

welcome that confirmation, despite the considerable
challenges that led to the withdrawal of the United States
from the Plan and its subsequent decision to reimpose
all unilateral sanctions that had been lifted or waived in
accordance with the Plan. However, we expect Iran to
continue to implement all of its nuclear commitments
in full, as provided for by the Joint Comprehensive Plan
of Action.
Concerns persist about the full implementation of
the provisions related to ballistic missiles and transfers
of weapons to and from the Islamic Republic of Iran
involving territories of the region, taking into account
that some reports on this matter have not yet been
duly verified. In this regard, we invite competent,
duly mandated institutions to conduct a thorough,
effective, independent and impartial investigation into
these reports and to subsequently inform the Security
Council.
At the same time, the recent alleged launch by
the Iranian Government of medium-range ballistic
missiles — if verified and confirmed — would
undermine all advances that have been registered to
date and weaken an agreement that has contributed to
regional and international peace and security. However,
diverging opinions among certain States with greater
research capacity call into question the certainty of
others regarding the verification of such events, as
well as creating further tension in the region. In this
connection, we appeal to the Government of the Islamic
Republic of Iran to continue to respect and strictly
abide by the provisions of resolution 2231 (2015), which
forbid it, inter alia, from carrying out activities relating
to ballistic missiles capable of delivering nuclear
weapons.
As a State party to the Treaty on the
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, the Republic of
Equatorial Guinea strongly condemns the proliferation
and use of weapons of war in the Middle East, as well
as the use of force in international relations. We accept
the use of force only when it is in accordance with the
principles of international law and the provisions of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Finally, and in line with our foreign policy
objectives and the ideals of peace and stability promoted
and defended by our Government and its President, His
Excellency Mr. Teodoro Obiang Nguema Mbasogo,
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea reaffirms its
commitment to preventive diplomacy, non-interference
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

and respect for the sovereignty, independence and
territorial integrity of States. We therefore encourage
all parties involved to preserve the Joint Comprehensive
Plan of Action, strictly adhering to the responsibilities
and obligations they have undertaken and with the same
shared vision for the future.
Let us bear in mind that progress is rooted not in
the creation of differences, but in advancing together
towards a better future that benefits all States. In that
context, we once again reiterate the official position of
the Republic of Equatorial Guinea in favour of the total
eradication of weapons of mass destruction, including
nuclear weapons, from the face of the Earth. That must
be our aim if we want humankind to be free from this
persistent threat once and for all.
Mr. Amde (Ethiopia): I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General Rosemary DiCarlo, Ambassador
Karel van Oosterom and Mr. Serge Christiane for their
briefings on the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015). Let me also join other Council members in
welcoming and thanking Secretary of State Pompeo for
taking the time to be here with us today.
We have noted from the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2018/1089) that the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to adhere to its nuclear-related commitments.
We have also noted from the report that the International
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) has continued the
verification and monitoring of the implementation of
nuclear-related commitments, the non-diversion of
nuclear materials and the absence of undeclared nuclear
materials and activities by the Islamic Republic of Iran.
The fact that the Secretary-General has not received
any report on the supply, transfer or export to Iran
of nuclear and dual-use items, materials, equipment,
goods and technology is indeed encouraging.
We share the view of the Secretary-General that the
Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) stands
out as a demonstration of successful multilateralism.
It is indeed a symbol or, if we may, an embodiment
of functioning multilateralism, with good results.
However, we recognize the challenges and difficulties
in the broader implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), particularly in relation to the reported activities
allegedly undertaken by Iran contrary to the restrictive
measures contained in annex B to the resolution and
the key findings included in the report of the SecretaryGeneral.

S/PV. 8418

We have noted the communications regarding the
ballistic-missile test by the Islamic Republic of Iran as
reflected in the reports of the Secretary-General and of
the Facilitator (S/2018/1106). We have also noted from
the report of the Secretary-General that the Secretariat
has continued its analysis regarding ballisticmissile-related transfers or activities on the part of
the Islamic Republic of Iran, as well as arms-related
transfers. In our view, such activities, together with
the ballistic missile launched by Iran, will affect the
broader implementation of the JCPOA and resolution
2231 (2015). It will also increase tensions and have
serious regional consequences.
We concur with the Secretary-General’s statement
in his report that “[i]t is essential that the Plan continue
to work for all its participants, including by delivering
tangible economic benefits to the Iranian people”
(S/2018/1089, para. 3). For the JCPOA to continue to
work for all participants and for it to achieve its broader
objective — to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear
weapons and continued dialogue and collaboration
among the remaining participants — is of utmost
importance. In our view, this will enable the remaining
participants to address the challenges encountered in
the implementation of the JCPOA, particularly with
respect to arms- and ballistic-missile-related transfers
as well as ballistic-missile tests. It will also certainly
contribute to the preservation of the Plan, which the
Secretary-General called for in his report.
Mr. Van Oosterom (Netherlands): I will now speak
in my national capacity.
At the outset, I would like to thank UnderSecretary-General DiCarlo and the Chargé d’affaires
ad interim of the Delegation of the European Union,
Mr. Christiane, for their briefings. We also welcome the
reports of the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089) and of
the Joint Commission (see S/2018/1070).
I will focus on three points: first, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA); secondly, our
concerns about Iran’s ballistic-missile programme and
its role in the region; and, thirdly, the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015).
First, with respect to the JCPOA, in our view,
the Plan is a product of years of negotiation, a major
diplomatic accomplishment and a key non-proliferation
achievement. It was unanimously endorsed by the
Security Council in resolution 2231 (2015). Preserving
the agreement is a clear priority for the Kingdom of the

18-4336921/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

Netherlands. The agreement is crucial for the security
of the region, of Europe and of the entire world.
The JCPOA has been delivering on its objective,
which is to prevent Iran from developing nuclear
weapons, an obligation it also has under the Treaty on
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons. Further, the
JCPOA is based on solid verification. Inspectors from
the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) spend
more than 3,000 calendar days per year on the ground in
Iran and monitor more than 25 locations in the country
on a 24/7 basis, which is an important endeavour for
my country and one to which we have contributed more
than €1.5 million.
The inspections have led to already 13 consecutive
IAEA reports confirming that Iran is living up to its
commitments under the JCPOA. It is in that light that
we reiterate our deep regret at the decision of the United
States to withdraw from the agreement. We believe that
the JCPOA effectively blocks the route to an Iranian
nuclear weapon. It is better than any alternative, which
is why we call on the JCPOA participants to remain
committed to the agreement.
This brings me to my second point: our concerns
about Iran’s ballistic-missile programme and its role in
the region. The Kingdom of the Netherlands shares the
serious concerns expressed by many today about Iran’s
ballistic-missile programme, the recent ballistic-missile
tests and Iran’s destabilizing role in the region. We are
concerned about Iran’s meddling in the internal affairs
of such countries as Syria, Lebanon and Yemen, and
about its support for such armed groups as Hizbullah
and the Houthi. We condemn any Iranian involvement
in the transfer of missiles and arms to actors in the
region, including missiles to the Houthi in Yemen. We
call on Iran to refrain from any such activities, to fully
implement resolution 2231 (2015) and to engage in
serious dialogue on these concerns.
With respect to my third point, the implementation
of resolution 2231 (2015), as long as Iran continues
to remain committed to the JCPOA, the international
community should do so as well. We therefore call on the
entire international community to continue to support
and implement resolution 2231 (2015), including the
JCPOA. The international community should ensure
that Iran continues to benefit from the agreement, as
foreseen, including trade through the procurement
channel, as needed. The Kingdom of the Netherlands
will continue to play its part in ensuring the full
22/26

12/12/2018

implementation of resolution 2231 (2015) — nationally,
as a member of the European Union, and, this year, as
Facilitator for the resolution in the Security Council.
In conclusion, the Kingdom of the Netherlands
sees it as a clear priority that the JCPOA participants,
including Iran, and the international community
remain committed to resolution 2231 (2015), including
the JCPOA, especially now that the agreement seems
to be at a crossroads. At the same time, Iran should
address the international concerns about its ballisticmissile programme and its destabilizing role in the
region. The JCPOA showed that the international
community could come together and resolve even the
most complex of issues. It showed that it is possible to
overcome differences through dialogue and diplomacy.
It is a clear example of effective multilateralism, and
ensuring the continued implementation of resolution
2231 (2015) is in the interests of the Iranian people, of
the region and of us all.
The President (spoke in French): I shall now make
a statement in my capacity as the representative of Côte
d’Ivoire.
I would like to thank Ms. Rosemary DiCarlo,
Under-Secretary-General for Political Affairs, for
her briefing on the sixth report of the SecretaryGeneral on the implementation of Security Council
resolution 2231 (2015) (S/2018/1089). I would also
like to thank Ambassador Karel van Oosterom,
Permanent Representative of the Netherlands and
Facilitator for the implementation of resolution 2231
(2015), for introducing his latest six-month report (see
S/2018/1106). I also thank Mr. Serge Christiane, Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Delegation of the European
Union, for his excellent briefing on the activities of the
Procurement Working Group. Finally, I would like to
welcome the presence among us of the United States
Secretary of State, Mr. Michael Pompeo, and Ms. Maria
Luiza Ribeiro Viotti, Chef de Cabinet of the SecretaryGeneral, who is not often with us, but whom I personally
would like to see more often at our meetings.
More than three years after its adoption, the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is today
at a crossroads. The unity of the Council, which
made possible the adoption of resolution 2231 (2015)
endorsing the JCPOA, is now being undermined, to the
point of impacting the interpretation of the provisions of
the Plan, which had been welcomed by the international
community.
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

With regard to the Iranian nuclear issue, my
delegation would like to express its appreciation for the
cooperation between the Iranian Government and the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Indeed,
as highlighted in the Secretary-General’s report
(S/2018/1089), the IAEA continues to perform its role,
without hindrance, in the verification of Iranian nuclear
facilities.
In the Agency’s latest report, dated 12 November,
it notes that Iran is in compliance with its commitments
under the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, has not
enriched uranium to prohibited levels or created illegal
stockpiles and continues to apply, on a provisional basis,
the Additional Protocol to its Safeguards Agreement,
pending its entry into force. Based on that observation,
my delegation believes that the implementation of the
Iranian nuclear agreement should continue since it meets
the requirements of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons.
With regard to the issue of ballistic missiles, my
country remains concerned about reports that Iran
tested medium-range ballistic missiles, which could be
nuclear-weapon delivery systems, on 1 December.
Côte d’Ivoire would like to take this opportunity
to urge the Iranian authorities to strictly uphold their
obligations, which would undoubtedly contribute to
facilitating discussions on the implementation of the
JCPOA and strengthening confidence and cooperation
among the signatory parties. It also invites them to
dispel all doubts with regard to alleged ballistic-missile
transfers. In that regard, my country supports the
establishment of consensual investigation mechanisms
to establish the truth on that issue.
With regard to information on the illicit transfer
of and discovery in the region of debris from other
types of weapons allegedly manufactured in Iran, my
delegation urges the United Nations to expeditiously
conclude investigations into their origins and the timing
of their transfer. Côte d’Ivoire would like to encourage
the Iranian authorities to reassure the international
community by scrupulously applying the provisions of
the Security Council resolutions relating to, inter alia,
the travel ban and measures to freeze assets.
Given that Côte d’Ivoire is strongly committed
to multilateralism and the promotion of multilateral
frameworks, where consensus is built to address current
threats to international peace and security, I would
like to reiterate our support for the JCPOA, which

S/PV. 8418

remains a strong guarantee of the implementation of
the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore urges the parties to the
Plan of Action to agree on the interpretation of its
provisions and resolve any misunderstandings through
the mechanisms provided for that purpose, in particular
the Joint Commission established in its annex IV. My
country also encourages them to maintain their level
of commitment and work together towards the full
implementation of the Plan, which, like any human
undertaking, remains open to improvement.
My delegation urges all States parties, without
exception, to return to the negotiating table and calls
on them to fully uphold their respective commitments,
while bearing in mind the need to strengthen
international security by fully implementing the
agreement, which has already led to significant progress.
Côte d’Ivoire also invites the Islamic Republic of Iran
to pay particular attention to the concerns raised by the
members of the Council and maintain its cooperation
with the International Atomic Energy Agency. It also
calls on Iran to scrupulously respect the provisions of
resolution 2231 (2015).
I now resume my functions as President of the
Security Council.
I give the floor to the representative of the Islamic
Republic of Iran.
Mr. Al Habib (Islamic Republic of Iran): I would
like to begin by sincerely thanking those Council
members who have reaffirmed their commitment to
continue supporting the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA). At a time when multilateralism is
under threat, preserving the JCPOA, which, according
to the Secretary-General, is a demonstration of
successful multilateralism and a major achievement in
dialogue and diplomacy, is of utmost importance.
From that perspective, we laud the call made by the
Secretary-General in his report (S/2018/1089) on the
JCPOA participants, the Council, all Member States
and regional and other international actors to ensure
the continuity of that agreement, which is fundamental
to regional and international peace and security.
At this meeting, which is being held to consider the
implementation of resolution 2231 (2015), the Council
should consider and address all obstacles created to its
implementation, focusing in particular on its provisions
on promoting and facilitating the development of

18-4336923/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

normal economic and trade contacts and cooperation
with Iran.
As is well known, the sustainability of the JCPOA
has been seriously challenged by the unilateral and
unlawful conduct of the United States in withdrawing
from the JCPOA and reimposing illegal sanctions
against Iran. It is a clear violation of the resolution,
which calls upon all States, without exception — all
States, without exception — which includes the United
States, not only to take actions as may be appropriate to
support the implementation of the JCPOA, but also to
refrain from actions that undermine the implementation
of commitments under the JCPOA. Therefore, the
Council should consider the United States’ illegal acts
as a flagrant violation of the resolution and hold it
accountable for such violation.
It is evident that any inaction or leniency in
taking appropriate action to prevent any violation of
the resolution will only embolden the United States
to continue its unlawful practices and irresponsible
policies. The irony is that the United States, which
itself is in absolute violation of resolution 2231 (2015),
today accused Iran of violating that resolution. What
we heard today was another series of lies, fabrications,
disinformation and deceptive statements by the United
States. This is not unprecedented. Suffice it to recall
the infamous speeches made in the past in this very
Chamber by United States officials.
This is not surprising. Deception is an inseparable
part of the United States’ foreign policy, as is bullying
and its addiction to sanctions and warmongering. A
clear example of such policies is the American approach
to Iran’s peaceful nuclear programme, about which it
manufactured an unnecessary crisis and was successful
in abusing the Council to impose illegal sanctions.
Nevertheless, as soon as the sanctions came to an
end with the conclusion of the JCPOA, and the IAEA
repeatedly confirmed Iran’s full compliance with its
commitments, the United States withdrew from the
JCPOA, violated resolution 2231 (2015), reimposed its
illegal sanctions and started punishing States that abide
by the resolution. Such policies and practices clearly
indicate that even in the past, they did not have any
genuine concern about Iran’s nuclear programme.
Now, for the first time in United Nations history, a
permanent member of the Security Council is blatantly
punishing United Nations Members not for violating,
but rather for complying with a Security Council
24/26

12/12/2018

resolution. That is the first time in the history of the
Security Council. And yet, the United States finds the
audacity to hijack the Council in order to intensify its
hostilities against Iran. We have not forgotten the days
when the United States rendered the Council ineffective
in preventing Saddam’s aggression, stopping the use of
chemical weapons against Iranians, and addressing the
attack on an Iranian civil aircraft over the Persian Gulf
by American forces, killing all 290 people on board,
including 66 children.
Rather than allowing the United States to repeat
such abusive patterns, the Council should strongly
condemn the United States for reimposing its
illegal sanctions against Iranians in violation of the
Charter of the United Nations and international law.
These sanctions only harm the ordinary and, more
importantly, vulnerable people of Iran, such as women,
children, the elderly and patients. They prevent even
the import of basic foodstuffs, medicine and medical
devices to Iran. Unlike the United States declaration,
in practice there are no exceptions or exemptions for
importing such needs. Now they argue that banks
do not have confidence in Iran’s banking system to
facilitate those transactions. “That is Iran’s problem,”
they say. “It is not our problem.” Is this not ironic and
disgraceful? How come they had confidence to Iran’s
banking system until weeks ago, and suddenly and
for no reason lost their confidence? In fact, they avoid
such transactions because they are intimidated and
threatened by a bullying and irresponsible State.
On 7 November, the United States Secretary of State
threatened all Iranians with mass starvation. He said
that the Iranian “leadership has to make a decision that
they want their people to eat”. Does the weaponizing
of food and medicine against civilians have any
other designation than as a crime against humanity?
Is the disruption of free trade and the application of
United States national laws to other nations, thereby
disrespecting their sovereignty, not a clear manifestation
of economic terrorism? The international community
should stand against American bullying policies and
the United States authorities should be held to account
for ordering, committing and enforcing such horrible
crimes.
Through fabrication, disinformation and invoking
irrelevant criteria, the United States tries to create
ambiguity and confusion in order to misinterpret the
resolution with regard to Iran’s missile launches. Here,
I draw the Council’s attention to the interpretation of
18-43369

12/12/2018

Non-proliferation

relevant paragraphs of the resolution by the United
States Special Envoy for Iran, who says that the
resolution “simply” and “kindly” calls upon Iran not to
undertake certain activity. He then concludes that the
resolution’s language is “hardly a clear and enforceable
prohibition”.
Iran’s ballistic missile programme is designed
to be exclusively capable of delivering conventional
warheads required to deter foreign threats. While
the Americans argue that Iran’s security concerns
are entirely self-generated, and also hypocritically
state that Iran faces no natural threat from Israel, as
recently as three months ago Israel’s Prime Minister
threatened Iran even with nuclear annihilation. That
was definitely a wishful dream. Moreover, no one can
ignore the consistent tremendous threats Iran continues
to face from the United States itself, in particular
through its outdated mantra of “all options are on the
table” — which amounts to a military threat.
They are dreaming wishfully to bring us back to
those days when Saddam’s planes bombed an Iranian
city for 105 minutes — the longest aerial assault since
the Second World War — killing and injuring over 1,000
civilians. They also wish to bring us back to those days
when Saddam rained missiles on our cities — some of
them carrying chemical components provided by the
United States — and Iran was actively prevented from
purchasing even the most rudimentary means of selfdefence to at least deter the aggressor. No one should be
surprised that they even prevented the export of barbed
wire to Iran. Most such restrictions continue.
We have paid a very high price to save our territory
from the aggressors and to ensure the security of our
borders and citizens. Those days have long passed.
Living in such a volatile region as the Middle East, our
Government will not and cannot compromise on its
security and its conventional defensive capability, as no
other country does.
Describing Iran as a source of regional threat is
nothing but a shifting of blame in order to sell more
American “beautiful weapons” — as the United States
President calls them. Conflicts, insecurity and instability
in our region have two main sources: the occupation
of Palestine by Israel and America’s interventions and
massive military build-up in the region. Who can also
forget the United States role — as openly confessed
by its President during his campaign — in creating
the ugliest face of terrorism, the monstrous Islamic

S/PV. 8418

State in Iraq and the Sham (ISIS)? If not for Iran’s
support and help, the black flag of ISIS would still be
flying around the Middle East. Our neighbours have
repeatedly acknowledged Iran’s role in fighting and
defeating Da’esh in their countries. In reaction to Iran’s
prominent role in fighting terrorist groups in Syria and
Iraq, such groups have conducted a few terrorist attacks
in Iran in 2017 and 2018, including in our Parliament.
Today, in addition to transferring ISIS elements to
Afghanistan and Central Asian countries, the United
States has extended its sponsorship of terrorism to a
vicious terrorist cult, the Mujahideen-e-Khalq, that
has murdered more than 17,000 Iranians — including
children, women, girls, officials and other ordinary
people — and many Iraqis, and whose leaders currently
cosy up to the highest political figures in Washington,
D.C., to destabilize Iran through terrorist activities.
Here, I would like to stress that according to the
Charter of the United Nations, the Council represents
all Member States and that its decisions should
therefore also echo their views. Almost all Members of
the Organization have strongly supported the JCPOA
and loudly voiced their rejection of the illegal unilateral
sanctions that is a clear violation of resolution 2231
(2015). Consequently, the Council should hold the
United States accountable for reimposing such sanctions
and demand that it end their application. That would
also would be in line with the obligation imposed on
the United States by the International Court of Justice
order issued unanimously on 3 October, which is a clear
testament to the illegality of the United States sanctions.
I would also like to clarify that our legal and
technical observations on the report of the SecretaryGeneral are contained in a letter that I sent to you
yesterday, Mr. President, which also covers our views
on issues that I did not address in my remarks today.
Last but not least, the United States representative
made baseless allegations against Iran, most of which
are either not relevant to the agenda of this meeting or
do not even fall within the Council’s purview. I have
therefore confined my statement to this meeting’s
agenda, as I did not want to defy it as that representative
did. At the same time, my country has responded to
those allegations either through our Foreign Ministry or
our representatives in the relevant international forums
in Geneva, Vienna, The Hague or here in New York.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Germany.

18-4336925/26

S/PV.8418

Non-proliferation

Mr. Heusgen (Germany): I thank you very much,
Mr. President, for including Germany in today’s
meeting. I appreciate that all colleagues have stayed
until the end of the debate. I also thank the Secretary
of State of the United States for having stayed for
more than two hours. In return, I promise to be brief.
Indeed, I can be brief because I basically align myself
with what was said earlier by my colleagues from the
European Union — the representatives of France, the
United Kingdom, Sweden, Poland and the Netherlands.
I would like to start by thanking Under-SecretaryGeneral Rosemary DiCarlo for presenting the report of
the Secretary-General (S/2018/1089). We believe that
it is a very good report — thorough, well-evidenced
and balanced. We believe also that its current scope and
methodology, with a focus on annex B, is appropriate. I
would like to take this occasion to reject the criticisms
of the report that have been voiced. I believe that, having
been tasked with reporting on the implementation of
resolution 2231 (2015), the Secretary-General must do
so robustly and use the sources at his disposal.
I would also like to thank Ambassador Van
Oosterom for his work as Facilitator. I must also say
that I am very happy that my Belgian colleague Marc
Pecsteen de Buytswerve was selected to follow him in
carrying out the Facilitator’s difficult task.
With regard to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), let me repeat what my Dutch colleague
said about the JCPOA being a major diplomatic
accomplishment and what my Swedish colleague said
about it being a successful multilateral agreement.
I totally share those views. I also commend Federica
Mogherini and the Secretary General of the European
External Action Service, Helga Schmidt, for doing a
fantastic job in stitching together the agreement and
trying everything to keep it alive, which we consider
essential.
Resolution 2231 (2015) endorsed the JCPOA, which
strengthens the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of
Nuclear Weapons. We believe that the JCPOA is a very
important contribution to the global non-proliferation
architecture. It is an important asset for the security
of the region and for the security of Europe, which is
our key interest. Preserving the JCPOA is therefore
very important to us. Our position remains unchanged.
Along with our European partners, Germany will

26/26

12/12/2018

remain committed to the JCPOA as long as Iran is in
full compliance with it. So long as it is, along with our
partners France and Britain and the remaining JCPOA
partners, we will commit to taking the necessary steps
to ensure that Iran continues to receive economic
benefits from sanctions relief.
The full and effective implementation of annex B
in all its aspects is equally important for regional and
international stability. We heard the Secretary of State
eloquently underline the breaches of annex B regarding
arms transfers and ballistic-missile activity. Therefore,
the findings of the Secretary-General give rise to serious
concern. Iran’s programme to develop ballistic missiles
continues to be inconsistent with paragraph 3 of annex
B to resolution 2231 (2015). I would like to give a couple
of examples: the Iranian testing of a medium-range
ballistic missile in December and the Iranian missile
strikes on targets in Syria on 1 October. Furthermore,
we strongly condemn the messages written on the
missiles fired on 1 October, as reported in the Iranian
and international media, which threatened the United
States, Israel and Saudi Arabia severely. Such aggressive
rhetoric is unacceptable, and Germany condemns Iran’s
continued questioning of Israel’s right of existence. We
call on Iran not to conduct any further ballistic-missile
launches and to refrain from such unacceptable rhetoric
and any transfers to the Houthis, or anybody else, of
ballistic missiles, components or technologies, as well
transfers of any other weapons or related material from
Iran, and to fully respect resolution 2231 (2015).
Lastly, let me come to the most important issue.
Germany agrees with the Secretary-General that the
issues not directly related to the nuclear deal should
be addressed without prejudice to preserving the
agreement. We believe that the American position
is akin to throwing out the baby with the bathwater.
Secretary Pompeo quoted President Obama, who said
that, ideally, Iran would behave in the region when it
comes to missile technology. As Germans, we know all
about idealism, which comes from German philosophy
and Immanuel Kant’s categorical imperative. If that
were observed by everybody, we would not need the
Security Council. Nonetheless, we have to live with
a non-ideal situation, which calls for the JCPOA to
continue to be observed because it is in our security
interests.
The meeting rose at 12.40 p.m.

18-43369
