S/2016/407

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
29 April 2016
Original: English

Report of the Secretary-General on the United Nations
Interim Administration Mission in Kosovo
I. Introduction and Mission priorities
1.
The present report is submitted pursuant to Security Council resolution 1244
(1999), by which the Council decided to establish the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) and requested me to report at regular
intervals on the implementation of its mandate. It covers the activities of UNMIK,
and developments related thereto, from 16 January to 15 April 2016.
2.
The priorities of the Mission remain to promote security, stability and respect
for human rights in Kosovo and in the region. In furtherance of its goals, UNMIK
continues its constructive engagement with Pristina and Belgrade, all communities
in Kosovo and regional and international actors. The Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and the Kosovo Force (KFOR) continue to perform
their roles within the framework of Security Council resolution 1244 (1999). The
European Union Rule of Law Mission (EULEX) continues its presence in Kosovo in
line with the statement by the President of the Security Council of 26 November
2008 (S/PRST/2008/44) and my report of 24 November 2008 (S/2008/692). The
United Nations agencies, funds and programmes work closely with the Mission.

II. Key political developments
3.
While a new President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, was elected by the Assembly
of Kosovo, the political situation remained tense and divisive throughout the
reporting period. Opposition lawmakers regularly prevented, or sought to prevent,
proceedings of the Assembly through disruptive and violent tactics. Among other
issues, they objected to the implementation of agreements previously signed by the
Kosovo authorities under the European Union-facilitated dialogue between Belgrade
and Pristina. Owing in part to this situation, relatively little progress was made in
the implementation of the major agreements to date, in particular regarding the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities.
However, both Belgrade and Pristina, at the senior level, reiterated their
commitment to fully implementing agreements and to continuing the dialogue
process. Technical-level talks in Brussels also continued to be held regularly
throughout the reporting period.

16-06847 (E)

040516

*1606847*

S/2016/407

4.
As part of efforts to elevate the level of discourse and behaviour among major
parties, on 8 February, the outgoing President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, initiated a
new round of discussions involving party leaders. However, the talks yielded few
specific results. Two of the three main opposition party leaders refused to
participate, maintaining their stance that only an early election would resolve the
deadlock.
5.
On 19 February, during the first session of the Assembly of Kosovo in 2016,
opposition lawmakers released tear gas canisters in the Assembly hall and
opposition supporters protested outside the building. Twenty -three lawmakers were
suspended and at least nine detained by police for causing a violent dis turbance in
the proceedings. Immediately following the session, the leader of the opposition
Alliance for the Future of Kosovo party, Ramush Haradinaj, resigned his seat in the
Assembly as a further sign of protest. Similar scenes erupted during the 26 February
and 10 March sessions of the Assembly. Ahead of the scheduled election of the new
President, political violence intensified outside the Assembly hall and elsewhere in
Kosovo, as detailed in paragraphs 22 and 23.
6.
Notwithstanding this acrimonious environment, on 26 February, the leader of
the coalition partner Democratic Party of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi, hitherto the First
Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, was elected President of Kosovo in
the third round of voting. Opposition party representatives repeatedly released tear
gas in the Assembly hall during the session. On 2 March, the Prime Minister of
Kosovo, Isa Mustafa, formally confirmed that Mr. Thaçi had resigned from his
existing government positions in order to assume the office of Pres ident. On
4 March, the three major opposition parties challenged the election result in the
Constitutional Court, alleging procedural and material violations during the vote.
On 4 April, however, the Court declared the petition inadmissible. Mr. Thaçi was
sworn in and began his five-year term of office on 7 April. During his inauguration
ceremony the following day, he pledged to continue the European journey of
Kosovo and the dialogue between Belgrade and Pristina, adding that Kosovo and
Serbia should make the transition from a normalization to a reconciliation process.
He also resigned as leader of the Democratic Party of Kosovo, as required by law,
and the Speaker of the Assembly, Kadri Veseli, was appointed to lead the party until
party elections in May.
7.
On 27 January, the Prime Minister of Kosovo met the Prime Minister of
Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, in Brussels to assess progress in the dialogue between
Belgrade and Pristina, hosted by the High Representative of the European Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Federica Mogherini. Little specific progress
was reported, but the Prime Ministers reiterated their commitment to continuing to
normalize relations and to focus on the implementation of the agreements reached to
date. On central issues, including settling the modalities and time frame for
establishing the Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities in Kosovo,
no further meetings or major agreements had been announced by the end of the
reporting period.
8.
Each side accused the other of delaying the implementation of agreements.
Serbian leaders decried the disruption of commerce and trade when “selfdetermination” associates intercepted and attempted to overturn two Serbian
commercial trucks in Kosovo in March. Frictions also deve loped when Belgrade
ceased to validate certifications issued by Pristina for the transport of dangerous

2/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

goods. Pristina responded by imposing similar restrictions on Serbian transport
vehicles.
9.
Regular meetings of the European Union-facilitated dialogue continued at the
technical level. The modalities were finalized to implement, beginning on 1 March,
the agreement of 2011 on the mutual recognition of educational diplomas, involving
the certification of diplomas by the European University Association.
10. On 21 January, the European Parliament voted in favour of the Stabilization
and Association Agreement between the European Union and Kosovo, which had
been concluded in October 2015. The Agreement entered into force on 1 April.
11. During the reporting period, the leaders of and governing institutions in Serbia
were engaged in preparations for the early general election scheduled to be held on
24 April. At the end of the reporting period, discussions were continuing to agree on
the modalities under which OSCE would support the holding of elections in Serb inhabited areas in Kosovo. Serbian political parties held several campaign rallies in
Kosovo, with no significant incidents.
12. With regard to the European refugee/migrant crisis affecting the region, United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes, in coordination with local and
international stakeholders, concluded contingency-planning efforts for the
eventuality that the movement of migrants and asylum seekers is diverted across the
territory of Kosovo.
13. In March, following widely publicized agreements between Turkey, the
European Union and regional political leaders, the so -called “Balkan route” was
largely shut. The implications of this agreement for both stranded mixed migrants
and host countries along the route were yet to be adequately resolved. United
Nations agencies, funds and programmes in the region worked closely and in
coordination with all relevant authorities on the ground to implement humanitarian
and protection projects. All United Nations presences, including UNMIK, continued
to stress the primacy of the protection of individual rights and other difficult
considerations when establishing and applying policies to address such major
movements of persons.

III. Northern Kosovo
14. Consultations between the mayors of four northern municipalities and the
authorities in Pristina yielded a compromise on 24 February, with the municipal
assemblies adopting their budgets in conformity with guidance from the Ministry of
Finance. Owing to confusion about the appropriate budget ceilings, the assemblies
of Leposavić/Leposaviq, Zubin Potok and Zvečan/Zveçan approved slightly
amended budgets on 29 February, still in accordance with the guidance from the
Ministry. The Ministry had previously rejected significantly larger budget proposals,
and discussions between Pristina and the mayors had continued over the course of
several months.
15. The implementation of the agreed plan to revitalize the main Mitrovica bridge
and its surroundings, expected to conclude by the end of June, did not progress.
Although the European Union-managed tender closed on 18 January, construction
work has not yet begun. Technical discussions facilitated by the European Union
continued, with a view to arriving at a memorandum of understanding between the

16-06847

3/20

S/2016/407

relevant ministries and the municipalities of North Mitrovica and South Mitrovica,
which would determine the administrative boundaries of cadastral areas in
Suvi Do/Suhadoll and Kroi i Vitakut/Brđani.
16. As referenced above, there was progress in the area of the mutual recognition
of diplomas by Belgrade and Pristina. Following the adoption in Pristina of a
regulation on the procedure for the issuance of certificates to Kosovo Serbs holding
degrees from the university in North Mitrovica, a commission comprising Kosovo
Albanian and Kosovo Serb representatives was established within the Kosovo
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology to undertake the verification of
diplomas.
17. The 378 former Serbian civil protection personnel in northern Kosovo, who
had signed their appointment letters early in January with Kosovo institutions,
participated in a basic training course on applicable institutional and legal
frameworks and community rights organized by OSCE in March. The Kosovo
authorities also established a recruitment panel allowing the integration of 32
former administrative staff from the Ministry of the Interior of Serbia into the Civil
Registration Agency of Kosovo. In addition, on 11 March, the Kosovo police
established two new offices in Leposavić/Leposaviq municipality to extend its
outreach and community policing presence.
18. Serbian political parties increased their organizational and outreach activities
in northern Kosovo ahead of the upcoming Serbian legislative el ections. The
Socialist Movement Party organized a series of municipal-level meetings that
culminated in a Kosovo-wide party convention held on 30 January in
Zvečan/Zveçan municipality. The Serbian Progressive Party also held a party
convention in Leposavić/Leposaviq on 8 February with some 1,000 participants.
The Serbian Progressive Party established municipal boards of the Union of Serbian
Progressive Party Women in Zubin Potok and Leposavić/Leposaviq on 15 and
26 February, respectively, while the Socialist Movement Party established a
women’s wing in Leposavić/Leposaviq on 4 March. There was also an increase in
the number of visits from officials of the Government of Serbia and Serbian
political party leaders to northern Kosovo during the reporting period.
19. On 3 April, the outgoing Prime Minister of Serbia, Aleksandar Vučić, toured
northern Kosovo and held a rally in Zubin Potok. In the early hours before his
arrival, a grenade was thrown and a number of rifle rounds fired at the facility in
Zubin Potok where his rally was scheduled to be held. The rally proceeded without
further incident.
20. In an incident on 31 March, five Kosovo Serb juveniles reportedly threatened
nine Kosovo Albanian juveniles in North Mitrovica, with one Kosovo Serb firing
four shots from a pistol. There were no injuries. The Kosovo police interrogated the
suspects.

IV. Security
21. The overall security situation in Kosovo remained stable, although political
tensions generated a significant number of incidents, including violent protests,
assaults and threats against officials and damage to government and private
property. On 17 February, on the occasion of the eighth anniversary of the unilateral

4/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

declaration of independence by Kosovo, some 12,500 mainly peaceful
demonstrators marched through central Pristina. On 19 February, as opposition
lawmakers used violent means to disrupt the session of the Assembly, some 500
opposition supporters gathered outside the Assembly building, adding to the
organized protest. On 26 February, during the extraordinary session of the Assembly
to elect a new President, a gathering of some 400 to 500 opposition supporters
turned violent. The Kosovo police made five arrests, including that of one member
of the Assembly.
22. Government officials and their property also became targets throughout
Kosovo. On 26 January in Pristina, four unknown persons threw pain t and stones at
the vehicle convoy of the then First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister,
Hashim Thaçi. Three days later, in Pristina, unknown persons threw stones and
bottles filled with ink at the official vehicle carrying the Minister of Agricult ure. On
24 February, private vehicles belonging to the Minister of Agriculture and the
Deputy Minister of Local Administration were set ablaze by unidentified
perpetrators. On 26 and 27 February, offices belonging to the two major ruling
coalition parties were vandalized in various locations in Kosovo. Also on
27 February, the President of the Kosovo Assembly was threatened on social media.
On 6 March in Pristina, the official vehicle used by a ruling party official was set on
fire. On 8 March, four opposition party activists were arrested for attempting to halt
the official escort of the Prime Minister in Pristina. Lastly, on 12 March,
unidentified persons threw a petrol bomb at the office of the outgoing President,
Atifete Jahjaga, causing damage to the building. Five vehicles belonging to Kosovo
officials were set on fire during the following week, and four EULEX vehicles were
also vandalized.
23. The overall security situation in non-majority communities remained stable
and was less affected by political violence, although the police increased patrols
throughout Kosovo, in particular in the north. In January and February, the number
of reported incidents affecting non-majority communities decreased, compared with
the same period in 2015.
24. On 30 January, four Kosovo Albanians were detained for 48 hours near the
Visoki Dečani monastery for the possession of weapons, including an assault rifle.
On 18 February, individuals throwing stones at two Kosovo Serb houses in
Klinë/Klina were swiftly identified as juveniles. On 22 February, the Kosovo police
arrested three Kosovo Albanian juveniles and questioned an accomplice, releasing
all four following an interview in the presence of their parents and a social worker.
In northern Kosovo, the trial of six Kosovo Albanians involved in the stabbing of a
Kosovo Serb juvenile on 9 April continued and is expected to conclude at the end of
April.
25. Following the adoption of the five-year strategy of Kosovo on violent
extremism and radicalization, further steps were taken towards its implementation.
The Office of the Prime Minister has directed relevant ministries to prepare
activities in their respective areas of work, while consultations have taken place in
several municipalities, including Ferizaj/Uroševac, Kaçanik/ Kačanik and
Vushtrri/Vučitrn. On 15 and 16 March, the Kosovo police arrested two Kosovo
Albanians suspected of having financed or facilitated activities of terrorist groups
linked to Islamic State in Iraq and the Levant. On 17 March, graffiti referencing that
group was found on a Serbian Orthodox church in Pristina. The influence of violent

16-06847

5/20

S/2016/407

extremist ideologies and the presence of members of extremist organizations
remained a pressing concern for both local and international authorities.

V. Rule of law
26. Ongoing challenges in the rule of law area have been identified in recent
reports from the European Union and the Council of Europe, as well as from various
Member States. Among the most prominent issues are those concerning efforts to
ensure the independence, accountability, impartiality and efficiency of judges and
prosecutors; mistreatment of detainees, substandard physical conditions, drug abuse,
corruption and favouritism in prisons; lengthy pretrial detention; and unresolved
restitution claims.
27. Relatively little progress was achieved during the reporting period on the
integration of judges and prosecutors from the Serbian judiciary into the Kosovo
system, pursuant to agreements reached through the European Union -facilitated
dialogue. Thirty-four judges and nine prosecutors who were selected in June and
July 2015 are still awaiting their appointment. The Assembly of Serbia is yet to
enact special legislation regulating the pensions of the staff who will make the
transition.
28. On 21 January, a trial panel of EULEX international judges in the Basic Court
of Mitrovica announced its verdict in the case of Oliver Ivanović et al. The Court
found Ivanović, a prominent Kosovo Serb politician, guilty of “war crimes against
the civilian population” in connection with the events of 14 April 1999. However,
Ivanović and his co-defendant, Dragoljub Delibašić, the former head of the Ministry
of the Interior of Serbia in North Mitrovica, were acquitted of charges of
“incitement to commit aggravated murder” and “incitement to commit attempted
aggravated murder” relating to events that had taken place on 3 February 2000. The
other three defendants in the case were acquitted of charges of “aggravated murder”
and “attempted aggravated murder”. Ivanović was sentenced to nine years’
imprisonment; his defence team is appealing against the trial panel ’s decision.
29. On 24 February, the then President of Kosovo, Atifete Jahjaga, ratified the
international agreement concerning the hosting of the Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office in the Netherlands, previously signed on 15 February
2016 by the Minister for Foreign Affairs of Kosovo and the Ambassador of the
Netherlands to Kosovo. The Specialist Chambers will try crimes allegedly
committed during the Kosovo conflict between 1 January 1998 and 31 December
2000.
30. On 3 March, UNMIK facilitated a meeting between representatives of the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), the Financial Intelligence
Unit of Kosovo, the Special Prosecution Office of Kosovo, OSCE, EULEX, the
Office of the European Union Special Representative, the United Nations
Development Programme and other stakeholders on anti-money-laundering and
counter-terrorism financing. The discussions were held within the broa der
framework of the UNODC Regional Programme for South-Eastern Europe for the
period from 2016 to 2019.
31. UNMIK continued to monitor activities and exercise some responsibilities in
the area of the rule of law. It maintained its technical cooperation with institutions

6/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

in Belgrade and Pristina and continued to facilitate requests for mutual legal
assistance from States that do not recognize Kosovo. The Mission also facilitated
interactions between international organizations, civil society and public ins titutions
in northern Kosovo through monthly coordination meetings.
32. UNMIK also continued to provide document-certification services, primarily
for the certification of civil status, academic and pension documents, to Kosovo
residents and at the request of non-recognizing States. A total of 531 such
documents were processed from 16 January to 15 April. The Mission also continued
to facilitate communications between the Kosovo authorities and the International
Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL) and its member States. UNMIK
received 29 requests seeking the issuance of international wanted notices, while
nine INTERPOL “red notices” were issued.

VI. Returns and communities
33. The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
recorded 76 voluntary returns to Kosovo during the reporting period, comprising 39
Kosovo Serbs, 29 Kosovo Egyptians, 7 Kosovo Ashkali and 1 Kosovo Montenegrin.
In 2015, it registered 778 individual voluntary returns to Kosovo.
34. UNHCR estimates that the total number of internally displaced persons living
in Kosovo stood at 16,785 at the end of March 2016. Of those, 472 reside in 29
collective centres in Kosovo. UNHCR continued to provide support to individual
community members to obtain personal documentation and resolve civil status
issues. Eighty individuals received such assistance during the reporting period.
35. The Office of Community Affairs of the Prime Minister of Kosovo continued
its efforts to create employment opportunities for members of no n-majority
communities. A six-month programme began early in March for 100 beneficiaries,
including 49 Kosovo Serbs, to carry out internships in central and local government
positions, local media outlets and non-governmental organizations.
36. During the reporting period, 52 landless families from Kosovo Roma, Ashkali
and Egyptian communities received newly constructed houses in the town of
Gjakovë/Đakovica. Early in March, Ferizaj/Uroševac municipality and the
organization Caritas Kosova signed a memorandum of understanding to upgrade the
social and education centre in the village of Dubravë/Dubrava to improve medical
and social community services. Some 95 per cent of the village consists of ethnic
Ashkali.
37. The municipality of Prizren allocated €20,000 per year for two years to the
Municipal Office for Communities and Return to support the implementation of the
action plan for the integration of the Kosovo Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian
communities.

VII. Cultural and religious heritage
38. Relations between the Serbian Orthodox Church and the Kosovo authorities
remain difficult, but efforts to facilitate dialogue continued. While the

16-06847

7/20

S/2016/407

Implementation and Monitoring Council had yet to reconvene since its meeting in
September 2015, its members informally agreed to resume regular meetings shortly.
39. In an important development for the protection of church property rights, on
29 February, the Constitutional Court extended to 31 May the interim measures
relating to the long-standing dispute between the Deçan/Dečani municipality and
the Serbian Orthodox Visoki Dečani Monastery. Meanwhile, the council for the
cultural heritage of the historic centre in Prizren held four regular meetings
following its reconstitution early in January. A new Chair was elect ed and three
requests for minor repairs to existing buildings were approved.
40. On 19 March, the government of Kosovo organized a conference in Prizren on
interfaith dialogue and heritage protection as tools of reconciliation and of
combating religious extremism. Representatives of the Islamic community, the
Serbian Orthodox Church, the Roman Catholic Church, the Jewish community, the
Union of Kosovo Tarikats, the Kosovo Protestant Church and the Bektashi Order
participated in the conference.
41. On three occasions, under a new initiative, the Visoki Dečani Monastery was
visited by groups of Kosovo Albanian schoolchildren who expressed great interest
in learning more about the monastery’s architecture, frescoes and religious history.

VIII. Human rights
42. On 25 January, UNMIK, on behalf of the International Human Rights Working
Group, held a working session with the Office of the Prime Minister to discuss its
recommendations on the draft Kosovo human rights strategy (2016 -2020) and
continued to press for its swift completion.
43. On 12 February, the government of Kosovo and the Ombudsperson signed a
memorandum of cooperation relating to the use of the institution ’s new premises,
which would allow it to remain independent, in accordance with the princ iples
relating to the status of national institutions for the promotion and protection of
human rights (Paris Principles). On 18 February, the Kosovo authorities allocated an
additional €420,000 to the Office of the Ombudsperson. Compliance with the Paris
Principles and the allocation of funds were among the requirements set forth by the
European Union to advance the visa liberalization application submitted by Kosovo.
On 10 March, the Office of the Ombudsperson became a member of the Association
of Mediterranean Ombudsmen, which supports cooperation and the exchange of
information and best practices among members.
44. UNMIK welcomed the appointment of the Chair of the Pristina delegation of
the Joint Working Group on Missing Persons by the Prime Minister of Kosovo, Isa
Mustafa, on 5 February. On 25 March, the forty-second public meeting of the
Working Group was held in Belgrade, chaired by the International Committee of the
Red Cross. The Chair of the Working Group confirmed that the number of persons
unaccounted for in connection with the events in Kosovo stood at 1,665. Since the
previous public session, 8 cases had been closed, while 19 had been opened.
45. On 2 February, the Prime Minister signed a regulation to establish a
government commission and procedures for the verification and recognition of the
status of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence as civilian victims. The Office
of the Prime Minister also established the commission’s secretariat. The terms of

8/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

reference for the members of the secretariat, commission and authorized
non-governmental organizations were drafted with support from the United Nations
Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women. The regulation will
enable the start of the implementation of the related law, whi ch, for the first time,
legally recognizes the status of civilian victims of sexual violence during the
conflict in Kosovo. Reparations foreseen in the law include access to pensions, free
medical treatment, access to employment and income-generating activities, and
access to education.
46. The reporting period was marked by several developments relating to young
people, which are relevant to report in the context of Security Council resolution
2250 (2015) on youth and peace and security. On 14 February, 32 non-governmental
organizations for young people from the Republic of Moldova and the western
Balkans signed a “Balkan club” cooperation agreement, establishing an information
network to coordinate civil society engagement relating to young people in the
region. On 26 February, recognizing the potential role of young women in
reconciliation work, UNMIK organized a global open day round -table discussion.
Participants from civil society organizations throughout Kosovo took stock of
existing initiatives and discussed challenges and recommendations to advance the
women and peace and security agenda. Key areas addressed included the
engagement of young women in decision-making processes, economic security and
empowerment and preventing violence against women. While acknowledging the
adoption of relevant legislation and plans, participants observed that implementation
remained hindered by traditional gender roles in a patriarchal society, inadequate
financial support, a lack of intragovernmental coordination and li mited
accountability mechanisms in both the public and private sectors. On 26 February, a
group of young women programmers, in coordination with non -governmental
organizations including the Kosovo Women’s Network, launched a mobile
application to report sexual harassment.
47. As part of global efforts to promote gender equality on the occasion of
International Women’s Day on 8 March, the Assembly of Kosovo held a solemn
session in the presence of Kosovo dignitaries and members of the international
community, during which a documentary was screened on women who had suffered
sexual violence during the conflict. This positive development is indicative of the
renewed attention of the leaders and institutions of Kosovo to recognize the status
of survivors of conflict-related sexual violence.
48. During the reporting period, the UNMIK Human Rights Advisory Panel
delivered four opinions on seven complaints, including one in a case relating to the
exposure of Roma internally displaced persons to hazardous health con ditions,
including lead contamination, during the early days of the interim administration. In
two opinions, relating to five complaints, the Panel found that UNMIK had fallen
short of satisfying the procedural requirements of article 2 (right to life) and
article 3 (prohibition of torture, inhumane or degrading treatment) of the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms. In
another opinion, in addition to violations of articles 2 and 3 of the Convention, the
Panel found a violation of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination against Women. In the opinion arising from the case of the exposure
of the Roma internally displaced persons to lead contamination, the Panel identified
numerous violations of not only those conventions but also the International
Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, the International Covenant on

16-06847

9/20

S/2016/407

Civil and Political Rights and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. Since my
previous report, no progress has been made with regard to the Panel’s
recommendations concerning the payment of adequate compensation, including for
moral damages arising from the alleged violations by UNMIK. As at the end of the
reporting period, the Panel had closed 525 cases, with only 2 pending. T he Panel is
scheduled to complete its substantive work by the end of June 2016 and issue a final
report thereafter.

IX. Observations
49. I welcome the election as the new President of Kosovo, Hashim Thaçi. I note
with appreciation the important commitments that he presented in his inaugural
address, which I hope offer an opportunity for the beginning of a new chapter of
political discourse in Kosovo. I wish to express my appreciation to the former
President, Atifete Jahjaga, who set an example of fully engaged leadership during
the past five years, in particular as an advocate for the integration of all
communities and a champion for the increased participation of women in Kosovo
society.
50. The tense and divisive atmosphere that had surrounded t he election process in
the Kosovo Assembly, as well as the boycott and attempts to disrupt the
inauguration ceremony by opposition parties and supporters, serve as reminders of
the requirement for active efforts to address the needs and aspirations of peop le in
Kosovo by all its democratically constituted institutions. At the same time, acts of
violence in any form remain an unacceptable means to express political views. I
renew my call upon all leaders in Kosovo to act responsibly when debating the
many pressing concerns at hand.
51. I am pleased to note the commitments expressed by the President and the
Prime Minister to the process of normalizing relations between Belgrade and
Pristina taking place under the auspices of the European Union, and to achievin g the
full implementation of the agreements already reached, in particular regarding the
establishment of the Association/Community of Serb majority municipalities in
Kosovo. Nevertheless, I note with concern the slow pace of implementation during
the past 12 months and hope that the positive steps already taken under European
Union facilitation will be matched by energetic efforts to complete the remaining
steps, and also to tackle further subjects in the near future.
52. I look forward to the swift establishment of the Specialist Chambers and the
Specialist Prosecutor ’s Office and applaud the Kosovo authorities for expeditiously
ratifying the requisite host agreement with the Government of the Netherlands. This
process marks a vital step in strengthening the rule of law in Kosovo, as well as a
historic opportunity to help to heal the scars from the conflict.
53. As documented in my previous reports, Kosovo continues to face numerous
significant challenges with regard to the rule of law, not least the indepe ndence and
impartiality of the justice sector. In this regard, support from international partners,
including UNMIK and other United Nations entities, should be harnessed creatively
within the context of the ongoing European agenda in the region. I also ca ll for
further progress in the full integration of judges and prosecutors from the Serbian
judiciary into the Kosovo system.

10/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

54. Much work remains to be done in Kosovo to promote greater tolerance and
reconciliation among its communities, to ensure the pr otection of minority rights, to
facilitate the return of the displaced, to uphold their property rights and to safeguard
religious traditions without impediment or stigma.
55. I express my gratitude to my Special Representative, Zahir Tanin, who is
leading UNMIK with commitment and vision, and to all Mission personnel for their
dedication and service. In this regard, I note with appreciation Mr. Tanin ’s
continuous efforts in making maximum use of the Mission’s resources to achieve
further stabilization and normalization between Belgrade and Pristina. Equally
important are the Mission’s renewed outreach and facilitation efforts, as well as its
ongoing promotion of trust and reconciliation. I also wish to thank all members of
the United Nations family and the Mission’s international partners on the ground,
including KFOR, EULEX, OSCE and the European Union, for their cooperation and
contributions to our shared work towards peace and progress in Kosovo and the
entire region.

16-06847

11/20

S/2016/407

Annex I
Report of the European Union High Representative for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to the
Secretary-General on the activities of the European
Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo from 16 January
to 15 April 2016
1.

Summary
The European Union Rule of Law Mission in Kosovo (EULEX) continued its
monitoring, mentoring and advising activities, and to implement its executive
functions in line with its mandate in the rule of law area. A number of verdicts were
pronounced in cases concerning war crimes, organized crime, corruption and other
serious crimes. A Kosovo Serb was found guilty of war crimes against the civilian
population in 1999 and sentenced to nine years of imprisonment. He and four other
defendants were acquitted of charges relating to murders that had occurred in 2000.
The trial in the “PINK” case, relating to the smuggling of migrants and organized
crime, led to the conviction and imprisonment of three defendants. One defendant
received a prison sentence in a case relating to causing general danger in Mitrovica
South. One defendant was found guilty of the attack on EULEX in Zubin Potok in
May 2012. The Court of Appeals finalized the judgments in the “Passport” case,
relating, inter alia, to organized crime, money-laundering and fraud, and the
“Medicus” case, relating, among other things, to organized crime and trafficking in
persons.
The Mission continued to monitor and advise the Kosovo police in its response
to various protests. EULEX conducted joint training sessions on crowd and riot
control with the quick response teams of the regional police directorates Mitrovica
North and Mitrovica South. EULEX maintained its advisory support role to the
Kosovo Border Police on the preparedness of Kosovo in the event of a conside rable
influx of migrants. The Mission worked with the Kosovo Border Police and Kosovo
Customs as they resumed their joint green border patrols, leading to important
seizures of smuggled goods. In addition, since January, the Kosovo Border Police
and EULEX have been successfully conducting regular joint patrols along the green
boundary/border in northern Kosovo.
There was progress in the implementation of the Pristina -Belgrade agreement
on the integration of the judiciary, as vacancy notices for judges, pro secutors and
support staff were published on 29 March.
The Head of Mission appointed the Registrar of the Specialist Chambers. The
court planning team successfully transitioned to the Specialist Chambers and
personnel moved to the host State, the Netherlands, and commenced preparatory
work in The Hague.

12/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

2.

EULEX activities

2.1

Executive
War crimes
On 12 February, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
acquitted a local journalist of charges of violating the secrecy of proceedings and
attempting to obstruct evidence or official proceedings in the “Drenica 1” and
“Drenica 2” cases.
On 18 March, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court opened
the main trial against a defendant, indicted for war crimes, who had been a fugi tive
from justice, having avoided trial in the Sabit Geci et al. case, finalized in 2013.
Organized crime and corruption
On 24 February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Pristina Basic Court reopened the main trial against seve n defendants in the “KEK”
case, relating, inter alia, to fraud and the falsification of documents. The trial
restarted after the Supreme Court overruled, in December 2015, the decision of the
Court of Appeals, which had partially granted the defence counse l’s appeals and had
dismissed the indictment as belated.
On 26 February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Prizren Basic Court announced the verdict against four defendants in the “PINK”
case, relating to migrant smuggling into the European Union and organized crime.
Three defendants were found guilty and one was acquitted of all charges. Two of the
convicted defendants received aggregated sentences of six years of imprisonment
and a fine of €6,000 each, while one was sentenced to five years of imprisonment
and a fine of €4,000.
In February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court of
Appeals finalized a judgment in the “Passport” case, relating, among other things, to
organized crime, money-laundering and fraud. It partially granted the appeals by six
defendants against the judgment of the Pristina Basic Court, thereby reducing their
punishments. It further granted the appeals submitted on behalf of two other
defendants, acquitting them of charges relating to receiving stolen property.
A panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Court of Appeals
finalized in February a judgment in the “Medicus” case, relating, among other
things, to organized crime and trafficking in persons, and thereby modified the
judgment of the Pristina Basic Court. The verdict increased the prison sentences for
two defendants and acquitted two others, while the punishment for one defendant
was affirmed. Two of the convicts defied the j udgment of the Court of Appeals and
remained at large, despite arrest warrants.
On 2 March, a EULEX prosecutor at the Kosovo Special Prosecution Office
filed an indictment against 23 persons in a case relating to the expropriation of
socially owned land. The indictment comprises 29 criminal offences, including
money-laundering, the issuance of unlawful judicial decisions, the misuse of official
duty or authority and the falsification of official documents.

16-06847

13/20

S/2016/407

Other serious crimes
On 18 February, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the
Pristina Basic Court announced the verdict against one defendant in the case
relating to an attack on a convoy of two official Serbian vehicles in 2012. The
defendant, charged with endangering internationally protected persons and
damaging movable property, was acquitted.
On 1 March, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court restarted
the main trial against two defendants in a case relating to aggravated murder,
attempted aggravated murder and unauthorized ownership, control, possession or
use of weapons. The panel had found the two defendants guilty on 6 March 2015
and sentenced one to a term of imprisonment of 13 years and 6 months and the other
to a term of 17 years and 6 months. However, in October, the Court of Appeals
annulled the judgment and returned the case to the Mitrovica Basic Court for retrial.
On 8 March, a panel of one local judge and two EULEX judges at the Supreme
Court rejected as inadmissible the applications for protection of legality filed on
behalf of two defendants against a previous decision of the Supreme Court. On
13 March 2014, the Prizren Basic Court had found the defendants guilty of abuse of
official position or authority. Following the defendants’ appeals, the Court of
Appeals annulled the judgment and returned the case for retrial. However, on
1 December 2015, the Supreme Court revoked the decision and returned the case to
the Court of Appeals for reconsideration by a new panel.
On 14 March, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
announced the verdict against two defendants in a criminal case relating to abuse of
official position or authority and fraud in office. The defendants were acquitted of
all charges.
On 17 March, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
announced the verdict in a case involving two defendants and relating to causing
general danger in Mitrovica South in 2012. One defendant was found guilty and
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of two years and nine months. The panel
decided to try the second defendant separately, given that he did not appear in court.
Allegations found in the report by the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal
Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe
The Special Investigative Task Force was established in 2011 to conduct a
criminal investigation into the allegations contained in the Council of Europe report
from January 2011, authored by the Special Rapporteur for the Committee on Legal
Affairs and Human Rights of the Council of Europe, Dick Marty. The investigation
conducted by the Task Force continues to focus on the individual criminal liability
of those most responsible for the claims made in the report.
The Special Investigative Task Force’s work with individuals, injured parties
and victim advocacy groups continues in order to gather evidence and information
relevant to the investigation. While cooperation with judicial and law enforcement
authorities in the region and beyond is ongoing and remains satisfactory, the Task
Force looks forward to sustained cooperation from all parties as operational and
investigative activities move forward.

14/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

Specialist Chambers
In April, Ms. Fidelma Donlon was appointed by the Head of Mission as the
Registrar. Following this appointment, personnel from the court planning team
transitioned to the Specialist Chambers. Chambers personnel moved to The Hague,
the Netherlands, and have commenced preparatory work for the operations of the
Chambers in the host State.
Department of Forensic Medicine
In January, EULEX forensic experts at the Kosovo Department of Forensic
Medicine handed over two sets of remains, one to Serbia and one to Croatia, and in
February identified the remains of four other missing persons. In February and March,
EULEX forensic experts conducted site assessments in the areas of Skenderaj/Srbica,
Gjakovë/Đakovica, Gllogoc/Glogovac, Vushtrri/Vučitrn, Rahovec/Orahovac, Prizren
and Pristina. On 24 March, EULEX forensic experts handed over the remain s of one
missing person to the family in Suharekë/Suva Reka. On 29 March, EULEX forensic
experts at the Kosovo Department of Forensic Medicine, along with two local
representatives, as well as a representative of the Serbian side, resumed the site
assessment at Kiževak in the Rudnica mining complex in Serbia.
Property rights
During the reporting period, the Kosovo Property Agency Appeals Panel
received 25 new appeals and adjudicated 63 appeals, while 417 appeals are pending
a decision of the panel.
The Special Chamber of the Supreme Court for privatization matters rendered
629 decisions in first-instance trial panel cases and finalized 86 cases at the
appellate panel level.
2.2

Strengthening
Despite increased efforts by the Mission to support the Kosovo Judicial
Council and the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council in finalizing their drafting of
secondary legislation for the amended package of laws on the judiciary, there has
been no further progress after both councils missed the deadline of 15 January 2016,
as foreseen in the amended judicial package of laws. Approximately half of the
regulations remain to be adopted.
In February, the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council appointed the director of the
newly established secretariat, a positive step towards conso lidating the organization.
The Mission continues to provide advice to enable the secretariat to become fully
operational in the first half of 2016.
In March, EULEX monitored the selection process for two members of the
Kosovo Judicial Council from the Supreme Court quota. The Council thereby
maintained its quorum, despite the end of the mandate of two of its members on
8 March, with 12 of the 13 positions filled. The remaining member is to be
appointed by the Assembly.
The Kosovo Border Police and Kosovo Customs renewed their joint green
boundary/border patrols, leading to the seizures of smuggled goods, including
drugs, weapons, cigarettes and medicines. The Mission worked with both agencies

16-06847

15/20

S/2016/407

on strategic planning for the continuation of these joint opera tions. EULEX
continued to monitor the process of merging Kosovo Customs and the Tax
Administration of Kosovo. For this purpose, the Mission met on various occasions
with the Office of the European Union, the Ministry of Finance and other
international stakeholders to discuss progress achieved to date and further possible
technical assistance.
EULEX continued to advise the Kosovo Border Police on its preparedness
should Kosovo receive a considerable influx of migrants. The Kosovo Border Police
have increased their presence along the green boundary/border and intensified
checks at Pristina International Airport. Currently, there is neither an increased
influx of migrants into Kosovo nor any indication that it may become a favoured
route. The Mission also advised the Department of Citizenship, Asylum and
Migration in the Ministry of Internal Affairs on preparing for a potential migration
crisis. Improvements in several areas, in particular concerning accommodation in
the detention centre for foreigners, have been noted, and Kosovo has, overall,
improved its capacity to receive a larger number of irregular migrants.
EULEX monitored the selection process for the director positions at the
detention centres in Prizren and Pejë/Peć. While the new director of the P ejë/Peć
Detention Centre was appointed on 10 March, EULEX has advised that the selection
process for the position at the Prizren Detention Centre will have to be repeated
owing to procedural shortcomings. EULEX continues to advise the Correctional
Service in order to remedy the phenomenon of preferential treatment of high -profile
prisoners, which, for the time being, remains an issue.
The Mission continued to monitor and advise the Kosovo police in their
response to various protests by the opposition. The Kosovo police maintained their
professionalism, reflecting the lessons learned from previous interventions and
performing in accordance with European best practices.
EULEX provided guidance and impact assessment to the Kosovo police in the
implementation of the intelligence-led policing aide-memoire card project. Through
this project, police officers from throughout Kosovo received training on the
importance of using the intelligence-led policing model to improve police
functionality.
In March, EULEX conducted an assessment of the implementation process of
the Kosovo police information system, introduced in 2014. While the system is fully
functional and used in a proper way overall, the Mission recommended that the
training concept be reviewed and adapted in order to better fit the needs of officers
and cadets, especially those with limited computer literacy.
EULEX made an assessment of inter-agency cooperation in relation to
investigating rape and serious sexual offences, with a focus on identification,
acquisition and management of forensic samples. Several recommendations were
identified and discussed with senior police management to achieve a more victim centred approach in the future.
A mechanism of ad hoc coordination meetings at the deputy minist er level was
established following EULEX advice to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the
Police Inspectorate of Kosovo on how to proactively deal with cases where there are
diverging views between the Kosovo police and the Police Inspectorate on the
results of investigations by the latter.

16/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

2.3

Northern Kosovo
As part of its monitoring, mentoring and advising activities and outreach in
northern Kosovo, the Mission continued to meet regularly with political
representatives, civil society, Kosovo Police Regional Directorate Mitrovica North,
the Kosovo Correctional Service at the Mitrovica Detention Centre and others.
The situation remained largely calm but fragile. On 25 January, two Kosovo
Serb males sustained gunshot injuries in the main street of Mitrovica North. On
31 March, shots were fired at a group of Kosovo Albanians, mostly young people, in
Mitrovica North; no injuries were sustained. The Kosovo police interviewed four
suspects, all of whom were minors. Arson of private vehicles occurred in Mit rovica
North on 6 February (property of a Kosovo Serb police officer), on 7 March and on
18 March (the latter vehicle the property of a Kosovo customs officer). In the early
morning of 3 April, a hand grenade exploded and an automatic weapon was fired at
the Zubin Potok sports hall, in which a public gathering with the visiting Prime
Minister of Serbia was planned to take place that afternoon.
EULEX exercised its executive functions in a number of judicial cases. On
21 January, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court announced the
verdict against five defendants. One defendant was found guilty of war crimes
committed against the civilian population in 1999 and sentenced to nine years of
imprisonment. All defendants were acquitted of all charges of the second count
relating to murders that had occurred in February 2000. On 29 January, some
1,000 people protested peacefully in Mitrovica North in support of the convicted
person. The full reasoned judgment was delivered to the parties on 4 April.
On 2 February, one EULEX judge and two lay judges (one Kosovo Serb and
one Kosovo Albanian), acting as a juvenile panel at Mitrovica Basic Court, opened
the main trial against six Kosovo Albanian minors in a case relating to an attempted
murder (the stabbing of a Kosovo Serb juvenile near the main bridge in Mitrovica in
April 2015). The trial encompassed charges for events on two other dates (May and
June 2015), including threatening and inciting national, racial, religious or ethnic
hatred. On 24 March, the day scheduled for the announcement of the verdict, the
juvenile panel decided instead to reopen the main trial on 15 April in order to
supplement the case with the additional expert analysis of a weapon seized from one
minor.
On 29 February, a panel of EULEX judges at the Mitrovica Basic Court
announced the verdict against one defendant, finding him guilty of several criminal
offences relating to the attack on a EULEX convoy in Zubin Potok in May 2012. He
was sentenced to an aggregated suspended term of imprisonment of one year and
two months, with a verification period of three years and a fine of €1,000. Prior to
the verdict, a guilty plea agreement had been filed in which the prosecution
dismissed the charges initially brought against the same defendant for a similar
attack against EULEX in April 2012.
The Mission continued to support the Kosovo police response to inter -ethnic
crimes and implementation of the intelligence -led policing concept in the Regional
Police Directorate Mitrovica North. EULEX supported the Kosovo police in
preparing a new Serbian-language form for intelligence-led policing reporting. The
Mission initiated a series of joint training sessions on crowd and riot control with
the quick response teams of the Regional Police Directorates Mitrovica North and

16-06847

17/20

S/2016/407

Mitrovica South. EULEX helped to bridge the gap between the Kosovo police and
local civil society organizations in readiness and response to gender -based violence
and domestic violence by organizing expert meetings between the police, civil
society and international organizations in both Mitrovica North and Mitrovica
South.
Since 11 January, the Kosovo Border Police and EULEX have been
successfully conducting regular joint patrols along the green boundary/border in
northern Kosovo, leading to several arrests relating to smuggling, ille gal crossing or
irregular vehicle and transportation documents.
2.4

Dialogue implementation
On 18 February and 4 March, the selection panel for the integration of
77 former Serbian Ministry of the Interior administrative staff (not integrated in
2013/14) met. The panel was composed of representatives of the Kosovo Ministry
of Internal Affairs, the Civil Registry Agency, former Serbian Ministry of the
Interior administrative staff and EULEX. The first applications for positions in the
Agency are expected later in April.
EULEX continued its field visits to civil status satellite offices in northern
Kosovo to assess the use of the certified copies of civil registry books, handed over
in October 2015. There is a significant demand from Kosovo Serbs living there in
requesting civil status documents.
On 7 and 8 March, EULEX participated in an integrated border management
implementation group meeting in Brussels regarding the construction of six
permanent crossing points.
There was progress in the implementation of the Pristina-Belgrade agreement
on the integration of the judiciary. On 29 March, the Kosovo Judicial Council and
the Kosovo Prosecutorial Council issued the vacancy notices for 14 judges,
6 prosecutors and 149 support staff, as agreed in the co ntext of the European Unionfacilitated dialogue. The vacancies were published on the institutions ’ websites,
with a deadline of 29 April to apply.

18/20

16-06847

S/2016/407

Annex II
Composition and strength of the police component and the
military liaison component of the United Nations Interim
Administration Mission in Kosovo as at 15 April 2016
Police component
Country

Number

Austria

1

Bulgaria

1

Germany

1

Hungary

1

Italy

1

Russian Federation

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

1

Total

8

Military liaison component
Country

16-06847

Number

Czech Republic

2

Poland

2

Republic of Moldova

1

Romania

1

Turkey

1

Ukraine

2

Total

9

19/20

S/2016/407

20/20

16-06847
