United Nations

S/PV.5597

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-first year

5597th meeting
Monday, 18 December 2006, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Al-Nasser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Qatar)

Members:

Argentina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Congo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Denmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Greece . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Peru . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Slovakia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United Republic of Tanzania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Mayoral
Mr. Liu Zhenmin
Mr. Biabaroh-Iboro
Ms. Løj
Mr. Lacroix
Nana Effah-Apenteng
Mr. Vassilakis
Mr. Oshima
Mr. Gallardo
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Burian
Sir Emyr Jones Parry
Mr. Manongi
Mr. Wolff

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 December 2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2006/962)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-154A.

06-66630 (E)

*0666630*

S/PV.5597

The meeting was called to order at 3.10 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 12 December 2006 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2006/962)
The President (spoke in Arabic): I should like to
inform the Council that I have received letters from the
representatives of Lebanon and the Syrian Arab
Republic, in which they request to be invited to
participate in the consideration of the item on the
Council’s agenda. In conformity with the usual
practice, I propose, with the consent of the Council, to
invite those representatives to participate in the
consideration of the item, without the right to vote, in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Charter
and rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure.
There being no objection, it is so decided.
At the invitation of the President, Ms. Ziade
(Lebanon) and Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab
Republic) took seats at the Council table.
The President (spoke in Arabic): In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I shall take it that the Security Council
agrees to extend an invitation under rule 39 of its
provisional rules of procedure to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.
It is so decided.
I invite Mr. Brammertz to take a seat at the
Council table.
The Security Council will now begin its
consideration of the item on its agenda. The Security
Council is meeting in accordance with the
understanding reached in its prior consultations.
Members of the Council have before them document
S/2006/962, which contains a letter dated 12 December
2006 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council, transmitting the
report of the United Nations International Independent
Investigation Commission.

2

I now give the floor to Mr. Serge Brammertz,
Commissioner of the United Nations International
Independent Investigation Commission.
Mr. Brammertz: Mr. President, I would like to
thank you for the opportunity to present to the Council
the fourth report for 2006 of the International
Independent Investigation Commission (S/2006/962,
annex). The report covers the activities of the
Commission between 25 September and 10 December.
As members of the Security Council are aware,
the political climate in Lebanon has been volatile
during this reporting period. Cabinet minister Pierre
Gemayel was assassinated in Beirut on 21 November;
large demonstrations have taken place; and the
complex discourse surrounding the establishment of a
special tribunal for Lebanon is still ongoing. This has
had an inevitable impact on the Commission’s
investigation and security requirements.
The Commission has reached a critical stage in
its investigations. In this context, the Prosecutor
General of Lebanon and the Commission believe that
placing information concerning suspects and witnesses
in the public domain would make it difficult for
sensitive witnesses to step forward and engage with the
Commission and may be prejudicial to future trials
before a tribunal. The findings presented in this report
have to be understood with those limitations in mind.
The Commission’s investigation in the Hariri case
has remained focused on developing crime scene
evidence and investigating potential perpetrators and
their linkage to one another.
Following the collection of forensic evidence at
the crime scene in June 2006, the Commission has
received a final report from external forensic experts.
The report confirms many of the Commission’s own
hypotheses, for example that there was only one blast
and that the Mitsubishi van was the carrier of the
improvised explosive device. The expert report also
supports the hypothesis that an RDX-based high
explosive was used.
Recent forensic results also confirm that it is
likely that a person triggered the explosion from within
or immediately in front of the Mitsubishi van rather
than through the use of a remote-controlled device.
The Commission is also analysing the human
parts belonging to the unidentified male believed to be
the bomber that were recovered from the crime scene.

06-66630

S/PV.5597

Forensic results show that the individual did not spend
his youth in Lebanon, but was situated there in the last
two to three months before his death. The Commission
hopes that, after a second phase of analysis, the
specific geographic and ethnic origin of this person can
be determined.
Many other aspects of the investigation are
ongoing. For instance, the Commission continues to
focus on analysing information relating to Ahmed Abu
Adass, in order to establish how Abu Adass was
identified, where and when that occurred, who may
have been involved in organizing his appearance in the
video in which he claimed responsibility for the
assassination, and what happened to him after the
video was made and delivered.
The
Commission
has
also
undertaken
investigations with regard to individuals associated
with Ahmed Abu Adass in Lebanon and elsewhere. The
Commission has so far conducted 17 interviews in
Syria and Lebanon in connection with this line of
enquiry and has held a number of meetings with
relevant Syrian and Lebanese officials. It has collected
substantial quantities of computer and electronic
data — some of which is encrypted or in code — and
has visited a number of locations in Syria. This aspect
of the investigation will continue during the next
reporting period.
The Commission also continues to collect
information about the increasing threats against and
pressure on Rafik Hariri during the last 15 months of
his life. An analysis of this information reveals a
number of potential motives to kill Rafik Hariri, the
majority of which are in one way or another linked to
his political activities. At this stage of the
Commission’s investigation, a smaller number of
motives have emerged as the most plausible.
During the reporting period the Commission has
continued to extend technical assistance to the
Lebanese authorities in the 14 cases. The Commission
has focused in particular on interviewing witnesses
associated with the victims of the six targeted attacks.
It has thus far conducted 19 interviews in connection
with this line of enquiry and has a number of further
interviews scheduled for the next reporting period. A
considerable number of links between the six cases,
and between these cases and the Rafik Hariri case,
have emerged from these interviews. These links,
which relate to the nature of the attacks, the nature of

06-66630

the victims and the modus operandi of the perpetrators,
support the analytical hypotheses discussed in the
Commission’s report of June 2006 (S/2006/375,
annex). The Commission also believes that the motive
to attack at least some of the victims was associated
with the victims’ common objectives and interests, and
thus that these attacks may have been linked by a
common intent.
On 21 November 2006, Pierre Gemayel, the
Minister of Industry, was assassinated. Two days later,
following a request from the Lebanese Prime Minister
and a decision taken by the Council, the Commission
started providing technical assistance to the Lebanese
authorities in their investigation of the Gemayel case.
The Commission is providing investigative support by
helping to identify the perpetrators and the vehicles
that were used in the attack. It is also working to
reconstruct the modus operandi of the assassins. After
seven days of investigation at the crime scene, a total
of 250 exhibits were sent to a laboratory for forensic
research and analysis. It is the preliminary assessment
of the Commission that Minister Gemayel was the
subject of surveillance as part of a planned
assassination operation against him.
The Commission has continued to cooperate
closely with the Lebanese authorities. The Commission
is very grateful for all the support it receives from
those authorities, especially at a time when the security
situation in Lebanon remains highly volatile. The
Commission regularly shares with the appropriate
Lebanese authorities the substance of all relevant
information that it obtains, where necessary in a
manner that does not compromise the interest of the
source of this information. This information-sharing
process is especially important when the information is
relevant to individuals who are detained.
The cooperation of the Syrian Arab Republic with
the Commission remains generally satisfactory. During
the reporting period the Commission submitted 12
formal requests for assistance to Syria and undertook a
number of investigation activities and interviews of
individuals in Syria. The Commission is satisfied with
the timeliness and efficiency of Syria’s assistance to
the Commission and with the logistical and security
arrangements made for its investigation activities on
Syrian territory. The Commission will continue to rely
on Syria’s full cooperation, as this remains crucial to
the swift and successful completion of its work.

3

S/PV.5597

Since 15 September 2006, 10 new formal
requests for assistance have been sent to five different
States, bringing the total number of requests sent to
States other than Lebanon and Syria since March this
year to approximately 60. Although most States have
responded positively to the Commission’s requests and
have actively assisted its work, including by
facilitating witness interviews and providing other
support and information, some States have provided
late or incomplete responses. The lack of
responsiveness by certain States has impeded or slowed
down the work of the Commission on several fronts. In
view of the crucial nature of the information that it
seeks to obtain from States and the limited time frame
in which it aims to complete its investigative activities,
the Commission trusts that it will enjoy full and prompt
cooperation from all States during the next reporting
period.
The Commission has made progress in the two
main areas of its investigation in the Hariri case:
developing crime scene evidence and investigating
potential perpetrators. Fifty interviews and other types
of evidence collection are planned for the next
reporting period and, as always, the Commission’s
objective is to collect evidence that will be admissible
before a future tribunal.
The Commission’s work on the 14 cases
continues to elicit links between each case and to the
Rafik Hariri case. Further analysis will be done in the
next reporting period to develop these links.
Similarly, the Commission will continue to
provide support in the Gemayel case, focusing during
this initial period on assisting with identifying those
who physically perpetrated the crime and on examining
whether links to the other cases exist.
The Commission still faces many challenges. It
requires assistance from the United Nations Secretariat
in areas such as recruitment, procurement,
administration and finance, to facilitate and support the
necessary pace of its work. It also needs the continued
support of Member States to which it addresses
requests for assistance. A delayed response, or worse
still a lack of response, to its requests severely hampers
the progress of the Commission’s work.
Finally, in the light of the proposed creation of a
special tribunal for Lebanon, the Commission will
realign its objectives and organize its work in a manner
that will facilitate the transition to such a tribunal.

4

The Commission hopes and trusts that it will be
able to continue to count on the Security Council’s
support in carrying out its mandate.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank
Mr. Brammertz for his briefing.
I shall now call on the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Ziade (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): The
Security Council is meeting today to discuss the report
of the International Independent Investigation
Commission on the assassination of the martyr leader
Rafik Hariri and his companions. This is an occasion to
reaffirm the importance of the United Nations followup to that fundamental and vital issue in Lebanon.
The
professional
and
solid
work
of
Mr. Brammertz and his team is further consolidated by
the current report, as it was by previous ones. The
report provides additional evidence of the painstaking
methodology being used to pursue the investigation
and to achieve the progress reflected in the sure and
firm advances towards the universally desired
objective.
Lebanon has repeatedly, and in the person of
every one of its officials, expressed its full confidence
in the Commission’s work and ability to attain the
truth. The diverse political scene in my country
represents an amalgam of disparate ways of identifying
the truth — the whole truth — surrounding the
assassination of the martyr leader Rafik Hariri and his
companions and the crimes that preceded and followed
it.
Believing in the role of the International
Independent Investigation Commission and its noble
objectives, the Government of Lebanon continues to
offer all necessary assistance to the Commission and to
follow the progress achieved in the investigation as it
reaches the important milestone of unmasking the
perpetrators of the crimes and bringing them to justice
before an international court. The draft statute of such
a court has been drawn up, as has the memorandum of
understanding to be signed between the United Nations
and the Lebanese Government, in accordance with the
constitutional mechanism in place in Lebanon.
The efforts of the International Independent
Investigation Commission and the formation of the
international tribunal will break the cycle of violence
that has gripped Lebanon, most recently in the
assassination of the martyred minister Pierre Gemayel,

06-66630

S/PV.5597

whose murder the Security Council speedily added to
the Commission’s mandate. This will deter anyone who
would dare to disturb the civil peace that the whole
Lebanese society has striven to establish and preserve,
with the support of the international community.
In conclusion, the Government of Lebanon
deeply appreciates the efforts of Mr. Brammertz and
his team, and reaffirms its determination to offer every
possible assistance to his mission. It expresses its
complete satisfaction with the Security Council’s
resolve to extend Mr. Brammertz’s mandate for an
additional six months and his acceptance of the
extension. That is further testimony to the efforts being
made by the Security Council and the Commission to
reach their goal of seeing justice done.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I give the floor
to representative of the Syrian Arab Republic.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Allow me at the outset to congratulate you,
Sir, and your brotherly country for the skilful way in
which you are guiding the Security Council’s work this
month.
I should also like to welcome Mr. Serge
Brammertz, head of the International Independent
Investigation Commission, who has submitted his
fourth periodic report.
We have studied the report and taken note of the
positive information it contains concerning Syria’s
ongoing efforts to meet its commitments and cooperate
with the Commission. The report clearly indicates that
Syrian cooperation with the Commission has been
satisfactory, effective and timely, reflecting again my
country’s concern, from day one until today, to ensure
that the Commission can complete its work.
I wish once again to reaffirm before the Council
that the Syrian Arab Republic’s cooperation with the
International Independent Investigation Commission
stems from our desire to uncover the truth about the
assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik
Hariri and to identify the perpetrators and the
masterminds of the crime.
In that regard, we note that our cooperation with
the Commission has extended to all areas of its inquiry.
Mr. Brammertz’s fourth report shows that Syria has
cooperated on several fronts and has responded to the
investigators’ many requests to reveal the desired truth.
The Syrian judicial commission has provided the

06-66630

International Independent Investigation Commission
with all the information that it has extracted from the
inquiries being carried out by the appropriate Syrian
authorities with regard to Mr. Hariri’s assassination.
Syria hopes that the investigation will continue
and that, on the basis of the three previous reports, it
will lead to identifying those who perpetrated that
crime. In that context, we reiterate our repeated
affirmation that the greatest threat to the investigation
lies in the fact that certain parties in and beyond our
region are exploiting it in order to politicize
conclusions that are entirely unrelated to the
investigation and that are not based on firm evidence.
There is also a danger that certain parties may provide
uncorroborated information, prevent some witnesses
from being investigated, and draw conclusions that
have no bearing on the rationale and objective of the
Commission’s establishment. The report points out that
much remains to be done to uncover the truth before
we can achieve the desired outcome.
Syria notes that the Commission has set out new
hypotheses with regard to the assassination of former
Prime Minister Rafik Hariri and the circumstances and
motives surrounding that assassination. We wish to
reiterate the need to examine all of the existing
evidence in a very careful manner, in line with
international criteria for a criminal investigation. We
must also reveal the truth regarding those who
organized the crime. In this regard, we call upon all
States — in particular those who are requesting,
through the media, that the entire truth be revealed —
to assume their own responsibilities through complete
cooperation with the International Independent
Investigation Commission, and we ask them not to give
safe refuge to suspects or witnesses who have lost their
credibility.
My delegation calls upon the 10 other States
referred to by Mr. Serge Brammertz, who have not yet
cooperated with the Commission, to do so immediately.
We would have liked to have the names of those States
that have not cooperated so far with the Commission,
because the media in some countries have continued to
make comments about Syria, despite our continued and
effective cooperation with the Commission.
We do not wish to discuss the details of the
investigation, in order not to prejudge the
investigation, which must be independent, neutral,
objective and free from any political interference.

5

S/PV.5597

We believe that the International Independent
Investigation Commission should also investigate the
assassination of the al-Majdhoub brothers in order to
explain the link between that crime and the other
crimes. We know that the assassination of the two
Majdhoub brothers is an integral part of the
Commission’s mandate. The extensive mandate covers
the provision of technical assistance to clarify the
circumstances of the terrorist attacks that targeted
Lebanese public figures who were influential in the
political and media spheres from 2004 until the
November 2006 terrorist attack against Pierre
Gemayel, the Minister of Industry of Lebanon. The
extension of the mandate could help to illuminate those
crimes and previous crimes, as well as crimes that
followed.
The Syrian delegation agrees with the necessity
to maintain the confidentiality of the investigation. We
appreciate that and call for it to continue, because
confidentiality is closely linked with the impartiality of
the inquiry, in its efforts to achieve concrete and
credible conclusions.

Syria also believes that we must ensure that the
investigation has the time needed to find and obtain
real evidence that cannot be used for political purposes
or be subject to unfounded interpretations. We assert
here that Syria will continue its cooperation with the
International Independent Investigation Commission
and will provide any available information, along with
the results of the investigations being carried out by the
Syrian authorities on the assassination of Mr. Hariri.
Finally, we reassert here today that Syria is
committed to cooperating with the International
Independent
Investigation
Commission
in
a
professional, neutral and responsible manner. We are
very keen that the truth be revealed; that will serve the
interests of Syria.
The President (spoke in Arabic): I thank the
representative of Syria for his statement. In accordance
with the understanding reached in the Council’s prior
consultations, I now invite Council members to
informal consultations to continue our discussion of the
subject.
The meeting rose at 3.45 p.m.

6

06-66630
