S/2017/202

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
9 March 2017
Original: English

Letter dated 8 March 2017 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to Security Council resolution 2305 (2016), in which
the Council extended the mandate of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL) until 31 August 2017 and, bearing in mind the strategic priorities and
recommendations identified by my predecessor in his letter of 12 March 2012
(S/2012/151) as a result of the strategic review of UNIFIL, expressed the need for a
follow-up and update, requesting that I conduct, by February 2017, a strategic
review of UNIFIL, examining the structure of its uniformed and civilian
components and related resources in an effort to ensure that the Mission is
configured most appropriately to fulfil its mandated tasks. The scope of the strategic
review did not include the mandate of the Mission or its authorized maximum
strength of 15,000 troops, as specified in resolution 1701 (2006).
In accordance with resolution 2305 (2016), and following consultations with
the parties, Security Council members and countries contributing troops to UNIFIL
and to the United Nations Truce Supervision Organization, and pu rsuant to desk
reviews prepared by UNIFIL in close consultation with the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, a multidisciplinary team from the
Department of Peacekeeping Operations and the Department of Field Support
visited UNIFIL from 15 to 22 January 2017. The team met with officials in Lebanon
and Israel, United Nations entities, representatives of troop -contributing countries
and ambassadors of the permanent members of the Security Council. The Assistant
Secretary-General for Peacekeeping Operations, El-Ghassim Wane, led the review
team, which included representatives from the Offices of Operations and Military
Affairs, the Policy, Evaluation and Training Division and the Department of Field
Support. A military capability study of UNIFIL was conducted from 18 to
26 January 2017, and was informed by the strategic review.
The strategic review took place during a period of political progress in
Lebanon, with the election of President Michel Aoun, the appointment of Prime
Minister Saad Hariri and the formation of the new Government, albeit within an
overall context of uncertainty, not least as a result of the ongoing conflict in the
Syrian Arab Republic.
Notwithstanding the calm and stability that continue to prevail across the Blu e
Line, there has been no tangible progress towards a permanent ceasefire and a long term solution, as called for in resolution 1701 (2006). More than 10 years after the
adoption of that resolution, the main causes of the conflict remain largely
unaddressed. It is the responsibility of Lebanon and Israel to fulfil their respective
obligations under the resolution.

17-03832 (E)

130317

*1703832*

S/2017/202

The imperative remains for continued efforts to ensure that the area between
the Blue Line and the Litani River is free of any armed personnel, assets and
weapons other than those of the Government of Lebanon and of UNIFIL. The
Government of Lebanon must make good on its pledge to increase its involvement,
and that of its ministries and security institutions, in the implementation of
resolution 1701 (2006), and its presence in southern Lebanon, thereby further
extending the authority of the State in the south. This includes expanding the
capacity and presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern Lebanon and in the
territorial waters of Lebanon.
Intrusions into Lebanese airspace by Israel continue unabated, in violation of
Lebanese sovereignty and resolution 1701 (2006). These almost daily overflights
run counter to the efforts of UNIFIL to reduce tensions and have a negative impact
on the credibility of the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL. The continued
occupation by the Israel Defense Forces of the northern part of the village of Ghajar
and an adjacent area north of the Blue Line also constitutes a continuing violation of
resolution 1701 (2006). Israel must cease those violations.
During the review, both parties emphasized their continued commitment to
implementing resolution 1701 (2006) and maintaining stability along the Blue Line.
Both parties also agreed on the importance of UNIFIL and the need to maintain the
composition and deployment of the Mission, including its Maritime Task Force, at
its present strength, in its area of operations. Lebanon and Israel continue to
approach any adjustment to the capabilities, structure or activities of t he Mission
with strong caution, emphasizing that, in the current climate of uncertainty, the
focus should be on minimizing risks.
The team reviewed the progress of the strategic dialogue between the
Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL and the ways in which its pace could be
accelerated. The strategic dialogue is a means not only to strengthen the capacity of
the Lebanese Armed Forces to assume greater security responsibilities in southern
Lebanon and in Lebanese territorial waters, but also to facilitate mov ement towards
a permanent ceasefire. Since 2012, demands on the Lebanese Armed Forces have
not subsided; on the contrary, they have increased. The Lebanese Armed Forces
continue to face multiple security challenges, particularly along the northern and
eastern borders of the country. As a result of this situation, the Lebanese Armed
Forces maintain only two reduced-strength brigades in the area south of the Litani
River. Consequently, the presence of the most visible aspect of Lebanese State
authority in southern Lebanon has not increased as expected.
The review acknowledged that, through the strategic dialogue, in coordination
with the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and building
on previous efforts of the International Support Group for Lebanon, UNIFIL
supports the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to increase the capacity of the
Lebanese Armed Forces to carry out the tasks mandated in resolution 1701 (2006),
including by mobilizing resources for prioritized needs identified by the Lebanese
Armed Forces. In that connection, the review encouraged UNIFIL and the Lebanese
Armed Forces to further study and develop the possibility of establishing a “model
brigade” dedicated to the sector south of the Litani River in the UNIFIL area of
operations as a concrete step towards enhancing the capacity of the Lebanese Armed
Forces in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006). At the same time, the
review recognized the importance for the Government of Lebanon and the Lebanese
Armed Forces of assuming accountability and responsibility in that regard.
The review reconfirmed the essential function of the liaison and coordination
arrangements that UNIFIL has established with the parties, bilaterally and through
the tripartite mechanism, in deconflicting situations and defusing tensions, as well
2/9

17-03832

S/2017/202

as enhancing cooperation and building trust. A key objective of the engagement of
UNIFIL with the parties continues to be to assist the Lebanese Armed Forces and
the Israel Defense Forces in finding mutually agreeable security arrangements and
agreeing on confidence-building measures to reduce the potential for tension or
incidents, in particular in sensitive areas along the Blue Line. This includes the
continued efforts that UNIFIL is making with the parties to mark the Blue Line
visibly on the ground.
The review determined that, overall, the Force was well configured to
implement its mandated tasks. UNIFIL continues to be a credible, flexible and
mobile force. The deterrence effect of the high density of UNIFIL troops within the
area of operations, coupled with the more than 400 daily operational activities,
including ground and aerial patrols, checkpoints and observation tasks, contributes
to security and stability in the area. While the relationship between UNIFIL and the
local population continues to be positive overall, isolated incidents, some of them
serious, have at times affected the freedom of movement of UNIFIL. I have urged
the Lebanese authorities to continue to cooperate with UNIFIL to guarantee
adequate protection of the peacekeepers, as well as their freedom of movement
throughout the area of operations.
The review noted the important role of the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force in
providing training for and in supporting the naval branch of the Lebanese Armed
Forces to prevent the unauthorized entry by sea of arms or related materials into
Lebanon through maritime interdiction operations. By enabling a stable and safe
maritime environment, the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force not only contributes to
enhanced maritime trade, but also deters the use of Lebanese territorial waters for
illicit purposes and mitigates the spillover effects of the regional crises across the
Mediterranean.
The review assessed the impact of the different community outreach activities
of UNIFIL, including those funded by some of the national contingents of UNIFIL
and those funded through the assessed Mission budget in the for m of quick-impact
projects and strategic communication activities. Quick -impact projects are intended
to strengthen links between UNIFIL and local communities and address some of the
most pressing needs of the population. They also serve to harmonize the
engagement of the Mission with local communities in line with the priorities of the
national authorities. Through quick-impact projects, the Mission seeks to ensure the
equitable geographical distribution of its community outreach activities.
In the review, it was determined that the strategic priorities identified in the
strategic review of 2012 remained largely valid but needed to be adapted to take
into account the evolving regional dynamics and internal context in Lebanon. It was
recognized that failure to meet the political objectives of resolution 1701 (2006),
namely a permanent ceasefire and long-term solution to the conflict, increasingly
puts at risk the relative calm achieved in southern Lebanon an d along the Blue Line.
Importantly, there is a need for continued United Nations advocacy efforts and
engagement with political and military interlocutors in Lebanon and Israel, through
the good offices of the Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the Head o f Mission
and Force Commander of UNIFIL, in ensuring that the cessation of hostilities is
preserved and progress is made towards a permanent ceasefire. In this regard,
concerted engagement with the international community continues to be essential to
foster support for increasing the capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces and to
extend the authority of the State in the south.
At the same time, the updated strategic priorities reflect a heightened emphasis
on prevention, including through the presence of UNIFIL and its operational and
non-operational activities, in an effort to mitigate risks in a timely manner, thereby
17-03832

3/9

S/2017/202

preventing small incidents from escalating into larger -scale violence. In this regard,
the review recognized the importance of UNIFIL continuing to take steps, however
incremental, to create the space to enable the parties to move from the fragile
cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire. I am encouraged by the continued
willingness of the parties to engage with UNIFIL in taking practical and
constructive measures to maintain calm and to ensure stability. Although UNIFIL
has identified no imminent threat of physical violence against civilians, the review
also addressed the need to ensure operational preparedness, in particular as it
pertains to the Mission’s civilian protection mandate.
The strategic review has identified the following three strategic priorities in
the implementation of the mandate of UNIFIL:
(a) UNIFIL, in close coordination with the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the United Nations country team, should
further promote an integrated and comprehensive approach to the implementation of
Security Council resolution 1701 (2006) in order, among other things, to:
(i) Support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon in increasing its
involvement, and that of its ministries and security institutions, in the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), and its presence in southern
Lebanon, thereby further extending the authority of the State in the south;
(ii) Support the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to increase the
capacity of the Lebanese Armed Forces and its presence in southern Le banon
and the territorial waters of Lebanon at an accelerated pace, particularly in
relation to prioritized land and maritime capabilities, through the strategic
dialogue between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL and through the
advocacy work of the International Support Group for Lebanon, as
appropriate, not only as a prerequisite for the gradual assumption of effective
and sustainable security control of the UNIFIL area of operations and
Lebanese territorial waters, but also as a key element to support ing steps
towards a permanent ceasefire;
(b) UNIFIL should undertake all necessary preventive actions to maintain
calm along the Blue Line and in its area of operations, including as a means to build
confidence between the parties and contribute to creating conditions conducive to
moving from the cessation of hostilities to a permanent ceasefire between Lebanon
and Israel;
(c) Without prejudice to the responsibilities of the parties, and in accordance
with its mandate, UNIFIL should have contingency pla ns in place and be prepared
to implement its mandate effectively and safely in extreme situations and, in
particular, to deliver on its mandated responsibility to protect civilians under
imminent threat of physical violence, within its means and capabiliti es.
The overall strategic political guidance is to maintain the current strength,
composition and configuration of UNIFIL. This notwithstanding, the strategic
review, in line with its terms of reference and in pursuit of the aforementioned
strategic priorities, made a number of recommendations to ensure that UNIFIL may
fulfil its mandated tasks optimally, while maintaining its operational effectiveness
on land, in the air and at sea. Through the strategic review, a number of potential
efficiency gains have been identified. A summary of recommendations is attached to
the present letter (see annex).
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter and its annex to the
attention of the members of the Security Council.
(Signed) António Guterres

4/9

17-03832

S/2017/202

Annex to the letter dated 8 March 2017 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
Summary of recommendations
Protection of civilians
1.
Bearing in mind the primary responsibility of the host State for protection,
liaison arrangements for protection contingency planning should be established with
the Government of Lebanon, as well as with the Office of the United Nations
Special Coordinator for Lebanon and relevant United Nations country team
partners.
2.
The United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) should build upon
progress achieved in its contingency planning for the protection of civilians by
extending planning to the sector and unit levels and conducting frequent rehearsals
and logistics preparation, with a view to ensuring the commitment of troop contributing countries to execute such plans and implement the mandate of UNIFIL
to protect civilians, should the situation warrant it.
Strategic dialogue mechanism
3.
In line with the Capability Development Plan of the Lebanese Armed Forces,
the strategic dialogue plan and, as appropriate, building on previous coordination
efforts of the International Support Group for Lebanon, th e strategic dialogue
between the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL should prioritize the needs that
the Forces have put forward to build their capacity on land and at sea, namely:
(a) A “model brigade” of the Lebanese Armed Forces in the UNIFIL area of
operations;
(b)

Naval assets (offshore patrol vessel);

(c) A Lebanese Armed Forces regional civil-military cooperation centre in
the south in the UNIFIL area of operations.
4.
Through the strategic dialogue, UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces
should establish a series of benchmarks and timelines, with a view to developing
further the “model brigade” concept and ensuring its sustainability in terms of
staffing, equipment, training, bases and resources. This would maximize the
capacity of existing Lebanese Armed Forces personnel in the UNIFIL area of
operations, as well as increase the presence of the Lebanese Armed Forces south of
the Litani River. The brigade would facilitate closer joint operations, as UNIFIL
would provide “advise and assist” teams at various echelons to mentor leaders in the
Lebanese Armed Forces.
5.
Through their strategic dialogue, the Lebanese Armed Forces and UNIFIL
should establish a series of benchmarks and timelines, with a view to establishing a
dedicated cadre of trained and experienced naval personnel who, through
continuous training, would be able to assume the role of trainers.
6.
UNIFIL, in consultation with the Office of the United Nations Special
Coordinator for Lebanon, should consider how best to mobilize support for
developing the land and sea capabilities identified as priorities by the Lebanese
Armed Forces, including the possibility of organizing a donors’ conference in
follow-up to the Ministerial Conference on International Support for the Lebanese
Armed Forces, held in Rome in June 2014, as well as establish a system to track
progress in capacity-building in relation to tasks mandated in resolution 1701

17-03832

5/9

S/2017/202

(2006) and ensure the accountability and responsibility of the Government of
Lebanon and the Lebanese Armed Forces in that regard.
7.
In an effort to promote, facilitate and accelerate the pace of resource
mobilization for the prioritized needs identified by the Lebanese Armed Forces and
in order to avoid duplication of effort, UNIFIL should continue to cooperate with
the Executive Military Commission, which is co-chaired by the Lebanese Armed
Forces and the Office of the United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon, on
the coordination of multi-donor assistance to the Lebanese Armed Forces.
8.
The UNIFIL Head of Mission and Force Commander should retain overall
political direction and oversight of the strategic dialogue process, which is currently
coordinated by the Deputy Force Commander. In an effort to bolster and broaden
access by the Force to the international diplomatic and donor community, including
troop-contributing countries, in close coordination with the Office of the United
Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and in line with the strategic priority to
ensure an integrated approach to support capacity-building in the Lebanese Armed
Forces, it is recommended that UNIFIL, under the overall guidance of the Head of
Mission and Force Commander, enhance the engagement of the Deputy Head of
Mission and its civilian substantive component in the strategic dialogue.
Liaison and coordination with the parties
9.
All assets should be synchronized and synergy between the UNIFIL Liaison
Branch, sector forces and the Observer Group Lebanon of the United Nations Truce
Supervision Organization should be ensured, with a view to fully utilizing all
capabilities, especially as first responders to incidents.
10. The UNIFIL Liaison Branch should be strengthened, within existing resources,
including for deployment south of the Blue Line.
11. In order to enhance the current level of liaison and allow for a strategic
dialogue with the Israel Defense Forces and other Israeli authorities on issues
relating to the UNIFIL mandate, the establishment of an office in Tel Aviv, a greed
by the Government of Israel in February 2007, remains of critical importance for
UNIFIL.
Structure of the uniformed and civilian components of UNIFIL
Land forces
12. Ways to enhance further the coverage and effectiveness of coordinated
operations between UNIFIL and the Lebanese Armed Forces should be explored.
13. Notwithstanding the overall strategic political guidance to maintain the
current strength, composition and configuration of UNIFIL land forces, a troop -totask analysis conducted as part of the military capability study of UNIFIL identified
a number of recommendations to ensure that UNIFIL may fulfil its mandated tasks
optimally.
14. Priority should be given to the work of the Contingent-Owned Equipment/
Memorandum of Understanding Management Review Board in order to realize
efficiencies.
Maritime Task Force
15. The overall strategic political guidance is to maintain the operational
effectiveness of the UNIFIL Maritime Task Force. Following this guidance, a ship to-task analysis conducted as part of the military capability study of UNIFIL

6/9

17-03832

S/2017/202

identified a number of recommendations to ensure greater efficiency in the way the
Maritime Task Force fulfils its mandated tasks:
(a) The UNIFIL Maritime Task Force should be gradually reconfigured to
comprise an all corvette fleet. The adjustment would entail phasing out one offshore
patrol vessel/fast patrol boat and replacing another such vessel with a corvette, thus
resulting in a stronger reconfigured fleet of six corvettes. The env isioned
reconfiguration could take place by the end of 2018, with the expectation that
partners would be able to help the naval branch of the Lebanese Armed Forces to
improve its capacity, including through the acquisition of an offshore patrol vessel
that would be pursued via the strategic dialogue mechanism and the International
Support Group for Lebanon, as appropriate;
(b) The flight hours of the two UNIFIL Maritime Task Force helicopters
should be reduced from 45 hours to 25 hours per month, com mensurate with their
actual use;
(c) The total maximum number of maritime crew personnel across the
UNIFIL Maritime Task Force, including the Maritime Task Force headquarters,
should be reduced from 1,200 to 900.
16. Ways to enhance the effectiveness of coordinated operations between UNIFIL
and the naval branch of the Lebanese Armed Forces should be explored, including
by increasing the continuous presence of the naval forces at sea to 72 hours per
week and strengthening the reliability of the Coastal Radar Or ganization stations in
conducting maritime interdiction operations.
Community outreach activities
17. In support of the full implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and the
Mission’s strategic priorities, UNIFIL community outreach activities should be
directed at: promoting good relations between the Mission and local communities
and ensuring the protection and freedom of action of the Mission; the full
deployment and effective control of the Lebanese Armed Forces in southern
Lebanon; and supporting the efforts of the Government of Lebanon to increase its
involvement in the implementation of resolution 1701 (2006) and its presence in
southern Lebanon, thereby further extending the authority of the State in the south.
18. To ensure that community outreach is planned and implemented as a Mission wide activity, UNIFIL engagement should be structured along two interrelated lines
of action under the day-to-day management of the Deputy Head of Mission:
outreach and programmatic activities (cost and no -cost); and strategic
communications.
19. To strengthen the coherence and effectiveness of its community outreach and
programmatic efforts, it is recommended that UNIFIL establish a community
outreach board that would be led by the Deputy Head of Mission and comprise: the
military Chief of Staff, the Deputy Chief of Staff for Operations and the civil
affairs, J9, civil-military cooperation and sector commanders, to ensure that:
(a) Annual priorities and criteria of the Mission are established to direct all
community outreach and programmatic activities (cost and no -cost) to meet the
objectives listed above;
(b) Community outreach and programmatic activities of the Mission are
culturally sensitive and distributed equitably across the area of operations;
(c) Programmatic activities are undertaken in close consultation with
municipal or central institutions of the Government of Lebanon and, where feasible
and appropriate, under their visible leadership;
17-03832

7/9

S/2017/202

(d) Opportunities are identified to coordinate or engage, where relevant and
appropriate, the Lebanese Armed Forces in the delivery of programmatic activities;
(e) Programmatic activities are coordinated with the country team and other
stakeholders to avoid duplication and, where possible, ensure synergy;
(f) The impact of UNIFIL community outreach efforts is assessed regularly,
including through the establishment of a common Mission database, systematic joint
evaluations of all community outreach activities and the conduct of public opinion
surveys.
20. To strengthen the contribution of community outreach activities to the
implementation of resolution 1701 (2006), and specifically the deployment of the
Lebanese Armed Forces throughout the south, UNIFIL, where relevant and
appropriate, should engage the Lebanese Armed Forces in the implementation of the
Mission’s programmatic activities. Should the Government of Le banon establish a
regional civil-military cooperation centre in the south, it should be the focal point
for the planning and organization of coordinated or joint community outreach
activities.
21. UNIFIL should continue to maintain an annual budget for qui ck-impact
projects of $500,000 for the next two to three years. Those projects should ensure
balance in the geographical distribution of activities and be in conformity with the
national priorities and plans of the Government of Lebanon. Priority should be
given to coordinated or joint civil-military cooperation activities with the Lebanese
Armed Forces. Consideration should be given to quick-impact projects co-funded
with municipal or central authorities.
22. To strengthen the impact of community outreach activities, the UNIFIL Civil
Affairs Section should prioritize: liaison and engagement with key Government of
Lebanon ministries and security institutions, in coordination with the Office of the
United Nations Special Coordinator for Lebanon and the countr y team; and the
monitoring and assessment of and reporting on community outreach activities of the
Mission, in addition to ongoing engagement with local communities in the south.
23. In support of enhanced assessment of the impact of community outreach
activities, public opinion surveys managed by the Civil Affairs Section could be
streamlined to enable more agile and regular surveys, the analysis of which could
contribute to the planning and delivery of community outreach activities.
24. To strengthen coordination of civil-military cooperation activities, the Force
Commander’s Civil-Military Cooperation Unit should be tasked by the J9 branch
and report to the military Chief of Staff through the Chief of J9, with responsibility
for supporting the planning, implementation, delivery and evaluation of
programmatic activities at the sector level.
25. To strengthen the coherence and delivery of UNIFIL strategic
communications, the Military Community Outreach Unit should be reduced from 55
to 25 personnel and merged with the Public Information Office to establish a
Mission Strategic Communications Unit, to be staffed by personnel from at least
three troop-contributing countries and headed by a P-5 staff member (the current
Chief of the Public Information Office), who would report to the Deputy Head of
Mission.
26. Further to the implementation in full, over a three-year period, of the
recommendations of the 2013 civilian staffing review, UNIFIL should continue to
optimize its staffing complement and resources to support the effective and costefficient implementation of its mandate and, in this regard, make re levant proposals
for the 2018/19 and 2019/20 budgets.
8/9

17-03832

S/2017/202

Mission integration and coordination
27. Establish a civilian Chief of Staff in the Office of the H ead of Mission and
Force Commander, within existing resources, at the D -1 level to strengthen the
integration and coordination of the Mission.

17-03832

9/9
