S/PV.9158

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-seventh year

9158th meeting

Thursday, 20 October 2022, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Biang. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Gabon)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ireland. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kenya. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Mexico. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Norway . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Ms. Fino
Mrs. Espeschit Maia
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri
Mr. Raguttahalli
Mr. Mythen
Ms. Nthoki
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu
Ms. Juul
Mr. Kuzmin
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield

Agenda
Women and peace and security
Strengthening women’s resilience and leadership as a path to peace in regions
plagued by armed groups
Report of the Secretary-General on women and peace and security (S/2022/740)
Letter dated 4 October 2022 from the Permanent Representative of Gabon to the
United Nations addressed to the Secretary-General (S/2022/743)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

22-63994 (E)
*2263994*

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
Women and peace and security
Strengthening women’s resilience and
leadership as a path to peace in regions plagued
by armed groups
Report of the Secretary-General on women and
peace and security (S/2022/740)
Letter dated 4 October 2022 from the
Permanent Representative of Gabon
to the United Nations addressed to the
Secretary-General (S/2022/743)
The President (spoke in French): In accordance
with rule 37 of the Council’s provisional rules of
procedure, I invite the representatives of Australia,
Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, the
Central African Republic, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Croatia, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, Finland,
Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guyana,
Indonesia, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Israel, Italy,
Japan, Jordan, Kuwait, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Morocco, Namibia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, the
Niger, the Philippines, Poland, Portugal, the Republic
of Korea, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa,
Spain, Switzerland, Thailand, Türkiye, Ukraine, Viet
Nam and Yemen to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Ms. Sima Sami
Bahous, Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Bineta
Diop, Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security of
the Chairperson of the African Union Commission; and
Ms. Zahra Nader, Editor-in-Chief, Zan Times.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite His Excellency
Mr. Olof Skoog, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations; Ms. Irene Fellin, NATO
Secretary-General’s Special Representative for
Women, Peace and Security; and Ms. Alexandra
Boivin, Head of Policy and Humanitarian Diplomacy
Division, International Committee of the Red Cross, to
participate in this meeting.
2/33

20/10/2022

I propose that the Council invite the Permanent
Observer of the Observer State of Palestine to the United
Nations to participate in this meeting, in accordance
with the provisional rules of procedure and the previous
practice in this regard.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members to
document S/2022/740, which contains the report of the
Secretary-General on women and peace and security,
and document S/2022/743, which contains the text
of a letter dated 4 October 2022 from the Permanent
Representative of Gabon to the United Nations
addressed to the Secretary-General.
I would like to warmly welcome the Deputy
Secretary-General, Her Excellency Ms. Amina
Mohammed, to whom I now give the floor.
The Deputy Secretary-General: Let me begin
by responding to some remarks that I was not wearing
pink. The bright part of the dress that I am wearing
represents the hope that I have for women’s rights in our
world today. But this black veil in which I am shrouded
is a sign of mourning for the women who have been lost
to gender-based violence, the war in Ukraine and the
incredibly tragic climate events we have seen over the
past few years.
I thank Gabon for organizing this important debate
on strengthening women’s resilience and leadership as
a path to peace in regions plagued by armed groups.
We cannot separate the perilous state of peace in our
world from the destructive effects of patriarchy and
the silencing of women’s voices. The challenges we
face today, from proliferating conflicts to worsening
assaults on human rights, are in many ways connected
to the trampling of women’s rights and to deeply
ingrained misogyny around the world. We must call
out such misogyny as it manifests itself in the abuse
and discrimination that women confront on the street,
at home, at work and online, day in and day out. But we
must also challenge the social, political and economic
structures and norms that sustain it. We must stand firm
against armed groups that use violence as a weapon
of war and misogyny as part of their propaganda,
recruitment and fundraising tactics. Women and girls
are often the primary targets of violence and abuse in
conflict settings, and they must be at the vanguard of
our responses.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Study after study has demonstrated that when we
strengthen women’s resilience and leadership, everyone
benefits, including our boys and men. Women are
more likely to foster inclusive modes of governance
and coexistence, build peace and silence the guns and
invest in sustainable development — a cornerstone
of peace, prosperous communities and societies.
The participation of women at all levels, from local
communities to national parliaments, has played a
pivotal role in changing the way we approach peace and
security over the past 20 years. But progress has been
far too slow. Between 1995 and 2019, the percentage
of peace agreements with gender-equality provisions
increased from 14 to 22 per cent. Four peace agreements
out of five still ignore gender equality, and a disconnect
continues at decision-making levels. Around the same
time period, women constituted on average just 13 per
cent of negotiators, 6 per cent of mediators and 6 per
cent of signatories to major peace processes. That is
unacceptable. Seven of every 10 peace processes
included no women mediators or signatories. Women’s
participation in peace processes, and their influence over
decisions that affect their lives, continues to lag very far
behind, creating a real barrier to inclusive, durable and
sustainable peace. We must do better, and we must do
it now. That will mean dismantling patriarchal norms
that exclude women from power; putting forward more
women mediators and negotiators; establishing more
regular and formal exchanges with women mediators
to continually improve our approach; and securing
greater and more predictable financing. Today women
peacebuilders mediate disputes, defuse tensions and
save lives in the hardest-to-reach places. Yet their frontline work remains consistently underfunded.
The Secretary-General has identified five
transformative actions for the decade ahead on
women’s rights. I urge everyone to implement them
without delay. He has urged for special attention to be
paid to protecting women human rights defenders, who
face rising threats, reprisals and violence. Those brave
women are at the vanguard of the women and peace
and security agenda. For its part, the United Nations
is acting to protect women leaders and human rights
activists around the world.
The United Nations Assistance Mission in
Afghanistan has publicly condemned violence
against women human rights defenders, including
extrajudicial killings, arbitrary arrests, detention and
torture. The Mission is engaging with the de facto
authorities to advocate for the protection of human

S/PV.9158

rights for all Afghans, regardless of gender, religion
or ethnicity. Our Women’s Peace and Humanitarian
Fund, which has already supported more than 600
local women’s organizations in crisis settings, has
opened a special window to support women activists
who are at risk. Across the world, we are pushing for
women’s meaningful representation and participation
in peacemaking efforts, with some success.
The strategy of the United Nations Mission in
the Sudan for a gender-responsive process included a
40 per cent target of women in delegations to the peace
talks. This year, the Mission facilitated the formation of
a women’s rights group that will participate in the next
phase of political talks. Our political and peacekeeping
missions promote women’s participation in elections
in conflict-affected countries, including by protecting
women candidates from violence. In the Central African
Republic, a female candidate for Parliament alerted
us that she was under threat. Peacekeepers arrived
swiftly, and the armed actors left. Today that former
candidate is a member of Parliament. In Mali, years
of coordinated advocacy by women’s organizations,
the United Nations and the Security Council have
contributed to significantly increasing the share of
women in the Executive Monitoring Committee of the
Political Agreement from three to 38 per cent. In that
regard, we would like to commend the African Union
on its efforts for women, peace and security. We must
build on those examples, and we count on Council
members to do the same, using their influence to move
the women and peace and security agenda forward.
The women and peace and security agenda is not
just an answer to historic wrongs and marginalization,
but an opportunity to do things differently — in a very
difficult world. When we open the door to inclusion and
participation, we take a giant step forward in conflict
prevention and peacebuilding.
Yet, despite decades of evidence that gender
equality offers a path to sustainable peace and conflict
prevention, we are moving in the opposite direction.
We need full gender parity, including through
special quotas to accelerate the inclusion of women
across election monitoring, security sector reform,
disarmament, demobilization and justice systems.
At this time of peril, conflicts and crises, we
must pursue proven strategies for peace and stability.
Protecting women’s rights and promoting women’s
inclusion is such a strategy. Today let us recommit

22-639943/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

to putting women’s participation at the centre of
everything we do, everywhere.
The President (spoke in French): I thank the
Deputy Secretary-General for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Bahous.
Ms. Bahous: At the outset, allow me to thank
Gabon for organizing today’s open debate.
It is an honour for me to be here this morning.
This is a vitally important time for the women and
peace and security agenda. A reversal of generational
gains in women’s rights is taking place amid surging
threats to security. Violent conflict, displacement, the
repercussions of the global pandemic and the growing
climate emergency all exact the highest price from
women and girls.
The Deputy Secretary-General has already made
clear the linkages among the challenges we face. The
retreat from and pushback against the rights of women
and girls aggravates those challenges, while depriving
us of the most powerful solutions. The report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/740) describes how the
women and peace and security agenda has been driven
back. It details crucial and specific implementation
gaps that demand our collective and urgent attention. I
urge everyone with a part to play in the pursuit of peace
and security to read the report in full.
I will focus on three cross-cutting areas highlighted
by the report, for which I will have three corresponding
asks for everyone. To be clear from the outset, those
asks are to protect and support women human rights
defenders as a powerful force for peace; guarantee a
seat at the table for women when peace is made; and
ensure that what we say about the priorities of women
and peace and security is reflected in what we fund. We
are a long way from where we should be on all three of
those asks.
I will begin with the subject of women human
rights defenders, whose courage and commitment
embody the ideals of the Security Council. Around the
world — from Iran to Tigray, Ukraine, Afghanistan and
beyond — women human rights defenders risk their
lives every day in the name of peace and human rights
and for the sake of their communities and our planet.
They should be cherished by everyone, but instead
they are increasingly under attack. Tragically, there are
numerous examples of that.
4/33

20/10/2022

Daniela Soto, an indigenous woman human rights
defender from Colombia, has been advocating for
human rights since she was a teenager. In May 2021,
she was shot twice in her abdomen by armed civilians.
She survived the attack and spoke here at the Security
Council five months later (see S/PV.8879), bringing
attention to the continuing killings of indigenous
women leaders in Colombia.
Siti Alnfor Ahmed Bakr, a 24-year-old nurse and
activist in the Sudan, was killed by security forces in
November last year when she participated in a peaceful
demonstration in Bahry.
We will soon hear from Ms. Zahra Nader, who will
share with us the enormous risks taken and price paid
by women human rights defenders in Afghanistan, who
continue to demonstrate for their human rights in the
face of the Taliban’s policies of systematic repression
of women and girls — and for that they are harassed,
detained and tortured.
Each one of those incidents is appalling in its own
right, but together they also reflect a bigger picture. The
Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for
Human Rights recently reported that 60 per cent of the
nearly 350 individual cases of intimidation or reprisals
following cooperation with the United Nations in the
past year concerned women. Surveys conducted by
UN-Women show us that nearly one third of the women
representatives of civil society who have briefed the
Council have also faced reprisals. The fact that briefing
the Council is cause for such reprisals should surely
shock and compel us to take action.
The United Nations has stepped up its public
condemnations of those reprisals, conducted visits to
women human rights defenders at risk, facilitated the
establishment of networks of women human rights
defenders and supported the development of policies
and laws that strengthen protection.
For example, in Libya the United Nations has
engaged with social media companies to fight
misinformation and hate speech targeting women’s
rights activists. In Colombia, more than 5,500 women
leaders and human rights defenders have benefitted
from protection strategies developed under a UNWomen programme.
Those interventions save lives and help create space
for the bravery of women human rights defenders to be
translated into change, but there remains much more
that we can — and therefore must — do. The Secretary22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

General’s report points the way forward. First, we must
urgently strengthen reporting and coordination on the
United Nations side and further build our partnerships
with Member States, regional organizations and
civil society.
Secondly, we must provide material and political
support to women human rights defenders and
their organizations.
Thirdly and finally, we must review and update
legislation and administrative measures concerning
asylum, temporary relocation or the temporary protected
status needed due for gender-based persecution.
Through those measures and more, we can make
our political support visible and real. And lest any
think that marginalizing women keeps them safe, let
us be clear: it achieves the opposite. Denying women
space, access or funding because of safety concerns
emboldens perpetrators and in their eyes validates their
tactics. Women human rights defenders must be front
and centre in our work as we move ahead.
We know that the pursuit of inclusive and
sustainable peace demands the full participation of
women. That point has been made here multiple times
and is reflected in the Council’s own resolutions and
supported by a wide range of evidence. Why then was
the level of women’s representation in United Nationsled peace processes in 2021 only at 19 per cent — lower
than it was in 2020? Why is the level of women’s
representation even lower in processes not led by the
United Nations? And why is it that from 2020 to 2021
we saw a decrease in the level of women’s participation
in leadership and management structures in refugee
and internally displaced persons contexts?

S/PV.9158

as in Cyprus or Yemen. Those are welcome demands
and I thank the Council for them.
Nonetheless, I urge all those supporting peace
processes to insist on women’s direct and formal
participation and on strengthening women’s resilience
and leadership as a path to peace. I echo the SecretaryGeneral’s call for the appointment of Special Envoys
with a mandate to insist on women’s direct and formal
participation and to take specific steps to facilitate it. It
should not be — and it is not — beyond us.
Let me turn now to funding, one of the key levers by
which our words become reality. Investing in women’s
leadership and women’s civil society organizations and
supporting women human rights defenders in conflict
contexts is more urgent, more needed and makes more
sense than ever. It is encouraging that 103 countries
have now adopted national action plans on women and
peace and security compared to 37 a decade ago. It
is heartening that a growing number of countries are
choosing to adopt a feminist foreign policy, and I urge
any countries that are going back on such decisions
to reconsider. I also welcome the 184 signatories of
the Compact on Women, Peace and Security and
Humanitarian Action.

In conflict-affected countries, the proportion of
women represented in coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
task forces was only 16 per cent — despite women’s
leading role on the front lines of the COVID-19 response
at home and in their communities and professions.
And today the level of women’s representation in the
national parliaments of conflict-affected countries is
5 per cent lower than the global average, while in local
Governments it is 12 per cent lower. We know very well
what to do. Quotas and temporary special measures
remain our best tool to set right those damaging
imbalances and promote equality in decision-making.

However, those commitments can fulfil their
promise only when they are supported with funding
commensurate to the challenge. In 2021 there was a
72 per cent shortfall in funding aimed at preventing and
responding to gender-based violence in humanitarian
emergencies. The share of bilateral aid to fragile and
conflict-affected contexts dedicated to gender equality
remains at 5 per cent. Funding for women’s organizations
in conflict-affected countries, where it is most needed,
went from $181 million in 2019 to $150 million in 2020.
In Afghanistan, 77 per cent of women’s civil-society
organizations have received no funding at all in 2022
and are no longer running programmes. In Myanmar,
approximately half of women’s organizations had to
close following the coup. I call on the international
community to reverse that trend. All in a position to do
so should significantly step up their funding for gender
equality in conflict settings. To fail to do that is to fail
to live up to our claims of commitment and support.
I urge Member States to live up to their words and to
make the choice to fund women’s rights defenders and
the work of the United Nations and our partners.

In the past year, we have seen the Security Council
use stronger language to demand women’s full, equal
and meaningful participation in peace processes, such

We are not naive. We understand that economic
pressures around the world are part of what is driving
those reductions. But this is also a matter of prioritization.

22-639945/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

It is a false economy that increases military spending,
which has now reached an all-time high, while
neglecting investments that make it less necessary. The
women and peace and security agenda demands both
our individual commitment and our collective action.
UN-Women is doing its part despite the challenges and
will continue to do so. We are redoubling our efforts to
support an ever more effective integration of women’s
leadership, women’s empowerment and gender equality
across humanitarian work. We are doing it through
United Nations coordination, supporting meaningful
intergovernmental action and supporting Member
States to accelerate the implementation of the women
and peace and security agenda in humanitarian settings.
Just last week UN-Women joined the Inter-Agency
Standing Committee, the highest-level humanitarian
coordination platform of the United Nations system.
I thank all the Member States that supported this. It
reflects our sister entities’ recognition not only of the
role and contribution of UN-Women in that space but of
how central gender equality is to effective humanitarian
action. I assure the Assembly that I will tirelessly
advocate for women’s leadership and gender equality,
together with my entire team, across the breadth of
humanitarian response. At UN-Women, we are also
committed to ensuring that all we do contributes to the
women and peace and security agenda. That includes the
Generation Equality Forum, which provides a unique
space for public and private partners to work together
to achieve transformative change for gender equality.
Let us make the Secretary-General’s report a
milestone. The needs could not be greater, nor the cause
more pressing. We must take its recommendations to
heart. I ask that members follow through on measures to
protect and empower human rights defenders, because
they are there, on the front line, and their courage and
leadership deserve nothing less than our full support.
I call on Member States to demand that women be
properly represented in peace processes. There are
no real excuses for anything less. That we are going
backwards is surely a simple failure of will. And I urge
everyone to make the smart decision on funding and
prioritize resources for women and peace and security.
Our stated commitments are too far from the reality of
where money goes right now, and that needs to change.
We have choices to make. The right ones are clear
and compelling and place women at the heart of our
agenda. I hope that when we next meet it will be to
discuss our success and progress in doing so. The
6/33

20/10/2022

alternative will not only fail women, but it will fail
us all.
The President (spoke in French): I thank
Ms. Bahous for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Diop.
Ms. Diop (spoke in French): At the outset, I would
like to warmly congratulate the Republic of Gabon
on its assumption of the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October. I commend you,
Mr. President, and Gabon in particular, for adopting
one of the most comprehensive and progressive African
national action plans among the 35 that currently exist
in Africa. I thank all Council members for organizing
this debate focused on women and peace and security,
in commemoration of the twenty-second anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000). I am also grateful to the Deputy
Secretary-General, Ms. Amina Mohammed, for her
leadership in promoting the effective participation of
women in peace, security and development processes,
which is expressed not just through her presence at
this meeting but her commitment on the ground as
well, both in the African continent and throughout the
world. I thank her for that commitment. And I thank the
Executive Director of UN-Women and her entire team,
and all the United Nations agencies, for the technical
and financial support provided to our African member
States, facilitating the development and implementation
of our national action plans.
The Office of the Special Envoy on Women, Peace
and Security of the Chairperson of the African Union
Commission, which I am representing today, has been
formally institutionalized within the African Union
(AU) and is the first of its kind in the world. It has
served as a model for strategically positioning women’s
leadership in peace and security governance and works
tirelessly to strengthen the voice of women in conflict
prevention and resolution, as well as in post-conflict
reconstruction processes, and to ensure their protection
in violent conflicts.
(spoke in English)
I would like to share some key facts from the report
of the Chairperson of the African Union Commission,
His Excellency Mr. Moussa Faki Mahamat. The report
was developed with data gathered using the Continental
Results Framework, an accountability tool adopted by
the AU Peace and Security Council for the delivery of
the women and peace and security agenda in Africa.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Twenty-two years after the adoption of resolution
1325 (2000) , women continue to face discrimination,
underrepresentation and protection challenges. The
triple-C crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
pandemic, climate change and conflict has exacerbated
the challenges in the political, social and economic
fabric within which women and girls evolve, making
it urgent that we invest in strengthening women’s
resilience and leadership. In that regard, I want to share
a few examples.
The first example is the crisis in the Lake Chad
basin. I visited the terrain with my sister Amina
Mohammed. The continued presence of Boko Haram
and the shrinking of the lake, as well as the longdistance walk for women to collect firewood, have
harmed women through kidnapping, forced recruitment
into the insurgency and the depletion of livelihoods,
with many experiencing sexual violence and fleeing
into refugee and displaced persons camps. Their call for
essential commodities, such as energy-saving cooking
stoves and other necessary tools that empower them,
can be heard loudly and must be addressed.
In the Sahel, the wish of many kidnapped girls
who have experience violence and who, after being
rescued, wish to resume schooling, demonstrates their
determination to continue to live and thrive. We must,
therefore, dedicate the appropriate institutions and
facilities to accommodate their unique situations.
Conflict-related sexual violence in the Great Lakes
regions and in other parts of the continent, fuelled by
COVID-19 and creating a shadow pandemic, remains
a serious protection concern and deepens the political
and humanitarian crises we are facing. It is therefore
incumbent upon us to create safe spaces for women and
girls in conflict situations.
While women’s participation in peace processes
serves to ensure their success and sustainability,
they continue to be left out of such processes. In that
connection, we welcome the recent appointment of
Ms. Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka as a member of the
African Union Panel of the Wise and a member of the
mediators team to the Ethiopian peace negotiations,
and we call for the participation of more women in
such dialogues.
The women and peace and security agenda
remains a core priority of the African Union, with
the formulation of critical policies, platforms and
solutions. One of these is our model of joint solidarity

S/PV.9158

missions between the African Union and the United
Nations, under the leadership of the Deputy SecretaryGeneral. Those missions reach out to women in crises
situations and have been deployed in countries such
as Mali, Somalia, South Sudan, the Sudan and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, to name but a
few. That has been done through the African Women
Leaders Network (AWLN) platform, which continues
to empower women in decision-making processes and
to raise the voice of women and girls through its current
30 national chapters in Africa. In Mali, for example,
following the embargo by the Economic Community
of West African States (ECOWAS), AWLN facilitated
a meeting between a delegation of Malian women and
ECOWAS leaders and advocated for the lifting of the
sanctions, which were having such a harmful effect on
the Malian population and on the women and girls, in
particular. Another platform is FemWise Africa, which
has continued to train and deploy women in mediation
and electoral processes, which is another model that we
have seen replicated in other continents.
As part of my Office’s efforts to prevent and end
violence against women and girls, a few weeks ago,
together with Special Representative Pramila Patten, we
briefed the African Union Peace and Security Council,
in Addis Ababa, on the alarming situation of conflictrelated sexual violence and recommended the adoption
of preventive measures in that regard. In addition, my
Office commissioned research on sexual violence in
the Sahel, which recommended the replication of the
Isange Rwanda model — an inclusive model of a safe
space for women. On the basis of a study, a group of
women developed a plan of action for the Sahel. We call
for more support in the implementation of this plan for
the women of the Sahel.
The Security Council and the United Nations,
in partnership with regional entities in the United
Nations and civil society, can better support resilience
and leadership in many ways. In my view, one of the
key ways to do so is by adopting a human security
approach. At this juncture, I wish to mention a few
critical elements in that regard.
First, we must ensure that women’s organizations
have access to predictable and flexible funding. That
would allow them to effectively carry out peacebuilding
efforts in the current difficult circumstances.
Secondly, the impact of climate change, COVID-19
and conflicts and wars require us to combine

22-639947/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

peacebuilding efforts with women’s economic survival
as mutually reinforcing strategies.
Thirdly, deliberate measures are required in order
to increase women’s participation and inclusion in
peace negotiations, including as lead mediators and
negotiators, and ensure the insertion of clear provisions
in peace agreements and related legal instruments in
that regard.
Finally, we need to protect demobilized female
ex-combatants from social stigmatization and work
towards ensuring a conducive environment for a smooth
social reintegration.
As we emerge from the shackles of the COVID-19
pandemic and face the consequences of the war in
Ukraine, which has affected Africa with regard to the
three Fs — food, fuel and finance — and as we battle
the climate crisis, we must be resolute and invest more
in women and peace and security agenda. In this second
decade of implementing resolution 1325 (2000), the loss
of women’s human rights around the world is of grave
concern to all of us. We must stand in solidarity with
women survivors of violence and women human rights
defenders and must promote their agency through the
lens of positive masculinity.
In conclusion, Member States must implement
existing policies, strategies and action plans in order
to influence and have an impact on national security,
political, and social and economic policies. In that
regard, African Member States must allocate adequate
financing and institute coordination and accountability
mechanisms, including by reporting on existing
frameworks. At this time, I would like to thank Member
States that have been supportive of my work of the
women and peace and security agenda in my Office, in
Addis Ababa and in the African Union.
In
addition,
coherent
implementation
of
humanitarian and peace strategies, as enshrined in the
African Union’s Agenda 2063 and the 2030 Agenda for
Sustainable Development, will address some of the root
causes of conflict and ultimately promote the women
and peace and security and human security agendas.
Lastly, on behalf of all the women of Africa that I
represent, I wish to call to the Council to strengthen its
collaboration with the AU Peace and Security Council
in order to align priorities and actions on the ground
in support of women’s full participation in peace
processes. As others have said, we need to prioritize
and should not forget Africa, a continent that continues
8/33

20/10/2022

to experience a great deal of conflict and where women
continue to suffer. Therefore, we call on the Council to
use the established frameworks to pay attention to what
is happening in our continent.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Diop
for her briefing.
I now give the floor to Ms. Nader.
Ms. Nader: My name is Zahra Nader. I am
Editor-in-Chief of Zan Times, a woman-led newsroom
that covers human rights violations in Afghanistan. It
is both an honour and a responsibility to discuss the
devastating situation of Afghan women and girls with
the Security Council today. I am here because I can be.
However, it is important that the Council continue to
hear directly from diverse Afghan women, including
those still living in Taliban-controlled Afghanistan,
who risk their lives on a daily basis to speak truth
to power.
Just weeks ago, the suicide bombing of the Kaaj
education centre killed at least 55 people, including 51
Hazara girls and women, and injured at least another
124. As a Hazara woman myself, what makes that
incident especially painful is that it was an attack
both on my community and on girls’ education. Those
Hazara girls were there to take entrance examinations
to go to college and become journalists, doctors or
engineers. They dreamed of lives that today seem more
out of reach than ever before. That attack is a potent
symbol of the assault on the rights of women, girls,
the Hazaras and all other marginalized groups under
Taliban rule, which is the focus of my statement today.
Experts are warning the international community
that my country has descended into authoritarianism
and gender apartheid. Today an estimated 20 million
women and girls who grew up in Afghanistan going to
school and to work and who grew up being able to go
where they liked and to speak their minds are under the
Taliban, deprived of those fundamental human rights
because of their gender. The Taliban are arresting and
imprisoning the male relatives of women and girls for
failing to comply with their policies. Forced and child
marriages are on the rise. One shocking case involved
Elaha Dilawarzai, an Afghan medical student, who was
raped, tortured and forced into marriage by a Taliban
member. Her current whereabouts are unknown. The
only reason that we know about Elaha’s case is because
she shared a video.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

The truth is that we do not know, and will probably
never know, the full extent of the violations taking
place because United Nations monitoring is thin on
the ground and the Afghan media, especially women
journalists, have been crushed by the Taliban. Most
of the international media have left, and the Taliban
have terrorized into silence anyone who dares to
oppose them.
Women, of course, are the Taliban’s main target.
In the past year, we witnessed violent crackdowns on
anyone protesting against their misogynist policies.
We interviewed people involved in the September 2021
anti-Taliban protests in Mazar-e-Sharif. They shared
shocking accounts of how the Taliban had beaten,
abducted, tortured and imprisoned women for their role
in peaceful protests. Some activists, such as Frozan
Safi, were even killed. Another woman, who spent 11
days in Taliban custody for protesting, told us that she
witnessed Taliban members slapping children, putting
guns to their heads in order to pressure their mothers
and forcing women to confess at gunpoint.
Why are the Taliban going to such lengths to
silence women? It is because, to date, Afghan women
have mobilized the most consistent and peaceful
opposition to Taliban policies. Women took to the
streets as recently as this week, chanting “Bread, work,
freedom” — a call that encapsulates our key demands.
We need bread, but survival alone is not enough. We
demand independence and the right to work, participate
fully and equally in society and take control of our own
lives. We insist on freedom, which is the non-negotiable
lifeblood and right of every person, as decreed by the
United Nations and its Member States.
The Taliban view women protesters as the enemy
because they are exposing the scale of the Taliban’s
abuse of the Afghan people. Afghan women have
become the main obstacle to what the Taliban crave the
most: recognition by the international community.
The Taliban are also targeting marginalized
communities, such as ethnic and religious groups and
lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people,
putting some women at even greater risk. The Hazaras
have faced discrimination and abuse for more than a
century. Today they are under systematic attack, and
experts are warning of the risk of genocide. Since the
Taliban took over, the Islamic State in Iraq and the
Levant-Khorasan has been responsible for killing and
injuring at least 879 Hazaras. Members of the Hazara

S/PV.9158

community have mobilized in countries around the
world to demand urgent action.
In addition, disturbing reports of war crimes
continue to emerge from Panjshir, Balkhab and wherever
else the Taliban face armed resistance. The Taliban’s
assault on human rights, combined with their failure
to provide security and necessary services and their
extremist interpretation of Islam, have jeopardized the
rights and representation of not only Afghanistan’s Shia
Muslims, but also Sufis, Ahmadis, Hindus and Sikhs.
LGBT people in Afghanistan are being attacked, killed,
sexually assaulted and threatened by members of the
Taliban because of their sexual orientation or gender
identity, adding a level of terror to what was already a
dangerous existence.
Since the takeover last August, the Security Council
has met 11 times on Afghanistan, issued two press
statements (SC/14604 and SC/14902) and adopted three
resolutions (resolutions 2593 (2021), 2615 (2021) and
2626 (2022)) reaffirming the importance of women’s
rights. However, such efforts have thus far failed to
pressure the Taliban to change course. On the contrary,
the Security Council’s renewal of the mandate of the
United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan
(UNAMA) in March was followed by the Taliban’s
roll-out of some of their most extreme policies, such
as extending the ban on girls’ secondary education
and enforcing full-face coverings and male chaperones
for women. Both the United Nations and the Security
Council appear at a loss about what to do next. When
it comes to women and peace and security, there is a
major gap at the United Nations between words and
action. The Taliban have no respect for words.
The Security Council has before it overwhelming
evidence that the Taliban are terrorizing women,
girls and marginalized groups. For the sake of all my
sisters in Afghanistan, I urge the Council to take the
following steps.
The Security Council should call on the Taliban
to respect the human rights of all Afghans, including
women, girls, LGBT people and all ethnic and religious
groups; end all violations of women’s rights; and stop
the targeting and abuse of protesters, human rights
defenders, journalists and their families.
The Council should not grant the Taliban formal
recognition or renew any exemptions to the existing
travel bans on Taliban leaders, and should consider

22-639949/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

adding additional individuals responsible for violations
to the United Nations sanctions list.
The Council should call on all senior United
Nations leaders, in particular the Secretary-General
and the Head of UNAMA, to press the Taliban at every
opportunity to respect the rights of all women, girls
and other marginalized groups. It should hold UNAMA
accountable for women’s rights throughout its work.
The Council should ensure the full, equal and
meaningful participation of Afghan women civil
society in any decision-making regarding the future
of Afghanistan, including its own decisions. It should
support the establishment of an additional United
Nations mechanism to provide accountability for
human rights violations.
As a journalist, it is my job to bear witness. What
I can clearly see is that the Taliban have already done
permanent harm to the women and girls of Afghanistan,
and every day that the Security Council fails to take
action, that harm deepens. People in Afghanistan,
especially women, are watching this debate, as are
women in other conflict zones around the world. If the
Council fails to act in Afghanistan, women in Ethiopia,
Myanmar, the Sudan and Yemen will know that, in the
hands of the Security Council, women and peace and
security is nothing more than an empty promise.
The President (spoke in French): I thank Ms. Nader
for her briefing.
I shall now make a statement in my capacity as the
representative of Gabon.
It is a great moment for the peoples of the world and
all humankind when, in the Security Council Chamber,
we recognize, and call for further recognition, of
women’s leadership in peace and security in the world.
It is a time in which we encourage women to hold their
heads high and stand in support of the security and
dignity of the peoples of the world.
We are reminded of a Gabonese proverb that says
that if women give up the world will fall apart.
I thank Deputy Secretary General Amina
Mohammed, Executive Director Sima Bahous and
Special Envoy Bineta Diop for being in the Chamber
today to reaffirm their continued commitment to this
advocacy through their inspiring briefings. I thank
Ms. Nader for her moving testimony.
10/33

20/10/2022

Today’s meeting is taking place driven by an
international context marked by multiple crises that
require concerted, supportive and inclusive responses
from the international community. Indeed, many regions
of the world are collapsing under the stranglehold of
armed groups and terrorist gangs. The torment suffered
by civilian populations in these regions is horrific
and tragic. And women are paying an inhuman price.
Internationally traded and transferred weapons fuel
armed conflict and cause social and political upheaval,
including small arms used to commit femicide, or
explosive weapons used in populated areas with
potentially singular impacts on women, who are either
targeted or specifically affected by their use.
Women must no longer pay the heavy price in the
context of armed conflict. They must increasingly
be part of the response by participating fully in all
peacemaking and decision-making processes. Women’s
participation in all stages of the conflict-prevention and
conflict-resolution process is one of the surest ways to
achieve a more sustainable peace in the world.
Every day, women peacemakers and human rights
defenders demonstrate, in contexts that are clearly
unfavourable to them, that they are still standing and that
they have a crucial role to play in preventing conflicts
and working towards a lasting peace, even though
their voices are not sufficiently taken into account, or
their contribution is not fully appreciated in official
negotiation processes. This damning observation is
sufficient to call attention to the extent of the action
expected of the international community — and
the Security Council, in particular — to strengthen
women’s leadership and resilience, on the one hand,
and ensure their full and meaningful participation in
all peacemaking and decision-making processes, on
the other.
While it is undeniable that the international
community’s advocacy in favour of the recognition of
women as key actors in peace processes has gradually
gained significant resonance, my country remains
concerned that, almost 22 years after the adoption of
resolution 1325 (2000), women and children continue
to pay a heavy price, especially in conflict-ridden and
armed-group-affected areas. In most of these armedgroup-infested regions, the usual narratives focus on
women’s protection and vulnerability, with little or
no emphasis on what the primary source of danger for
women is or on women’s diverse identities, experiences,
and capacities. Beyond the protection of women in
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

war and the insistence that they have an equal right to
participate in the processes and negotiations that end
wars, our normative edifices devoted to women-made
peace should focus on preventing war or challenging
the legitimacy of the systems that generate war.
We take this opportunity to reaffirm our strong
commitment to silencing weapons, particularly through
the fight against the illicit transfer and circulation
of small arms and light weapons, their excessive
accumulation and uncontrolled proliferation in many
regions, especially on the African continent, which
have all kinds of humanitarian and socioeconomic
consequences, including on the security of civilians,
and which fuel armed conflicts, promote the resurgence
of sexual and gender-based violence and the recruitment
of child soldiers and seriously threaten peace, stability
and sustainable development at the local, national,
regional and international levels. To foster the
resilience of women facing cyclical insecurity, we need
to focus on conflict prevention rather than engagement
in the systems that generate and sustain conflict.
Reducing arms exports and imports remains an integral
part of women, peace and security programmes.
Implementation of the Arms Trade Treaty to prevent
armed conflict and armed violence is imperative. A
range of perspectives must be presented in discussions
and negotiations, including critiques of prevailing
structural inequalities and normative frameworks.
It is clear that women’s substantive participation
can create space for alternative conceptions of security
and the prevention of armed conflict and armed
violence, by offering an alternative to the use of
military force as a response. It is therefore also clear
that recognizing the centrality of women in the context
of peace is a catalyst not only for their empowerment,
but also for the dynamization of socioeconomic and
political landscapes, while predisposing them towards
the peaceful resolution of disputes that may arise.
For that reason, my country’s sociopolitical compass
under the leadership of President Ali Bongo Ondimba
remains to substantially reduce gender inequalities and
promote women’s participation in all decision-making
processes. This ambition is perfectly reflected in the
remarkable presence of women at the helm of three
of the four highest institutions in Gabon, namely, the
Prime Minister, the President of the Senate and the
President of the Constitutional Court — all of whom,
once again, are women — as are the heads of several
ministerial departments, including the Ministry of

S/PV.9158

the Armed Forces. Furthermore, to ensure sustainable
representation of women in the political sphere, we
have set up the “Political Mentoring Programme for
Young Women”, whose objective is to encourage them
to engage in political action, in order to increase their
representation in decision-making bodies.
Gabon remains firm and consistent in its advocacy
for the inclusion and participation of women and for
strengthening their resilience, as well as for ensuring
perpetrator accountability for sexual violence in times of
conflict. States’ commitment and judicial institutions’
firmness must be unequivocal in responding to sexual
violence in conflict. It is fundamental to facilitate access
to reparations, which is a key element in restoring the
dignity of affected persons, while a global preventive
approach that adapts to situations on the ground is
being developed. It is essential that the Security Council
unanimously advocate for access to international justice
for victims of sexual violence in conflict situations. This
is a pledge of hope, dignity and human reconstruction
and a question of fundamental rights.
I would like to conclude by reaffirming my country’s
willingness to amplify the voices of women who,
throughout the world, are proving to be extraordinary
leaders, agents of change, pioneers of sustainable
development and artisans of peace. These women who,
even under extreme conditions of extremist violence,
fragility and distress, demonstrate unparalleled courage
and remarkable resilience.
We call for intensified national, regional and global
efforts for the comprehensive, inclusive, and efficient
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) and its
related resolutions, including resolutions 1820 (2008)
and 2467 (2019), as well as for the strengthening of the
gender dimension in all stages of peace processes and
in prevention, peacekeeping and peacebuilding efforts.
It is crucial that the virtues of women’s leadership be
the driving force behind our collective action for a
world attuned to our peoples’ aspirations for security
and dignity.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I call on the Permanent Representative of the United
States and member of President Biden’s Cabinet.
Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield (United States of
America): Let me thank Gabon for hosting this very
important debate. The large number of speakers that we

22-6399411/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

20/10/2022

have on our list today reflects the high priority that we
all give this issue.

the tip of the iceberg. The Special Representative of the
Secretary-General on Sexual Violence in Conflict said,

I also want to thank Deputy Secretary-General
Mohammed for her strong support and for her presence
with us today.

“When women are held for days and raped,
when you start to rape little boys and men, when
you see a series of genital mutilations, when you
hear women testify about Russian soldiers equipped
with Viagra, it is clearly a military strategy”.

I thank UN-Women Executive Director Bahous,
Special Envoy Diop and Ms. Nader for their excellent
briefings today.
As outlined in resolution 1325 (2000), the women
and peace and security agenda offers a transformational
vision for a world in which women and girls are
protected, included and play an essential role in forging
peace. Our charge is to make that vision a reality — not
just in words but also in deeds and actions.
For its part, the United States took the important step
of codifying its commitment to women’s participation
and safety in peace and security processes. Today we
call on other countries to do the same. We must all
be held accountable, and we must be accountable. We
must build on the growing body of policies to affirm
gender equality and equality in security, peacemaking
and peacekeeping.
That call is urgent because right now, we face a
pivotal moment for the women and peace and security
agenda. Around the world, women and girls are under
threat from conflict and repressive regimes, climate
and poverty. Risks have gone up, including the threat of
kidnapping, torture, killing and gender-based violence.
Women leaders, human rights defenders and activists
are particularly targeted by online threats, harassment
and abuse. They are often the subject of disinformation
campaigns that are designed to intimidate, discredit and
silence their calls for peace. We see those same patterns
around the world, especially in areas of conflict.
In Ethiopia this past week, we have seen renewed
and horrific violence. The International Commission of
Human Rights Experts on Ethiopia found reasonable
grounds to believe that Ethiopian National Defence
Forces, the Eritrean Defence Forces and Fano have
committed widespread acts of rape and sexual violence
against Tigrayan women and girls. The Commission
also reported that Tigrayan forces have also committed
acts of rape and sexual violence.
In Ukraine, the United Nations has verified more
than 100 cases of rape and sexual assault since Russia’s
full-scale invasion in February. Those cases are only
12/33

It is a military strategy that uses rape as a weapon
of war.
In Afghanistan, we must recognize the heroic
women and girls who navigate the destructive repressive
policies of the Taliban. We heard from Ms. Nader about
the horrific attack perpetrated on a Hazara school,
killing more than 60 people. Those policies defy the
standards set out in our resolutions.
As we work to counter those unacceptable policies
and lift the voices of women, the United States
established the United States-Afghan Consultative
Mechanism, which systematically engages a diverse
range of Afghan voices, particularly women and civil
society leaders, to ensure that their perspectives are
integrated into our policy discussions. We also launched
the Alliance for Afghan Women’s Economic Resilience,
based on consultations with Afghan women. Our goals
with those efforts and others are to support and respond
to the innovation and resilience among Afghan women
at this harrowing time.
Finally, the eyes of the entire world are on Iran
right now. Courageous and brave Iranians from across
society — women and men — are protesting the death
of Mahsa Amini. They are protesting the fact that she
was killed by the Iranian morality police for the crime
of being a woman. They are protesting the denial of the
basic freedoms to which every woman and girl — every
person — should be entitled.
Whether it is Iran, Afghanistan, Ukraine, Ethiopia,
Haiti, Burma or elsewhere, this is a moment. It is a
moment where women and girls are looking to us — the
Security Council — to support them in their bravery
and time of need. To do that, we must fortify the United
Nations infrastructure we have established over the
past decade to prevent conflict-related sexual violence.
We must ensure that women and peace and security
language is deliberately and strategically integrated
into Security Council resolutions. We must promote
women’s leadership, whether in villages, capitals or on
the international stage, just as we five women members
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

of the Security Council and the many other women we
see in the Chamber today promote women’s leadership.
We need to make this a critical moment to band
together as a global community, not just to wear pink
today as a sign of our support but also to raise our voices
to demand the change that we know that the women of
the world need. We know that we can do that. We must
do it. We must do it for girls and women and for the
peace and security they will bring the world, but also
for the peace and security that they need to have from
the world.
Ms. Fino (Albania): I would like to commend the
presidency of Gabon for organizing today’s important
meeting on the women and peace and security agenda
and I thank the briefers for their insights.
While there is increased engagement in and
commitment to strengthening the normative framework
of women and peace and security, the situation on
the ground remains highly unsatisfactory. Despite
the well-known fact that women play a crucial role
in the achievement of sustainable peace and conflict
prevention, the fact is that we are witnessing important
gains in the field of women’s rights being erased and
undone because of violent conflicts, military coups
d’état, violent takeovers, displacement and hunger.
Women peacebuilders, human rights defenders,
advocates for gender equality, journalists and other
civil society representatives are under attack because
of their activism and their efforts to build better
societies and protect their rights. From Afghanistan to
Yemen, Iran and Syria, and from Myanmar to Mali and
Ethiopia — to name only a few — women activists face
increased threats and risks, including intimidation,
arbitrary detention, forced disappearances and even
targeted killings.
In Ukraine, the unprovoked, unjustified and illegal
aggression by Russia has had devastating effects on
women’s rights and well-being. Ukrainian women
activists, civil-society actors, journalists and human
rights defenders face increased risks to their safety
and security, including increased risks of abductions
and persecution.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban has enacted more than
30 policies, with the only objective being to exclude
women and girls from public life, including by denying
education and access to justice. Women civil-society
representatives, women protesters and human rights
defenders have become a clear target for the Taliban,

S/PV.9158

who are terrified of women when they peacefully
protest and speak out against the Taliban’s abuses. Last
month, a 22-year-old girl lost her life at the hands of
the Iranian morality police. That triggered a wave of
women-led protests across the country — to chants
of “Women, life, freedom” — that have been going
on for four weeks now. Due to the brutal crackdown
on the protests, many have lost their lives and many
more are unaccounted for, including women, girls and
young children.
Albania welcomes and supports the SecretaryGeneral’s report and recommendations on women and
peace and security (S/2022/740) and the open letter of the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security,
which was signed by 481 civil-society organizations.
We must take concrete action to create a safer and
more friendly environment for women human rights
defenders, civil-society representatives, peacebuilders
and journalists, free from reprisals. We cannot aim to
achieve the full and effective participation of women
in peace and security processes without ensuring their
protection and physical safety. It is high time to move
beyond rhetoric and take bold action to address violence
targeting women in peace and security processes and
protect their meaningful participation. In Albania’s
view, women should not only be in the room, but they
must also be at the table where discussions happen and
decisions are taken. I would like to focus on four points
that we believe are essential to strengthening women’s
resilience and improving the protection of women
human rights defenders and peacebuilders in conflict
and post-conflict situations.
First, providing appropriate support and resources
to the relevant United Nations entities, especially the
Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights,
would enable them to properly assist women human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and civil-society
representatives at risk of harm, including those who
have briefed the Security Council or otherwise engaged
with the United Nations system.
Secondly, we must bolster funding for women-led
and women’s rights organizations and movements in
fragile and conflict-affected countries. The stronger
the women’s movement, the stronger the voice of the
women human rights defenders and peacebuilders.
Thirdly, we must enhance accountability with
regard to women and peace and security. We need
to commit to a zero-tolerance approach to reprisals
against women activists and human rights defenders.

22-6399413/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

Fourthly, we must strengthen partnerships with
civil-society organizations to identify the best ways to
improve the protection and resilience of women civilsociety activists and human rights defenders.
The Security Council also has a key role to play.
It must stand with all women human rights defenders,
peacebuilders and civil-society activists and show
its solidarity by supporting women’s meaningful
participation in peace processes and holding the entire
United Nations system and host States of peacekeeping
operations accountable for ensuring women’s direct
participation in peace processes. The Council should
follow up on recommendations and priority issues
raised by civil-society briefers.
Gender equality is a high priority for the Albanian
Government. Albania currently ranks among the
top five gender-balanced Governments in the world,
with 70 per cent of its ministers being women. Some
of the top public positions in Albania, including in
independent institutions, agencies, and departments in
key areas of the State, are held by women. The Albanian
Government recognizes gender equality as one of the
principles of its planning and budgeting processes,
which is reflected in an increase of budget allocations
for gender-equality results over the years. In 2021,
gender-responsive budgeting elements constituted
9 per cent of our total planned annual budget, compared
to just 1 per cent in 2015. In May of this year, the
Albanian Government launched preparations for our
second national action plan for the implementation of
resolution 1325 (2000). As a result of those policies, the
World Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Report
2022 ranked Albania eighteenth out of 146 countries.
Albania will continue to keep women and peace and
security high on the Security Council’s agenda and
will prioritize the participation of women civil-society
briefers in the Council.
Let me conclude by highlighting that increasing
resilience and protection for women civil-society
activists and human rights defenders must be a priority
for us all. Attacks on them, wherever and whenever
they occur, are unacceptable. As agents of positive
change, women must be active participants in all peace
and security efforts. We can no longer exclude one half
of humankind from international peace and security.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
United Arab Emirates thanks Gabon for organizing this
open debate and welcomes the fact that Gabon has joined
the shared commitments to prioritize women and peace
14/33

20/10/2022

and security during its presidency. We thank Deputy
Secretary-General Amina Mohammed, Executive
Director Sima Bahous, African Union Special Envoy
Bineta Diop and especially Ms. Zahra Nader for their
powerful contributions today.
There are many contexts around the world that
we could use as examples of the resilience of women
and girls, but one of the most prominent today is that
of Afghan women and girls. It has been almost 400
days since girls in Afghanistan have been forbidden
to attend secondary schools. There are no ifs or buts.
The United Arab Emirates finds that situation, and the
many other restrictions in place since the Taliban took
over, to be completely unacceptable. The exclusion of
Afghan women and girls from public and social life is
yet another example of how violence against women
and girls can take numerous forms. In the face of that
violence, we continue to hear inspirational stories of
women teachers and students tirelessly pursuing their
right to education in Afghanistan. They use digital
tools to attend classes in the metaverse. But can we find
a better alternative to forcing women and girls into the
virtual space? I think we can and must. If we accept it as
a long-term solution, we are enabling gender apartheid.
Despite the resistance of women and girls around
the world to repeated acts of misogyny, armed groups
are exacerbating the challenges through acts of
violence in all its forms. They erode the social fabric
of communities. They abuse, persecute, detain and
oppress women, and therefore by focusing today’s
discussion on how to strengthen women’s resilience
under those circumstances, we honour the core idea
of the women and peace and security agenda at its
inception. At the press stakeout earlier, Mr. President,
you were asked what these Council meetings actually
achieve. Today let us commit to answering that question.
Gabon’s action-oriented approach today is welcome
in capturing the recommendations we all make in a
leader’s summary. The United Arab Emirates therefore
proposes the following four recommendations.
First, we know that local and regional women’s
networks and organizations are key. When violence
in communities erupts, its impact can be crippling
and lifelong. Those networks provide a foundation for
collective resilience against conflict. Yet as we heard
from Executive Director Bahous today, those networks
continue to face barriers in access to consistent and
reliable funding. They rely on the goodwill of individual
Member States, yet still bilateral contributions went
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

down from 0.4 to 0.3 per cent in just one year. We lack a
systematic approach, despite the financial mechanisms
that exist. Accordingly, as a key recommendation today
we would ask the Fifth Committee to consider funding
women’s organizations as part of the regular budget of
the United Nations.
Secondly, when women participate in the economy
and directly benefit from that participation, they
are more resilient in the face of violence. In the age
of digitalization, the economic and social growth of
women and girls increasingly depends on their access
to digital technologies. In Oyo state in Nigeria, the
She Learns Here initiative provides workshops where
rural women learn basic business and digital skills.
If they are to be on a par with their male peers in the
economy, women’s digital literacy and connectivity are
indeed bare necessities, but no one should have to exist
solely in the metaverse to have their rights protected.
Their voices need to be heard and amplified in school,
with their classmates, and in all other facets of public
life, where they belong. Let us give women and girls
the digital tools to compete in the same world as men
and boys.
Thirdly, the protection of women and girls is
bolstered when women peacekeepers, observers and
protection officers are in the field. This is why the
Sheikha Fatima bint Mubarak Women, Peace and
Security initiative, developed by the United Arab
Emirates in partnership with UN-Women, launched
its third training programme for women cadets in
September. Recently, Executive Director Bahous got
to meet the new cohort of cadets from Kenya, India,
Bahrain and elsewhere, seeing first-hand the impact
that the initiative is having in the Middle East, Asia
and Africa. We have repeatedly heard cadets link their
training to their later success in service, bolstering
their self-confidence and critical skills.
Investments in such capacity help strengthen
gender-responsive and inclusive security sector reform
at the national and international levels. That could be a
significant change in effective responses to threats and
violence by armed groups. Financing for such capacitybuilding must accelerate, particularly as conflicts
become more dangerous than ever before for all of us.
As we inch closer to another anniversary of
resolution 1325 (2000), we must reflect on what that
really means. We find ourselves still battling the
misconceptions of women and girls as victims or
survivors, but not as agents of change. We are witnessing

S/PV.9158

Afghanistan rapidly roll back into the same place it was
22 years ago.
Within that same time frame, the international
community, including the Council, has been adequately
and sufficiently equipped with the necessary tools to
drive the agenda forward. The political will, as well as
the framework, apparently exist. More than ever, action
is the missing piece. As we heard from Ms. Melinda
Gates at the seventy-seventh session of the General
Assembly, we need to stop talking about empowering
women and just give them power. I can think of no
better final recommendation for the Security Council.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me thank the
Deputy Secretary-General and all our briefers today for
their testimony, advocacy and leadership.
As we mark the anniversary of resolution 1325
(2025), the United Kingdom is proud to be a leading
champion of the women and peace and security
agenda at the United Nations and around the world.
Yet the stark reality presented by our briefers speaks
for itself. Despite our collective efforts of 22 years,
we all need to do more to deliver on the promise of
resolution 1325 (2000).
Today I would like to highlight three of the United
Kingdom’s priorities.
First, it is clear that we need to strengthen the
global response to conflict-related sexual violence. A
20 per cent increase in sexual violence against children
and a 41 per cent increase in the abduction of girls,
as documented in the report of the Secretary-General
on children and armed conflict (S/2022/493), cannot
be ignored.
That is why the United Kingdom will host
an international conference on preventing sexual
violence in conflict on 28 and 29 November. We will
gather countries together to galvanize the response to
conflict-related sexual violence, and we will launch a
political declaration to send a strong message that we
will support survivors, help prevent future violence
and hold perpetrators to account. We urge Member
States to endorse the declaration and make a national
commitment outlining the practical steps that they will
take to prevent and respond to conflict-related sexual
violence, such as by implementing the Murad Code.
Secondly, we continue to support women’s
participation in peace efforts. Women are integral to
building lasting peace and security; their full, equal

22-6399415/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

and meaningful participation in peace processes is the
cornerstone of our approach to women and peace and
security. But progress in that area has been too slow, as
we heard today. There has been no significant increase
in women’s participation in peace processes since 2000,
despite all the rhetoric.
The United Kingdom’s fifth women and peace and
security national action plan will therefore focus on
concrete and practical ways to reflect the contribution
that women make to peace in a changed strategic
environment, from Afghanistan to Ukraine and from
climate security to cyberthreats.
Thirdly, we need to create an enabling environment
for women to participate. A major barrier to women’s
engagement in political life is the rising risk of
reprisals. The Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/740)
highlights that since 2018, more than one third of the
women briefers to the Security Council have faced
reprisals. That is simply not acceptable. The United
Kingdom is committed to protecting women human
rights defenders and briefers who courageously speak
in this Chamber. In partnership with the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights,
we have developed guidance for Member States to
mitigate reprisals against civil society briefers.
Women’s place at the peace table is not only their
right; it is essential to building and sustaining peace
and security. Every absence will be our collective loss.
Mr. Mythen (Ireland): I thank Gabon for hosting
this very important debate today. My thanks also go
to Deputy Secretary-General Mohamed, Executive
Director Bahous and Special Envoy Diop for their
remarks, and especially to Ms. Nader, whose words
about the realities faced by women in Afghanistan
resonate with and challenge us all.
There can be no sustainable peace when women
are targeted in war and excluded from peace processes.
Women are essential to resolving conflict and building
peace. Although women have shown their resilience
time and time again, both in conflict-affected countries
and elsewhere, such resilience should not be necessary.
As we near the end of our term as a member of the
Security Council, to our deep regret we cannot report
much progress. We have to admit that the situation of
women in conflict has worsened over the past two years.
Women and girls continue to bear the brunt of
war and conflict. In Ukraine, the Russian invasion has
resulted in the displacement of millions of women,
16/33

20/10/2022

violated their rights and placed them at heightened risk
of violence and trafficking. In Afghanistan, as we have
heard from Ms. Nader, women are being erased from
political and public life and have been stripped of their
fundamental rights. In Haiti, women and girls have
been subjected to unthinkable and systematic sexual
and gender-based violence.
The Council is tasked with maintaining peace and
security in the world. Yet today we see more people
impacted by conflict than ever. In order to begin to
reverse that, one urgent and meaningful step would
be to implement what each of us around this table has
agreed to under the women and peace and security
agenda. That involves empowering and strengthening
women’s leadership.
Today Ireland’s statement will focus on four ways
to achieve that.
First, we must protect those who defend women’s
rights. It is shameful to see States or non-State actors
attacking those who are protecting others — those who
raise their voice to challenge oppression. Yet globally
we are witnessing alarming levels of reprisals being
committed against human rights defenders. Autocratic
leaders and repressive Governments aim to silence their
voices because they fear them. Women human rights
defenders can face specific targeting driven by violent
misogynistic rhetoric.
The crackdown on protesters in Iran following the
death in appalling circumstances of Mahsa Amini and
the persecution of activists in Myanmar are shocking
and disturbing examples. We must investigate and
hold to account those responsible for the intimidation
of and attacks against human rights defenders. As the
Secretary-General states in his report (S/2022/740),
that is our collective moral responsibility.
Secondly, we must push for women to be at all
decision-making tables, including this table. We thank
all Member States that have joined the women and
peace and security presidency shared commitments,
which were initiated by Kenya, Mexico and Ireland last
year. The women and peace and security presidency
trio set a blueprint for bringing more women voices
to the Security Council. We invite incoming members
and others to build on the initiative and continue to
ensure the safe and meaningful participation of women
briefers here.
That also means including women in all political and
peace processes, from the grass-roots to the national and
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

S/PV.9158

regional levels. Without inclusive participation, peace
agreements are simply not sustainable. We understand
that essential truth from our own involvement in the
Northern Ireland peace process. Therefore, we reiterate
our call on the United Nations to lead by example and
make women’s participation in all United Nations-led
or jointly led peace processes an essential requirement.

advancing that agenda. The presidency’s commitments
have signalled that. However, we cannot afford to let
public commitment be just for show, advanced when
it suits and laid aside when inconvenient. We implore
every speaker today to make women’s empowerment
and participation non-negotiable in their vision for a
peaceful future.

Thirdly, we must prevent violence against women
and girls. We need look only to northern Ethiopia, where
women and girls have suffered horrific sexual crimes,
or Mali, where there has been a 40 per cent increase in
conflict-related sexual violence in the past year alone.
Those situations bear witness to what happens when we
do not focus on prevention. In those and other contexts,
conflict-related sexual violence is being used as a tactic
of war. We must therefore make it a strategically costly
tactic. The perpetrators, the people who give orders
and those who fail to take the necessary steps to stop
conflict-related sexual violence — they must all be held
to account. The prevention of violence also includes
ensuring that women have full access to sexual and
reproductive health care and rights. Deploying gender
advisers and women protection advisers to United
Nations country teams and missions also plays a crucial
role in monitoring and promoting such issues. The
Council should consistently include those roles in all
peacekeeping and political missions.

Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
commends Gabon for convening today’s important
meeting, and I would like to thank all of the briefers
for their statements. Resolution 1325 (2000) ignited the
international community’s heightened attention to the
special situation of women in conflict, redefined the
relationship between women and peace and security
and greatly enhanced the agency and participation
of women in the field of peace and security. It was a
milestone. Strengthening the resilience of women in
conflict zones is an inherent part of the women and
peace and security agenda, and China commends
Gabon for making it the theme of today’s meeting. I
would like to share four points on that theme.

Fourthly, we must back our words with funding and
adequate resourcing. We have heard today that global
military spending stands at $2.1 trillion, following
seven consecutive years of increased spending. It
accounts for more than four times the amount spent
on bilateral aid. We must look hard at our priorities
and ensure that we are putting our investments in
peacebuilding. The President asked us to highlight any
new concrete commitments to advance the women and
peace and security agenda. Ireland has committed to
investing at least $50 million in feminist and women’s
rights organizations and women peacebuilders over
a period of five years. We have made a specific
pledge of $1.5 million to the Women’s Peace and
Humanitarian Fund.
Finally, as I have said, today’s debate on women
and peace and security will likely be Ireland’s last
during its Council term. I therefore want to offer
a parting reflection. During the past two years, in
chairing the Informal Expert Group on Women and
Peace and Security, we have seen a great demonstration
of will and commitment by Member States to

First, we must put fairness and justice into practice
in order to give women hope for their future. Behind
strength and resilience lies hope for the future. Where
there is hope there is direction. Where there is hope
there is strength. Women and families in conflict zones
are often devastated and suffer a multitude of hardships.
Achieving fairness and justice is the only way to help
women believe that they have a future worth looking
forward to, and that it is a beautiful one.
The question of Palestine has dragged on for
more than 70 years. Without a solution, generations of
Palestinian women have seen their hair go from black
to white. A Palestinian girl in Gaza aged 12 today has
already witnessed five armed conflicts since the day
she was born. The international community should wait
no longer. We must come up with concrete actions to
uphold justice and deliver on our commitments with a
view to promoting a comprehensive, just and lasting
settlement of the Palestinian question without delay,
restoring belated justice for Palestinian women and
ensuring that girls in Gaza can believe in peace and
see hope.
Secondly, we must follow through on gender
equality in order to give women more opportunities to
participate. The participation of women in the peace
process is not only an absolute requirement for women’s
empowerment and gender equality but also an important
condition for achieving lasting peace in conflict zones.

22-6399417/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

The international community has an untold historical
debt to women in that regard. In major peace processes
throughout the world over the past 30 years, only 13
percent of negotiators and 6 percent of moderators
and agreement signatories have been women. That
situation should be improved as soon as possible. Every
country should take action to eliminate all forms of
discrimination, give women more opportunities to
participate in the political process and ensure their
equal and effective participation in national governance.
The international community should also actively
support women’s participation in United Nations
peacekeeping operations and give full play to women’s
unique advantages in protecting vulnerable groups
and engaging in community outreach. Today many of
our colleagues have mentioned the plight of Afghan
women. China hopes that Afghan women will see their
fundamental rights and interests protected and that
they will be organically reintegrated into the country’s
economic and social life and become an important force
in the process of peaceful national reconstruction.
Thirdly, we must endeavour to ensure the protection
of women so that they can enjoy peace and stability.
The international community has made great efforts to
protect women in conflict areas and has achieved some
progress, but there is still a long way to go. Terrorism,
combined with armed conflict, is rampant in regions
such as the Sahel, and women and children suffer
the most. The Security Council should place Africa
higher on its agenda and should not let other problems
reduce its attention to African issues. The Council
should invest further energy and resources in Africa
in resolving conflicts and supporting reconstruction
there so that every African woman can benefit from the
peace dividend.
Today Haiti is known as the most dangerous place
in the western hemisphere. Gang violence has continued
to escalate, and the maiming of women and children
is even more appalling. The international community
should impose targeted sanctions on Haitian gangs,
crack down on violent crime and provide a safe living
environment for women and children.
Fourthly, it is necessary to carry out development
for peace so that women can gain the power of selfreliance. A lack of resilience is rooted in a lack of
development. Poverty, hunger and leaving school at an
early age make women vulnerable and helpless. Work,
education and training can help them change their
lives. The current global food crisis is intensifying. The
18/33

20/10/2022

international community should speed up its response
and provide emergency assistance to vulnerable groups
such as women in developing countries. We hope that
all the parties concerned in the Ukraine issue will
promote dialogue and consultation, fully implement the
Black Sea Grain Initiative and ensure that more grain is
shipped to developing countries.
At the same time, we need to take a longterm approach to supporting women’s economic
empowerment and helping more women earn their own
living. Since last winter China has imported 1,600 tons
of Afghan pine nuts via an air corridor, helping Afghan
women, who make up half of the industry’s labour
force, to generate income and lift themselves out of
poverty. Unilateral sanctions are seriously undermining
the economic foundations of Afghanistan, Syria,
Cuba, Venezuela and other countries. They are heavy
shackles that are impeding local women’s survival and
development, and they should be lifted immediately.
As the host country of the Fourth World Conference
on Women, China has always advocated for gender
equality, supported the women and peace and security
agenda and contributed to the international cause of
women’s development. We worked with UNESCO
to create the UNESCO Prize for Girls’ and Women’s
Education, which to date has provided support to 14
organizations in Zimbabwe, Tanzania, Jamaica and
other countries. As we speak, the Chinese female
astronaut Liu Yang is taking part in a mission at China’s
space station, contributing she-power to the noble
cause of human exploration of the universe. China is
willing to work with the international community to
dispel the fog of turmoil in conflict areas, open up a
future of peace and development and help more women
in conflict areas reach for the stars and embrace their
future — just as our female astronaut is doing now.
Mrs. Buenrostro Massieu (Mexico) (spoke in
Spanish): I thank Gabon for convening this open debate.
We also thank the briefers for their briefings.
In line with our feminist foreign policy, Mexico
reaffirms its support for all women activists, human
rights defenders, peacebuilders and civil society
leaders, who every day risk their lives, their health and
their safety in defence of gender equality and human
rights throughout the world.
Today we pay tribute to adolescent, indigenous,
Afro-descendant, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender,
queer and intersex, and disabled women activists, as
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

well as those who are members of ethnic minorities and
traditionally marginalized groups, who continue to be
victims of threats, sexual and gender-based violence or
reprisals in various parts of the world.
That includes the situations in Afghanistan, where
egregious violations of the rights of all women and girls
have been committed since the return of the Taliban,
resulting in the loss of access to basic services, such
as health and education; in Myanmar, where women
continue to be attacked and tortured for peacefully
protesting; in Ethiopia and the Democratic Republic
of Congo, where despite brutal acts of sexual violence,
the lack of access to justice remains the norm; and in
other parts of the world, where women have been on
the front line of defence in humanitarian settings and
conflict zones.
To them, we say today that their struggle is not in
vain. Their resilience inspires us to continue to advocate
in the Council and in the Informal Expert Group on
Women, Peace and Security, which we co-chair with
Ireland, to ensure that the Security Council incorporates
a gender-transformative approach in its work and in
all the resolutions and outcomes it adopts. Mexico
will continue to defend the full, equal and meaningful
participation of women at the negotiating tables and
in peace processes, convinced that that is the only
way to achieve lasting and inclusive solutions. We are
therefore encouraged to note the formation of a paritybased Government in Colombia that is committed to
the full inclusion of women in the peace process.
The testimonies of all the women briefers who have
come to the Security Council are proof of resilience
and determination, in a world in which socioeconomic
inequalities, conflict, misogyny, the illicit trafficking
in small arms and light weapons and military spending
have skyrocketed, causing a major setback to the rights
of all women and girls.
My country, Mexico, will continue to seek to
ensure enabling environments for the full, equal and
meaningful participation of women, adolescent women
and girls in society. We reiterate that their human rights
are non-negotiable. That means that they must have
comprehensive access to their sexual and reproductive
health and rights, including the right to safe abortion
and bodily autonomy, as well as the full provision of
mental health services and psychosocial support.
Ensuring gender-sensitive access to justice and
accountability for armed groups that perpetrate acts of

S/PV.9158

sexual and gender-based violence is also essential for
deterring further cases and for the full reintegration
of survivors of sexual and gender-based violence
and strengthening their resilience and leadership in
conflict. In accordance with that rationale, the draft
resolution to establish targeted sanctions against actors
destabilizing Haiti, on which Mexico is working with
the United States as co-penholder, includes sexual
violence as one of the grounds for placing individuals
on the sanctions list.
It is equally urgent to ensure the elimination
of notions of masculinity that contribute to the
radicalization of violence and extremism, gender biases
and social norms that place women in a situation of
inferiority, such as widows or female heads of household
who face interrelated forms of discrimination and are
rendered invisible in society.
The Generation Equality Forum, hosted by Mexico
and France in 2021, adopted the Compact on Women,
Peace and Security and Humanitarian Action, which
seeks to articulate the various existing mechanisms
to advance that agenda. And with the support of UNWomen, indicators will be launched tomorrow to
monitor commitments in five essential areas that will
accelerate implementation on the ground.
We also believe that national action plans
help to foster the participation of local women-led
organizations in peace processes and peacebuilding
efforts. I am pleased to note that Mexico’s national
action plan promotes the development of a women
peacebuilders programme for supporting and promoting
women’s empowerment and leadership at the local and
State levels in peacebuilding, gender-based violence
prevention and peacekeeping efforts.
Mexico will also continue to advocate gender
parity in peace missions. In line with our commitments,
currently 25 per cent of the total personnel deployed
by Mexico are women and Mexico has strengthened
the military and political components of their
pre-deployment training.
The international community can count on Mexico
to continue defending the human rights of women and
girls in this and all multilateral forums.
Mrs. Espeschit Maia (Brazil): Brazil thanks the
presidency of Gabon for providing the opportunity to
reflect upon the concept of resilience, a scientific term
originally applied to describe the capacity of some

22-6399419/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

materials to return to their original shape after being
bent or stretched.
Today it is being used to refer to the ability of
women and girls to resist adversity. Given the many
persistent challenges faced by women and girls in
situations of armed conflict, as duly noted in the report
of the Secretary-General (S/2022/740), analysing how
the Security Council can improve its capacity to help
them strengthen their resilience is key to our endeavours
to advance the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda.
In that regard, Brazil also thanks Deputy SecretaryGeneral Ms. Amina Mohammed, Ms. Sima Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women, Ms. Bineta Diop,
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission, and
Ms. Zahra Nader for their insightful presentations
and recommendations.
First of all, we must recognize, as noted in
the concept note prepared by Gabon (S/2022/743,
annex), the resilience shown by women and women’s
organizations, which continue to organize themselves
and to create ever-growing networks at the community
level even in challenging and dangerous environments.
That was seen at first hand in Lebanon during the
recent visit of the Informal Expert Group on Women,
Peace and Security. Women and networks of women are
making good use of technological developments that
enable faster and broader communication and, with the
indispensable support of UN-Women, are helping their
communities and defending their rights.
But as Ms. Bahous reiterated, we need to improve
the ability of UN-Women to assist those networks by
increasing financing and improving the capacity of
those who are already trying to make a difference in
their communities. The efforts of the Peacebuilding
Commission to advance the implementation of its
gender strategy are commendable in that regard, as are
the efforts of United Nations peacekeeping operations,
which have worked to implement their women and
peace and security mandates, with or without achieving
the goals established in terms of the deployment of
women peacekeepers.
We are proud of the valuable contribution of our
female peacekeepers to the empowerment of host
female populations in combating sexual violence and
sexual exploitation and abuse, which was recognized
by two Military Gender Advocate of the Year Awards
20/33

20/10/2022

received by Brazil in 2019 and 2020. We do need more
women peacekeepers, but we also need to act now, and
urgently, on some of the most persistent challenges,
which turn women’s resilience into a very hard and
life-threatening endurance test. Our collective failure to
generate improvements on the record of sexual violence
in conflict is explicit in the Secretary-General’s report,
which registers that, in 2021, rape and other forms of
sexual violence against children in conflict settings
increased by 20 per cent, with 98 per cent of survivors
being girls.
In Haiti, for instance, both the United Nations
Integrated Office in Haiti (BINUH) and the Office
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human
Rights have warned of a relevant increase in the reports
of sexual violence being used as a weapon by gangs
to intimidate and gain control over communities. The
signatories of the statement of shared commitments on
women and peace and security in the Security Council
addressed the situation in Haiti in a stakeout in July.
Resolution 2645 (2022), which renewed the mandate
of BINUH, recognized the problem by deciding that
the BINUH human rights unit needed a dedicated
capacity to address sexual and gender-based violence.
Brazil favoured language that would improve the
protective and preventive work of BINUH. In our view,
the Council must maintain a united and unequivocal
message of condemnation against the prevailing culture
of impunity for the crime of sexual violence in conflict.
When the United Nations is already present on the
ground, we must not fail to act to put in place better
protection capabilities.
In that regard, strategic communications are also an
important tool in the effort to prevent conflict-related
sexual violence. Peacekeeping operations should invest
from the outset in dialogue and engagement with local
actors, particularly women and youth, in order to build
a protective environment from the bottom up.
The report of the Secretary-General also registers
that in many countries, including those affected by
conflict, women are at the forefront of protests, refusing
to accept decisions that do not recognize their rights.
To quote Ms. Bahous once again, “we cannot expect
women to build peace if their lives are constantly under
threat” (S/PV.8886, p. 5). The Council must work — not
only to bring women to peace negotiation tables, but
also to protect those that are at the table, or on the
ground, from violence and intimidation.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

In March, the United Arab Emirates proposed
a debate on women’s economic inclusion and
participation as key to building peace, recalling
that, in many countries, legal restrictions persist and
constrain women from developing their full economic
potential. We should carefully draft and revise
peacekeeping mandates so that they are more explicit
in their role to promote women’s economic inclusion
and empowerment, in line with resolution 2242 (2015).
Without targeted mandates, it is very unlikely that
United Nations operations will contribute to women’s
access to opportunities, resources and markets.
Another pressing issue requiring urgent action
from the Council is the protection of women and girls
from attacks on their right to education. The Council
should be committed to maintaining full access to
education and the workplace for girls and women and
must stress that their empowerment and protection are
not just a moral and ethical duty, but also a necessity
for economic prosperity. Upholding girls’ rights also
means promoting economic inclusion and, therefore,
sustainable economic development.
In terms of conflict prevention, Brazil is proud to
have formed, last year, together with Argentina, Chile,
Paraguay and Uruguay, the first network of women
mediators in Latin America. The Regional Network of
Mediators of the Southern Cone is developing a work
plan for the upcoming year. Also in our region, an
Ibero-American network of women mediators, with a
focus on capacity-building, may be created.
The list of possible actions to strengthen women’s
resilience and to promote their leadership in situations
of conflict is endless. Given our limited resources,
especially in this context of numerous crises, we must
carefully analyse what we have at our disposal so as to
ensure that our chosen actions are effective. We cannot
continue to miss opportunities to act. The report of the
Secretary-General is clear — we are not working hard
enough. We must work even harder.
Ms. Juul (Norway): I want to thank Gabon for
organizing this timely debate, as well as the Deputy
Secretary-General, Executive Director Bahous, Special
Envoy Bineta Diop and Ms. Zahra Nader for providing
the necessary context for our discussion today.
Thanks to our commitment and hard work within
the Security Council, the General Assembly and other
United Nations entities, the norms for protecting the
human rights and fundamental freedoms of women and

S/PV.9158

girls have gradually been strengthened, yet the daily
lived experiences of women and girls and the human
rights defenders who protect their rights have been
rapidly deteriorating in many countries. That mismatch
between words and reality should concerns us all.
We must all act in partnership in order to break that
vicious cycle.
We fully support the theme of this year’s annual
debate and would like to share some of Norway’s
experiences in that regard. Where we engage in support
of peace processes, Norway always advocates for the
formal inclusion of women, in all their diversity. Yet,
we also know that the conversations that advance peace
and security processes often happen in informal spaces.
There, the leadership of local and regional women
mediators, peacebuilders and human rights defenders
is vital.
One such example is the persistent engagement of
local women in Yemen, where Ms. Ola Al-Aghbary,
a mediator from the Sheba Youth Foundation for
Development, who briefed the Council in January (see
S/PV.8946), managed to restore water reservoirs for the
citizens of Taiz after several districts had been cut off
by armed groups for years.
And we hear Zahra’s call about the devastating
human rights situation for Afghan women and girls,
which is the core of our messaging to the Taliban.
Many Afghan women continue to ask the international
community to create a platform for them to engage
directly with the Taliban. We will continue to look for
safe spaces in which they can do so.
In Colombia, in partnership with UN-Women,
we have long supported women’s organizations in
strengthening the implementation of the gender
provisions of the Final Agreement for Ending the
Conflict and Building a Stable and Lasting Peace. And
their advocacy must have left a mark — the unique
needs and priorities of women human rights defenders
are at the centre of the Government’s new emergency
protection plan.
In Somalia, women and girls bear the brunt of the
perils of insecurity, exclusion, poverty, drought and
a devastating humanitarian crisis. Yet, they remain
largely underrepresented in formal and informal
decision-making bodies. Here, Norway is working
for a stronger role for Somali women in peace
and reconciliation.

22-6399421/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

And in Syria, Norway is actively supporting
the Syrian Women’s Advisory Board, which
advises the United Nations Special Envoy on the
political process, including the work of the Syrian
Constitutional Committee.
We also support the work of women in the
agreement monitoring committee of the Agreement
on Peace and Reconciliation in Mali, which continues
to remind the parties of the need to prioritize peace
dividends and the return of basic social services and is
also mobilizing broad support for the peace agreement
in their constituencies.
Regrettably, women in public life are often targeted,
as a strategy to silence, humiliate and discredit them,
including through sexual violence and threats. However,
the risk of threats and violence should not be used as a
pretext to deny women their right to participate.
We support the development and implementation of
national action plans on women and peace and security
because the commitment of States is key to both
prevention and accountability.
Norway commends the many good examples
and recommendations in the Secretary-General’s
report (S/2022/740) on how women’s protection and
participation can be enhanced. In particular, we applaud
the call for a more coordinated and systematic approach
to supporting women human rights defenders.
In January, the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, UN-Women and the
NGO Working Group on Women, Peace and Security
facilitated consultations with more than 40 civilsociety representatives and experts on reprisals against
women human rights defenders in conflict-affected
countries. I encourage everyone to read the summary
report (S/2022/756, annex) and to engage in follow-up
of their recommendations.
Finally, I want to encourage both present and
future Security Council members to join the shared
commitments on women and peace and security. It is
important to maintain that cross-regional initiative,
which has created a significant shift in the systematic
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in the Council’s own work and support to
women peacebuilders and human right defenders safely
engaging with the United Nations.
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival (France) (spoke in
French): I too would first like to thank Gabon for
22/33

20/10/2022

organizing this open debate. I welcome its commitment
to women’s rights and to the Security Council’s women
and peace and security agenda. I thank the Deputy
Secretary-General and our other briefers for their
valuable insights, and I particularly commend their
daily commitment.
France is committed to the full implementation of
every aspect of all the resolutions of the women and
peace and security agenda. In that regard, I would like
to stress three points.
First, women peacebuilders play a fundamental role.
I want to take this opportunity to pay tribute to them
all. It is unacceptable that many women are targeted
because of their commitment. France calls for robust
mandates and sufficient resources for the protection
and participation of women in United Nations missions
and operations.
Furthermore, the Security Council must reaffirm
in one voice that it is not acceptable that the rights of
women and girls be flouted. No violence should go
unpunished. Therefore, the Security Council must more
consistently impose sanctions on the perpetrators of
sexual violence in times of conflict. Such violence can
constitute war crimes and crimes against humanity. In
that regard, we welcome the work of the International
Criminal Court to combat sexual violence.
Lastly, France welcomes the commitment of the
Secretary-General to the full, equal, meaningful and
effective participation of women in peace processes.
We call for the mainstreaming of the women and peace
and security agenda throughout the United Nations
system. In that regard, we welcome the leading role
of UN-Women, the Department of Peace Operations
and the Informal Expert Group on Women and Peace
and Security.
As the Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/740)
emphasizes, women bear the brunt of the consequences
of the increase in conflicts, coups d’état and population
displacements. Given that situation, France has a
strong, ambitious and feminist diplomacy. We oppose
any complacency, and we aim at concrete action.
Together with Mexico, as my colleague recalled,
under the auspices of UN-Women, we co-chaired the
Generation Equality Forum in June 2021. The Forum
resulted in the raising of more than $40 billion in
unprecedented funding. The Compact on Women, Peace
and Security and Humanitarian Action was launched at
that event, and we call on all States to join it.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

As all the speakers reminded us this morning, in
the face of violence against women, it is not enough
to be outraged. We must act, and we must have the
resources. France is currently supporting the Global
Fund for Survivors of Conflict-Related Sexual Violence,
co-founded by Dr. Denis Mukwege and Nadia Murad,
with €6.5 million.
Finally, France supports the participation of women
in all peacekeeping operations. We are committed to
continuing our efforts to increase the number of women
personnel, as well as their representation at all levels
of responsibility, in such operations. That is one of
the central axes of our third national action plan on
the women and peace and security agenda, launched
in 2021.
In line with the shared commitments endorsed
this year, the Security Council may rest assured of our
unwavering commitment to the full implementation of
the women and peace and security resolutions.
Ms. Nthoki (Kenya): I thank Deputy SecretaryGeneral Amina Mohammed for her remarks, including
the observations, recommendations and goals for
the decade reflected in the current report of the
Secretary-General (S/2022/740) on the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000). I also thank the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous, the African
Union (AU) Special Envoy on Women and Peace and
Security, Ms. Bineta Diop, and Ms. Zahra Nader for
their briefings. We commend Ms. Diop and her Office
for promoting women’s full, equal and meaningful
participation in peace processes in Africa and for the
reports on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda on our continent. Kenya fully
supports the initiative currently under way to establish
the AU women, peace and security focal points group
to highlight Africa’s women and peace and security
implementation narrative here in New York.
We celebrate Africa’s leadership in advancing the
women and peace and security agenda to being a core
component of our primary security and normative
architecture, as embodied, inter alia, in the AU
Constitutive Act. Kenya accords great importance
to supporting women’s resilience and leadership
at all decision-making levels, as informed by our
Constitution, laws and policies. At the moment, we
are implementing and conducting a mid-term review
of our second women and peace and security national
action plan.

S/PV.9158

Our national action plan received a further boost
from Kenyan voters during the general elections in
August. A comparatively peaceful pre-election period
boosted women’s candidatures. For example, three out
of four vice-presidential candidates were female, and
the number of female candidates for Governor doubled
to 62, as compared to 2017. While the constitutional
two-thirds gender rule was not achieved in the ballot,
the number of winning candidates rose. Thirty female
members of Parliament were elected, up from 23 in
2017, and seven female governors, as compared to three
in 2017.
There is still a great deal of effort to be made in
ensuring that women leadership is increased to equality
in the private sector, particularly in the corporate space.
However, Kenyan women are equal owners in micro-,
small- and medium-sized businesses, making up 48 per
cent of the number that contributes 20 per cent of our
national gross domestic product.
In brief, Kenya is a country that has further to travel
to full equality, but that is doing so rapidly in multiple
spheres. That progress will, in time, be reflected in our
continued implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
and the subsequent resolutions on the women and peace
and security agenda. Kenya is committed in particular
to recognizing the disproportionate impact of armed
conflict on women and girls and, based on that
recognition, initiating action to address their increased
vulnerabilities in access to resources, services and
opportunities in conflict and post-conflict contexts.
The women and peace and security normative
framework also reaffirms the critical role that women
play across the entire peace continuum, from conflict
prevention and resolution to peace transitions and
post-conflict recovery. Women’s continued role
and leadership as first responders, peacekeepers,
peacebuilders, mediators, peace signatories, activists,
advocates and human rights defenders have been aptly
demonstrated despite the difficult circumstances in
various regions of the world.
As demonstrated by the stories of women taking
ownership of peace in the Photoville travelling
exhibition launched during Kenya’s Security Council
presidency last year at the time of the women and
peace and security annual open debate (see S/PV.8886),
women are quietly working, or organizing and
mobilizing, for peace at the grass-roots level. They are
rebuilding broken communities, forging reconciliation
and agitating for their rights, even in the face of

22-6399423/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

oppression, structural inequalities, displacement,
human trafficking sexual and gender-based violence,
and in the brutality of conflict itself.
Inasmuch as the Council resolutions speak to
participation, prevention and relief and recovery of
women in the peace and security arena, in practice, we
are still witnessing violations of those key women and
peace and security pillars, including the denial of basic
rights, access to education, economic opportunities,
justice and other services. It therefore remains necessary
to amplify the voices of women and strengthen women’s
resilience and leadership at all levels as a path to peace,
particularly in regions plagued by armed and militia
groups. In this regard, my delegation would like to
propose four action points.
The first is to invest in building women’s resilience
and leadership in a way that corresponds to the context
and the immediate threat environment. This means
enhanced efforts to integrate localized knowledge,
home-grown conflict-management, negotiation and
mediation skills. A contextual approach that utilizes the
expertise of local women and prioritizes national and
regional women protection advisers also allows for more
accurate and culturally informed gender-disaggregated
data, especially when it comes to addressing the causes,
drivers and accelerators of conflict. The agency of local
women in early warning and prevention should also be
better utilized as a preventive and resilience-building
measure. In Kenya, we have seen the value of enhanced
gender-mainstreaming in early-warning and response
mechanisms, including through local peace committees
and local mediation networks. In this regard, we have
developed a gender-responsive community-led earlywarning and early-response framework.
Secondly, it is imperative for there to be a
comprehensive approach in the implementation of
all the four pillars of women, peace and security.
An investment in one pillar should not be made in
isolation from the rest. With specific regard to armed
and terrorist groups, we remain concerned that there
is too little being done to ensure accountability for
sexual and gender-based violence. We reiterate that,
for optimal impact, such resolutions as resolution 2242
(2015), which link acts of sexual and gender-based
violence with the strategic objectives and ideology
of certain terrorist groups such as Al-Shabaab must
be implemented alongside other counter-terrorism
instruments including resolutions 2354 (2017), 2178
(2014) and 2331 (2016). It is also important to invest
24/33

20/10/2022

in women’s peace and rights advocates and utilize
their agency as interlocutors in security sector reform
and disarmament, demobilization and reintegration
initiatives and mechanisms that deal with those at risk
of radicalization and with returnees.
My third point is on capacity-building and training.
Identifying areas that need new skills and competencies
and establishing institutions that work together are
important steps in ensuring resilience. Kenya has
institutionalized training programmes for women
leaders within Government training institutions. We
have also made significant progress in training and
recruiting more women into senior positions, including
advisory, representative and field-operations functions
for both civilian and uniformed personnel. Providing
context-appropriate psychosocial and legal support to
survivors of sexual and gender-based violence and the
early identification of victims of human trafficking
together with their referral to appropriate services
also require specialized training, which also involves
the enhancement of the expertise and capacities of
local women.
My fourth point relates to financing and the
socioeconomic empowerment of women and girls.
Currently, financing for women’s organizations in
conflict-affected countries remains minimal, which
hampers their agency and potential in peace processes.
Ensuring adequate financing to realize the Sustainable
Development Goals, women’s integration in national
economic frameworks and the rollout of national action
plans for women, peace and security, in line with the
respective national priorities, would also contribute to
enhanced resilience.
In conclusion, I join in the call from our fellow
co-founders of the Presidency Trio for Women, Peace
and Security — Ireland and Mexico — and all States
Members of the United Nations that have since joined
the initiative to ensure that these shared commitments
translate into and continue to inspire action.
Mr. Kuzmin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank you and your team, Mr. President,
for having organized today’s meeting on strengthening
women’s resilience and leadership as a pathway to
peace in regions plagued by armed groups. We are
grateful to the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, Executive Director of UN-Women,
Ms. Sima Bahous, and Special Envoy of the African
Union, Ms. Diop, as well as the Editor-in-Chief of the
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Zan Times, for their assessments and the information
that they have provided.
Our discussion reaffirms the timeliness and
relevance of resolution 1325 (2000), which was
adopted more than 20 years ago, laying down the
bedrock for the issue of women, peace and security.
The report of the Secretary-General that has been
submitted (S/2022/740) attests to progress in raising
the profile of women and strengthening their role in
the preservation and resolution of armed conflict, as
well as in post-conflict recovery. We are thankful to
the Secretary-General for the ongoing focus on issues
of expanding the full-fledged participation of women
in peacekeeping operations, peace talks and political
processes as a whole.
A key objective of the Security Council is the
protection of women from violence, which they
continue to endure during armed conflict, and there is
a great deal yet to be achieved in that regard. Despite
the measures that have been adopted, women continue
to fall prey to various forms of violence. They are killed
and wounded during armed conflict. The specificities
of every conflict must be taken into account, and
accounting for gender perspectives in the work of the
Security Council should not become an end in itself.
At the same time, let us recall that the leading role in
the protection of women in conflict is borne by national
Governments, whereas measures adopted by the United
Nations and civil society should be geared towards
supporting and complementing the efforts of States.
Duplication must be avoided in the work of various
United Nations bodies, and it is necessary to focus
on situations that pose a clear threat to international
peace and security in line with the prerogatives of the
Security Council.
We wish to emphasize that, in efforts aimed at
empowering women, protecting their rights and ensuring
gender equality, the General Assembly, the Human
Rights Council and the Peacebuilding Commission
also all contribute. We advocate the Security Council’s
stringent compliance with its mandate, and we reject
attempts to sanction its intervention in issues covered
by other bodies. What is inappropriate is the use of the
Security Council for the advancement of contradictory
concepts and approaches that do not enjoy broad
international support.
We call for a focus on concrete measures to support
women in armed conflict, including, inter alia, the

S/PV.9158

development of national action plans, the adoption of
which should be contingent on situations related to
armed conflict. In this regard, we are talking about
a constructive, effective instrument, not yet another
declaratory document. The adoption of action plans
for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
through checking boxes cannot serve as a criterion for
the assessment of the effectiveness of policies for the
advancement of women carried out in countries around
the world.
We believe that, in discussions on the questions
of women, peace and security, the Security Council
still pays insufficient attention to the need to invest
in science and health care and in social-protection and
development as a whole. We embrace the premise set
out by the presidency in the concept note (S/2022/743,
annex) that investments in expansion of women’s
economic rights and opportunities make a tangible
contribution to peace and security.
We have repeatedly called upon the membership
of the Security Council to focus on issues of women’s
employment and property rights, including to land,
access to credit and advanced technologies, as a
necessary aspect of the development of States affected
by armed conflict or those in post-conflict recovery. We
see in this regard a clear flaw in the Council’s Informal
Expert Group on Women, Peace and Security. To date,
the Group is not in a position to serve as a coordinating
link in the work of the Security Council in this area. Its
activity bears the hallmarks of clear politicization. Alas,
the procedure for the adoption of documents fails to meet
the requirements of transparency and agreement among
members of the Security Council as a key condition for
the maintenance of intergovernmental dialogue, and
these flaws undoubtedly need to be addressed.
Turning to the activities of the Secretariat, in its
work for the advancement of gender equality and women,
peace and security, more women from developing
countries need to be brought in, not those who know
about situations on the ground through hearsay. We
read with interest the recommendations contained in
the report of the Secretary General. We believe that
they can be complemented with recommendations
to reject the use of Illegitimate, unilateral coercive
measures, which have a very damaging impact on
the situation of women and their family members.
They deprive women of employment opportunities,
education, social protection and the opportunity to
raise children under normal conditions. For our part,

22-6399425/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

we intend to continue to contribute constructively to
ensuring the advancement of women’s position in
society, the protection of their rights and their effective
participation in all decision-making processes.
Ms. Oppong-Ntiri (Ghana): At the outset, permit
me to convey Ghana’s appreciation to Gabon for its
leadership and for prioritizing the discussion on women’s
contribution to peace, especially at a time when women
and girls continue to face disproportionate threats in
situations of armed conflict. Ghana is equally grateful
to Deputy Secretary-General Amina Mohammed;
Ms. Sima Sami Bahous, Executive Director of UNWomen; Ms. Bineta Diop, the African Union Special
Envoy; and Ms. Zahra Nader for the perspectives they
have brought to the open debate through their insightful
briefings. We also thank the Secretary-General for his
comprehensive report (S/2022/740) and for consistently
highlighting the important role of women in securing
peace. We reiterate his appeal to Member States to step
up their efforts to implement the women and peace
and security agenda and, more specifically, to protect
women human rights activists.
Despite the fact that the world is experiencing
a reversal of generational gains in women’s rights as
a result of conflict, Ghana stands by the belief that
the women and peace and security agenda, through
resolution 1325 (2000), remains a strong framework
that guides our collaborative efforts to build more
peaceful and sustainable societies. While women in
situations of armed conflict are indisputably victims,
they can also be actors for change, as they are vital to
the fight for peace. We therefore have to consider their
unique roles and viewpoints if we are to be able to build
safer communities and more resilient societies and
shape local solutions for lasting peace. My delegation
therefore welcomes the focus of today’s high-level open
debate on strengthening the resilience and leadership
of women as a path to peace in regions plagued by
armed conflicts. We believe that discussions around
this theme will help us to work towards the common
goal of increasing women’s participation in all facets
of society. I would now like to share with the Council
some initiatives that Ghana is undertaking under the
women and peace and security agenda.
As we have highlighted in recent Council debates,
two years ago Ghana adopted its second national action
plan for the period from 2020 to 2025, based on the need
to address certain implementation gaps in the initial
plan. The Government has disseminated the action
26/33

20/10/2022

plan by translating it into the country’s various local
languages in order to create awareness and ensure that
citizens understand and promote the women and peace
and security agenda. In spite of the implementation
barriers, Ghana is also committed to exercising
leadership in the area of operationalizing the global
women and peace and security agenda. It is against that
backdrop that the Women, Peace and Security Institute
of the Kofi Annan International Peacekeeping Training
Centre and other relevant stakeholders continue to train
gender activists on peace and security issues and women
as conflict mediators. Women are also being sensitized
at the grassroots level on their roles in ensuring
peaceful, resilient and democratic societies. Last
month, to enhance our operationalization of our second
national action plan, the Kofi Annan Centre trained a
number of women and peace and security focal persons
from Ghana and the wider region to better monitor and
report on the implementation of the women and peace
and security agenda in Africa, using the Continental
Results Framework, which the African Union (AU)
Peace and Security Council adopted in 2018.
Regarding the advancement of gender equality,
especially in our security agencies, the Ghana Police
Service has developed a gender policy to mainstream
gender in its operations and administration. Our National
Intelligence Bureau, of which women make up 52 per
cent of the total staff, has established a gender office.
The Government has increased the number of women on
the governing board of the National Peace Council from
one to three and on the Regional Peace Council from an
average of one woman to a maximum of four. Ghana
strongly believes that women bring unique perspectives
to addressing issues and should therefore be adequately
represented in decision-making processes.
As a HeForShe Male Champion and an AU
Gender Champion, President Akufo-Addo of Ghana
is committed to working to achieve gender equality
and advance women’s economic empowerment in our
country. Cognizant of that important role, Ghana will
co-chair the Africa Group Women, Peace and Security
Focal Points Network initiative in New York. The
Network is expected to provide a platform for the Group
of African States to discuss the women and peace and
security agenda in collaboration with stakeholders and
partners, with the aim of sharing experiences and best
practices for women and peace and security in action
on the African continent.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

As one of the top 10 United Nations troopcontributing countries, Ghana is currently deploying
2,769 uniformed personnel, 15.6 per cent of whom are
women, making Ghana the top contributor of uniformed
women in military contingents to United Nations
peacekeeping missions. We are proud of our female
leadership contribution to the United Nations Mission
for the Referendum in Western Sahara, whose Acting
Deputy Force Commander is a female Ghanaian officer.
Ghana intends to undertake the following initiatives
to advance the women and peace and security agenda
and build women’s resilience. The Government plans
to intensify public education on laws and policies on
human rights, gender issues, Sustainable Development
Goal 5, resolution 1325 (2000) and our national
framework on preventing and countering violent
extremism, among other policies, in order to reduce the
incidence of violations of women’s rights. We also intend
to conduct conflict-prevention training of traditional
leaders, especially queen mothers in the northern parts
of the country where conflict vulnerabilities exist,
and to increase awareness on conflict resolution and
peacebuilding among various women’s groups so as to
ensure peaceful and resilient communities.
In focusing on how United Nations entities
and Member States can strengthen the leadership
and resilience of women in peace processes in
regions plagued by armed groups, it is important to
acknowledge that women make up almost half of the
world’s population. It is therefore right that they should
be full participants in the discussions that shape our
present reality, as well as our future hopes, including in
matters relating to international peace and security. To
build their resilience and leadership, Ghana encourages
Member States, as well as United Nations entities, to
ensure the meaningful and full participation of women
in peacemaking, peacekeeping and peacebuilding
processes and negotiations, as their participation can
make an enormous difference in resolving conflicts.
Ghana also calls on Member States, the United Nations
and international policymakers to build the capacity
of women to take up leadership roles in peace and
security efforts.
As we are all aware, an increased presence of
armed groups creates fear, anxiety and panic, which
undermines quality of life, especially of women and
children, and negatively affects their psychological
health. It is essential that Member States commit to
efforts to provide counselling services, mental and

S/PV.9158

psychosocial support while also creating opportunities
and an enabling environment for women to live their
full lives in peace.
In the regional context, we want to highlight the
importance of national and regional networks of women
in building a pool of women leaders. In that regard, we
commend the African Women Leaders Network, which
helps countries in Africa to elevate women to positions
of leadership on the continent.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to reaffirm
the Government of Ghana’s commitment to the
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda and looks forward to working constructively
with Council members to ensure that it remains at
the forefront of our discussions as we work to achieve
our collective goal of peace and security. It is our
fervent hope that we will take pragmatic steps that can
translate the women and peace and security agenda
from rhetoric to concrete actions, ultimately leading to
sustainable peace.
Mr. Raguttahalli (India): We thank Gabon for
convening the open debate on this important topic.
I thank the Deputy Secretary-General, Ms. Amina
Mohammed, for her insights. I also thank the Executive
Director of UN-Women, Ms. Sima Bahous, the
African Union Special Envoy, Ms. Bineta Diop, and
the civil society representative, Ms. Zahra Nader, for
their briefings.
Women’s empowerment and gender equality
are prerequisites for building peaceful, inclusive
and resilient societies. Sustainable peace cannot be
achieved unless violence against women is eliminated
and their equal and meaningful participation in public
life is promoted. Armed conflicts and terrorist attacks
continue to have a devastating impact on the lives and
dignity of women.
Resolution 1325 (2000) was pathbreaking and
underlined women’s participation as being key to
resolving conflicts and securing peace. The women and
peace and security agenda has transformative potential,
but there are still challenges with regard to its realization.
A lack of enabling environments, inequalities and
discriminatory power structures inhibit effective
conflict prevention and inclusive peace processes. The
women and peace and security normative framework
needs to be powered by action. Governments, the United
Nations, regional organizations, civil society and other
actors must implement their commitments to ensure

22-6399427/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

20/10/2022

women’s full, equal and meaningful participation in
political processes and decision-making in order to
promote an inclusive society.

Women have consequently become economically
empowered and are providing employment to others
as well.

One of the most important indicators for
strengthening the roots of democracy, pluralism and
fundamental rights is the extent to which women
are included in the institutions of governance. The
greater involvement of women in the higher echelons
of decision-making considerably strengthens good
governance — and more so in post-conflict situations.
India has always called for advancing the democratic
framework, the rule of law and institution-building in
post-conflict situations, which is a sine qua non for
advancing the women and peace and security agenda.

To open up those economic opportunities, equal
access to education is fundamental. A large number of
women in India are obtaining education in the fields
of science, technology, engineering, mathematics and
medicine. In fact, women have outnumbered men
at medical schools in India for decades. India now
has women in important positions of responsibility,
not just in business but also in the areas of science
and technology.

Under the leadership of the Prime Minister, India’s
development narrative has witnessed a transformational
change, from women’s development to women-led
development and from exclusively Government-led
to an inclusive multi-stakeholder governance model.
We believe India’s experiences on its women-centric
development journey may be useful in our shared
pursuit of enhancing women’s resilience and leadership.
As the world’s largest democracy, India offers a
unique template for gender-sensitive governance. The
Constitution of India ensures the participation of women
in local governance by mandating that a minimum of
33 per cent of the total seats be reserved for women.
More than 1.3 million elected women representatives,
who constitute nearly 44 per cent of the total number of
elected representatives, lead political decision-making
at the grass-roots level.
Women’s political power can be sustained only if
accompanied by their socioeconomic advancement.
In that context, I would like to share numerous good
governance initiatives that we have taken to advance
the holistic empowerment of women. We have leveraged
digital technologies to provide greater access for women
to finance, credit, technology and employment. Online
bank accounts for more than 445 million people have
been opened, of which more than 55 per cent are held
by women. During the coronavirus disease pandemic,
that initiative helped facilitate direct benefit transfers
to almost 200 million women.
Through our micro-units development and refinance
agency, the Government provides collateral-free loans
to encourage entrepreneurship and self-employment.
Approximately 70 per cent of the agency’s beneficiaries
are women-owned and women-operated enterprises.
28/33

Women scientists have played a vital role in
research and development in various fields, including
the technology industry. In fact, women play an
important part in furthering India’s space research
and missions. Approximately 27 per cent of the key
executive positions in spearheading the Mars Orbiter
Mission were led by Indian women.
In keeping with the Indian ethos of the world
being one family and the Gandhian value of providing
service to humanity, India has shared its developmental
experiences and technical expertise with other countries
across the globe. Our approach to development
partnership was articulated by the Prime Minister of
India in his address to the Parliament of Uganda in
2018, in which he said:
“Our development partnership will be guided
by your priorities. It will be on terms that will
be comfortable for you, that will liberate your
potential and not constrain your future... We will
build as much local capacity and create as many
local opportunities as possible.”
Through our developmental cooperation, we have
assisted partner countries in a range of fields with a
direct bearing on women’s progress and upliftment.
One such encouraging example of powering up women’s
development in line with Sustainable Development
Goal 7 is the Solar Mamas project. Under that initiative,
more than 15,000 women from 83 countries, mostly
from rural areas and with no formal academic training,
received training in solar engineering and related skills
in India, in a process that provided light and power to
more than 1,200 villages and 500,000 people worldwide.
India has been an active participant in the
deliberations on issues focusing on women’s
empowerment and gender mainstreaming in various
United Nations bodies. India fully supports the
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Secretary-General’s call to action for the accelerated
implementation of the women and peace and security
agenda in implementing the Declaration of Shared
Commitments on United Nations Peacekeeping
Operations and actions taken under Action for
Peacekeeping Plus priorities. We also welcome the
Department of Peace Operations Uniformed Gender
Parity Strategy and are committed to complying
with it so that women’s participation and their role in
peacekeeping can be enhanced.
India supports the Secretary General’s zerotolerance approach to sexual exploitation and abuse.
India was the first country to contribute to the
Secretary-General’s trust fund in support of victims
of sexual exploitation and abuse and also signed the
voluntary compact on the issue in 2017.
The Prime Minister of India himself joined the
circle of leadership on the prevention of and response
to sexual exploitation and abuse in United Nations
operations. India’s contribution of a women’s formed
police unit to the United Nations Mission in Liberia,
the first-ever women-only contingent in the history
of United Nations peacekeeping operations, helped
increase the participation of Liberian women in the
security sector from 6 to 17 per cent. The Indian female
engagement team in the United Nations Organization
Stabilization Mission in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo has also been instrumental in enhancing local
women’s engagement in Goma in the eastern part of
the country.
Terrorism and violent extremism continue to
represent one of the biggest violators of human rights
and threats to global peace and security. Needless to say,
women and girls invariably suffer disproportionately.
Terrorist attacks deserve strong condemnation and
call for the collective adoption of a zero-tolerance
approach. The Council must focus its attention on the
consequences of terrorism for the rights of women. It
must strive to effectively integrate women and peace
and security considerations into sanctions regimes,
including by listing those terrorist entities involved in
violence against women in armed conflicts.
It is important that in conflict situations, the
spotlight on women and minority issues be maintained.
A case in point is Afghanistan, about which we heard a
first-hand account earlier today. The world cannot look
the other way while the rights of women and minorities
are being trampled upon. There has been an increasing
number of attempts to remove women from public life

S/PV.9158

in Afghanistan. We call for women and minorities to be
included in Afghanistan’s future and their rights to be
fully respected, as affirmed in resolution 2593 (2021).
In conclusion, India is committed to engaging with
all its partners to work towards mainstreaming women
and peace and security considerations in order to
build inclusive, peaceful and resilient societies. India’s
commitment to and experience of enhancing women’s
resilience and leadership across sectors will continue to
guide our actions on taking the women and peace and
security agenda forward.
The President (spoke in French): I wish to remind
all speakers to limit their statements to no more than
four minutes in order to enable the Council to carry
out its work expeditiously. Flashing lights on the collars
of the microphones will prompt speakers to bring their
remarks to a close after four minutes.
I now give the floor to the Minister for Foreign
Affairs, Francophonie and Central Africans Abroad of
the Central African Republic.
Ms. Baipo Temon (Central African Republic)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to commend
you, Mr. President, for convening this meeting, which
enables us to share our experiences on today’s topic
on strengthening women’s resilience and leadership in
regions plagued by armed groups. I would also like to
acknowledge the briefings by women’s representatives
from various organizations — Ms. Sima Sami Bahous,
Executive Director of UN-Women; Ms. Bineta Diop,
Special Envoy on Women, Peace and Security of the
Chairperson of the African Union Commission; and
Ms. Zahra Nader, Editor-in-Chief of Zan Times. I thank
them for the information that they have provided on
such an important subject. I also thank you, Sir, for
inviting me to share the experiences of the Central
African Republic in this debate.
It should be noted that in armed conflicts, women
and children are the first victims, while also taking
account of the fact that in most countries in conflict
women represent a majority of the population. It is
therefore important for countries in conflict to work
on strengthening women’s leadership so that they
can effectively participate in the process of restoring
peace. We must applaud their remarkable resilience
and ability to maintain and safeguard the economy
during conflicts — women whose courage and actions,
which reflect solidarity, can be a driving force for the
resilience of an entire population.

22-6399429/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

It is regrettable and unacceptable that in 2022,
women are still terribly exposed to violence, barbarism
and the deprivation of their rights. Our battles to have
our rights respected, which we commemorate on
8 March, have to some extent been in vain because
the fate of women, their rights and respect for their
bodies continues to be of true concern. Despite their
remarkable determination, leadership and resilience,
women and women’s organizations and work are
being undermined in countries in conflict. That is
why silencing the guns, in Africa in particular but
also in every region of the world, must be a priority
for us all and part of our shared commitment for the
sake of international peace and security. We must work
harder for peace because our actions and decisions are
compromising the future of the world and of women,
who are the givers of life. Humankind has been placed
in danger by the tyranny of Man with a capital M, by
our persistent will to dominate and subjugate the other.
I would like to commend the Secretary-General for
his report (S/2022/740) and urge him to go further in
taking concrete action to fight in solidarity against
destabilization, terrorism and armed groups.
My country, the Central African Republic, has
experienced a shocking number of crises and armed
conflicts marked by unprecedented violence. The last
two major conflicts in particular had especially violent
consequences for women and children — the conflict
in the early 2000s involving the Bayamoulengué
mercenaries from the Democratic Republic of the
Congo under the leadership of Jean-Pierre Bemba, and
that of 2013 involving the Séléka rebels and mercenaries
who re-emerged in strength in 2020 under the name of
the Coalition des patriotes pour le changement. Those
two major conflicts have undeniably left in their wake
various forms of trauma caused by the extreme violence
of the crimes that were committed — with systematic
violence and sexual violations against women and
children, crimes perpetrated from house to house with
the sole intention of killing the men of the house and
raping women and girls under the helpless gaze of
their husbands and children, sometimes even forcing
their sons to have sexual relations with their mothers
or grandmothers.
The history of the Central African Republic
is indeed a sad one, and one can wonder how the
people of the country hold on and keep themselves
from descending into chaos. In response, we must
acknowledge the remarkable resilience of the women
of the Central African Republic, who despite the
30/33

20/10/2022

individual suffering they may have endured as a result
of rape, the loss of their husbands and the murder of
their children, have stayed standing, committed to
refusing to render evil for evil and steadfastly remaining
resilient in order to provide the children who survived
human barbarity with a way to rise again. That sense
of responsibility and self-sacrifice for one’s family is
a true driver of resilience for the women of the Central
African Republic.
In the face of adversity and the consequences of
armed conflicts that have created an exponential rise
in the number of orphans, the women of my country
have come together to improvise decent shelter
for orphans by opening their homes or makeshift
houses to accommodate them. They have dealt with
the emergency, and over time, with the help of more
experienced associations and non-governmental
organizations (NGOs), they have organized to provide
a more adequate welcome and better care. They have
come together and individually and collectively helped
to carry out humanitarian work. In order to encourage
their initiatives, some of the projects of the Central
African Republic recovery plan have been entrusted
to them, helping and promoting their work. Moreover,
Central African civil society now has a good number
of associations, including those whose members are
women, women doctors, women lawyers and young
women leaders.
The resilience of women in the Central African
Republic correlates with leadership in terms not just of
initiatives but of their capacity to resist pressure and take
on positions of responsibility. Although our State has
yet to appoint the number of women required to achieve
the goal of gender parity, it should be acknowledged
that it is a model in terms of women’s promotion.
During the time of our illustrious Emperor Bokassa,
the Central African Republic saw the appointment of
its first female Prime Minister, Elisabeth Domitien.
In 2013, a woman — Catherine Samba-Panza — also
served as interim President during the transition, at
the height of a major crisis, a critical and extremely
sensitive period during which at least 80 per cent of
the country’s territory was occupied by armed groups,
which were not from the Central African Republic.
That trend of looking to women’s leadership in the
Central African Republic increased with our return
to constitutional order, including in 2016 with the
accession of Mr. Faustin Touadera to the presidency and
the appointment of women to Government positions.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

Women have held and continue to hold important
positions, including in our Ministry of Defence, the
diplomatic corps and the area of reconciliation. Even
the position of President of the country’s Constitutional
Court is held by a woman. All of them are positions
that have been entrusted to women in times of extreme
tension and pressure.
We must also recognize that measures to promote
resilience and women’s leadership and ensure a
sense of certainty, confidence and security have
been implemented and continue to be implemented,
including by a follow-up committee that is working on
the issue of human trafficking, a problem that mainly
affects women. The President has given the committee
special attention and it is being overseen directly by the
executive branch, with a Minister Councillor enlisted
for the task. That exceptional and noteworthy resilience
is also supported by the technical and financial partners
of the Central African Government, placing them at the
heart of the support system they provide to my country.
The Government of the Central African Republic
welcomes the support provided to our women and
calls attention to the vital importance of improving the
structure of the NGOs and associations concerned to
ensure that they are more effectively involved in the
State’s recovery and in overcoming challenges so that
we have better social cohesion and coexistence, and not
just in the political arena. We must encourage women
to be bold with regard to principles of parity and to get
more involved in decision-making bodies and in public
affairs — all in a spirit of equity as predetermined by the
concept of parity, which accordingly requires bringing
together a sufficient number of Central African elites,
especially young women.
In conclusion, I want to emphasize the importance
of adopting a fitting paradigm that consists in providing
States that are constrained by armed groups with the
means to promote women’s meaningful leadership so
that they can thrive in the political, economic, social,
cultural and even personal arenas — in order to replace
the current paradigm, which makes the support that
the State needs conditional on the principle of equality
instead of parity, which is based on equity — and in
enabling women to assume their aspirational and
deserved place so that their leadership can better
benefit the public interest.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the Minister for Gender, Family and Children
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

S/PV.9158

Ms. Luseba (Democratic Republic of the Congo)
(spoke in French): At the outset, I would like to
congratulate you, Mr. President, and your country,
Gabon, on assuming the presidency of the Security
Council for the month of October and to thank you for
convening today’s open debate on women and peace
and security, on the theme “Strengthening women’s
resilience and leadership as a path to peace in regions
plagued by armed groups”.
I would like to pay a warm tribute to His Excellency
Mr. Félix-Antoine Tshisekedi Tshilombo, President and
Head of State of the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
who spares no effort to re-establish the authority of the
State throughout the country’s territory and to establish
peace in a peaceful manner, with the equal participation
of women and men. The President of the Republic is
known as a man of positive masculinity, owing to his
efforts to ensure the effective inclusion of women in the
management of the country’s affairs.
My country spares no effort in investing in women,
who are the key to achieving peace, by empowering
them to be resilient so that they can contribute
effectively to building lasting peace in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo and the entire subregion. My
Government also believes in the invaluable potential of
promoting gender equality and women’s leadership in
order to achieve significant progress in the peace and
development of our societies.
However, as far as the Democratic Republic of
the Congo is concerned, the Government’s substantial
investments in recent years in improving the status of
women have had little effect, owing to the resurgence
of armed groups in the eastern part of my country. The
support being provided to the terrorist groups that are
devastating the lives of the women of my country is
one factor preventing the advancement of the women
and peace and security agenda in the Democratic
Republic of the Congo. In that regard, President
Tshisekedi Tshilombo has been quick to denounce such
actions towards my country, which are in violation of
international law.
Despite the factors I have mentioned that
undermine the implementation of resolution 1325
(2000) in my country, some notable progress has been
achieved. Since 2020, my country has been pursuing its
second-generation action plan for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000), the objective of which is
to promote a secure environment and guarantee the
equitable involvement of women, men and young

22-6399431/33

S/PV.9158

Women and peace and security

people in peacebuilding in the Democratic Republic of
the Congo.
That plan is in line with the strategic drivers
of our national gender policy, which outlines my
Government’s priorities in that regard. We believe
that new plan will enable us to guarantee women’s
safety and ensure that laws are respected and
penalties strictly enforced with regard to combating
violence — especially sexual violence — against
women, young women and girls, which is one of the
priorities of the Congolese Government.
The Ministry of Gender, Family and Children of the
Democratic Republic of the Congo, through its national
secretariat for the coordination and follow-up of the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000), is currently
supporting the country’s provinces in contextualizing
their provincial action plans for the implementation
of resolution 1325 (2000) in order to allow each of
them to be able to address priority security needs.
That is how our country is working to decentralize the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000).
Congolese women’s capacity-building in mediation
techniques has been strengthened, and there is a
network of women peace mediators being built in the
country. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has
several peace mechanisms and initiatives that involve
women, including a steering committee on the followup to the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
at the national, provincial and local levels; a national
secretariat for the coordination of and follow-up to the
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000); a network of
women peacemakers that is currently being developed;
and early warning and other mechanisms.
The normative framework currently in place
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo provides
an increasingly favourable context for women’s
empowerment, as demonstrated by the high level of
women’s political participation in our Government,
in which women currently occupy 27 per cent of the
key positions. Together with our Government, the
Fondation Denise Nyakeru Tshisekedi recently created
a reparations fund for survivors of sexual violence
linked to armed conflict. The Government has also
put in place integrated multisectoral centres to ensure
care for victims of gender-based violence. Those are
important decisions that will bring a smile to the faces
of many women who have been humiliated by such
despicable acts.
32/33

20/10/2022

The state of siege that our President has decreed in
the conflict zones in North Kivu and Ituri is one of the
life-saving measures that is currently contributing to
the protection of the population in general, especially
women. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is
currently chairing the regional follow-up mechanism
for the Addis Ababa Framework Agreement, which
hosted its tenth summit in Kinshasa in February.
On that occasion, the Heads of State of the region
endorsed the recommendations of the consultative
committee on women and peace and security for the
region aimed at promoting the effective participation
of women in political life and peacebuilding processes
and combating violence against women and girls.
Currently, several reforms are under way in the police,
army and judiciary. We aim to recruit more than 20,000
young women with a view to reinforcing their presence
in those institutions by ensuring that they occupy
leadership roles.
In conclusion, I recognize that there are several
challenges to be addressed in order to ensure a better
implementation of resolution 1325 (2000) in our
country. The work to be done is immense and requires
the involvement of all stakeholders engaged in the
search for peace and security at the national, regional
and international levels. Our second-generation action
plan for the implementation of resolution 1325 (2000)
deserves the support of all stakeholders in order to
achieve the expected results.
The President (spoke in French): I now give the
floor to the representative of Finland.
Ms. Sumuvuori (Finland): I have the honour
to deliver this statement on behalf of the Nordic
countries — Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Sweden and
my own country, Finland. We commend Gabon for
organizing today’s important open debate.
In today’s complex conflict situations, the work
of human rights defenders is ever more dangerous.
As we heard from the briefers this morning, threats,
violence, harassment and hate speech against women
peacebuilders and human rights defenders pose a
serious threat to their lives and physical integrity,
which can seriously disrupt their efforts for peace
and conflict resolution. The Nordic countries echo
the messages contained in the report of the SecretaryGeneral (S/2022/740) and the open letter of the NGO
Working Group on Women, Peace and Security.
22-63994

20/10/2022

Women and peace and security

It is the international community’s responsibility
to ensure an enabling environment in which women
may exercise their right to participate in all aspects of
public, social and political life. That includes concrete
measures of protection from threats and violence. We
simply must recognize the inextricable link between
protection and participation. That is a rights issue
but also a crucial step towards building inclusive and
sustainable peace. Particular attention must be paid to
those who experience multiple and intersecting forms
of discrimination, such as women with disabilities.
The Security Council has shown leadership by
providing many women human rights defenders and
peacebuilders a platform for sharing their views,
expertise and experiences. We call on Council members
to incorporate those perspectives into the Council’s
work and conclusions, and to continue to provide
women human rights defenders and peacebuilders
visibility and appropriate support before, during and
after briefing the Council. We call on Member States to
adopt a zero-tolerance policy to address reprisals and
to follow up with robust and systematic accountability
measures against all perpetrators.
Women and girls are disproportionately affected
by crises and conflicts because of their gender. The
Secretary-General’s report (S/2022/740) documents a
substantial increase in threats and attacks, including
sexual and gender-based violence, targeting women
in public life as a strategy to silence, humiliate and
discredit them.
Yet women peacebuilders and women’s rights
organizations all over the world continue to show
remarkable leadership, initiative and resilience.
They play pivotal roles in efforts relating to conflict

S/PV.9158

prevention, conflict resolution, sustaining peace and
achieving gender equality.
Continuous support to women’s rights organizations
is essential. In addition to political support that
recognizes women’s agency, that should include
sufficient, predictable and sustainable funding to
support grass-roots level action and capacity-building
for women’s networks.
By the year 2030, it is estimated that over 80 per
cent of global poverty will be in countries suffering
from violence and fragility. Tackling State fragility
and placing emphasis on conflict prevention and peace
mediation are ever more urgent. The Nordic countries
regret that only 5 per cent of official development
assistance to conflict-affected countries is dedicated to
advancing gender equality. We — particularly Member
States — must redouble our efforts when it comes
to funding.
In conclusion, without women, we cannot achieve
inclusive and sustainable peace. The Nordic countries
commend the 11 current and former Security Council
members who have signed the shared commitments on
the women and peace and security agenda. We expect
and call on the Security Council to take the lead in
ensuring that the inclusion of women’s perspectives and
gender equality becomes a given in all discussions on
peace and security.
The President (spoke in French): There are
still a number of speakers remaining on my list for
this meeting.
Given the lateness of the hour, with the concurrence
of the members of the Council, I intend to suspend the
meeting until 3 p.m.
The meeting was suspended at 1.15 p.m.

22-6399433/33
