S/2004/528

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
30 June 2004
English
Original: French

Letter dated 12 March 2004 from the Secretary-General addressed
to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the statement by the President of the Security
Council dated 20 November 2003 (S/PRST/2003/23), in which the Security Council
called on the countries of the Great Lakes region and the international community to
support the efforts of my Special Representative, Mr. Ibrahima Fall, and requested
me to keep it informed of developments in the region.
As I indicated in my report of 17 November 2003 (S/2003/1099), major
progress has been made over the past six months towards the convening of an
international conference on the Great Lakes region. When the preparatory process
was launched in Nairobi last June, the future orientation of the conference and its
main elements were determined. With the help of the United Nations, the African
Union and donor countries, the countries of the region have established a framework
for their discussions of substantive issues. They have established national
preparatory committees and agreed to hold several preparatory and thematic
meetings prior to the two summit meetings.
For the past three months, my Special Representative has helped the countries
of the region to put into place the necessary framework for the conference to be held
as soon as possible. In December 2003 and January 2004, two preparatory meetings
were held under the auspices of the United Nations and the African Union, and
others should take place in the coming months.
Given the progress made in the preparatory process, the Office of my Special
Representative will face an increasing workload over the coming months. In
particular, it must assist the countries of the region in organizing and providing
follow-up to preparatory meetings and in the establishment and smooth operation of
the national preparatory committees. Currently, however, the Office has only seven
administrators, including my Special Representative. In order for it to perform its
tasks efficiently, nine additional international civil servants will be needed. I hope
that I can count on the support of the international community to provide the Office
of my Special Representative with the resources necessary for the success of its
mission.
I should be grateful if you would bring this letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

04-41034 (E) 010704 010704

*0441034*
