S/PV.9409

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-eighth year

9409th meeting

Thursday, 31 August 2023, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mrs. Thomas-Greenfield. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(United States of America)

Members:

Albania . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Brazil. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ecuador. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Gabon . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Ghana . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Japan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Malta. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Mozambique . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Switzerland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Arab Emirates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 

Mr. Hoxha
Mr. França Danese
Mr. Geng Shuang
Mr. Montalvo Sosa
Mrs. Broadhurst Estival
Mrs. Ngyema Ndong
Mr. Issahaku
Mrs. Shino
Ms. Gatt
Mr. Afonso
Mr. Nebenzia
Mrs. Baeriswyl
Mrs. Nusseibeh
Mr. Kariuki

Agenda
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 3 August 2023 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2023/587)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of speeches delivered
in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records of the Security Council.
Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy
of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the
Verbatim Reporting Service, room AB-0601 (verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be
reissued electronically on the Official Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

23-25774 (E)
*2325774*

Accessible document

Please recycle

S/PV.9409

The situation in the Middle East

In a spirit of compromise and consensus, the United
Kingdom voted in favour today. The United Kingdom
is a strong supporter of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), which has a critical role
in maintaining peace and stability across the Blue
Line, preventing any further escalation that would be
catastrophic for the region.

The meeting was called to order at 10.30 a.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in the Middle East
Letter dated 3 August 2023 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2023/587)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Lebanon to participate in this meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

Members of the Council have before them document
S/2023/641, which contains the text of a draft resolution
submitted by France.
I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2023/587, which contains the text of a
letter dated 3 August 2023 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council.
The Council is ready to proceed to the vote on the
draft resolution before it. I shall put the draft resolution
to the vote now.
A vote was taken by show of hands.
In favour:
Albania, Brazil, , Ecuador, France, Gabon, Ghana,
Japan, Malta, Mozambique, Switzerland, United
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, United States of America
Against:
None
Abstaining:
China, Russian Federation
The President: The draft resolution received 13
votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions. The
draft resolution has been adopted as resolution 2695
(2023).
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements after the voting.
Mr. Kariuki (United Kingdom): Let me begin by
thanking France for its efforts as penholder.
2/7

31/08/2023

Resolution 1701 (2006) has always been clear:
UNIFIL is authorized to take all necessary action to
ensure the freedom of movement of its personnel and
to fulfil its duties. Resolution 2695 (2023) clearly
upholds that principle. We are pleased that the language
clarifying UNIFIL’s long-standing mandate to exercise
freedom of movement, which allows UNIFIL to
conduct independent patrols and respond quickly
to Blue Line violations and was added last year to
that end, was retained. However, it is unacceptable
that UNIFIL is still unable to access some locations
along the Blue Line border, including Green Without
Borders sites — in particular give Hizbullah’s selfacknowledged stockpiling of weapons, in violation of
resolution 1701 (2006).
The support UNIFIL provides the Lebanese Armed
Forces (LAF) has had a positive impact on the situation
across the Blue Line. It is therefore disappointing
that the logistical support — an important signal of
cooperation — was removed from this year’s mandate.
The United Kingdom has long been a proud supporter
of the Lebanese Armed Forces, and we will continue
our support to the LAF and internal security forces in
Lebanon as the pillars of Lebanon’s stability.
With the adoption of this mandate, we look to
UNIFIL to provide the stability that Lebanon needs,
and we pay tribute to its personnel.
Mr. França Danese (Brazil): I commend France
for its careful work as the penholder in the negotiations.
We also thank all Security Council members for their
constructive engagement throughout the process.
As a close friend of Lebanon and being proud of
its large community of persons of Lebanese descent,
Brazil has long been engaged in the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) and participated
in the negotiations with a sense of responsibility and
commitment. We fully understand and share the need
to keep UNIFIL’s mandate as robust as it is. But in the
present circumstances we think that the text, as finally
proposed by France after a careful negotiating process,
in no way weakens UNIFIL’s mandate, as it ensures that
23-25774

31/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

the mission will continue to operate in full freedom and
with the support and careful attention of the Council.
In addition, it addresses some of Lebanon’s concerns,
which at the same time, sends a powerful message to
that friendly country and its political leadership.
Brazil will continue to lend its unwavering support
for the mission. We are steadfast supporters of its
crucial activities in maintaining peace and stability in
the region, in particular in the current circumstances.
We reaffirm our commitment to Lebanon and its
brotherly people.
Mr. Geng Shuang (China) (spoke in Chinese):
As the resolution (resolution 2695 (2023)) put to the
vote failed to fully address the concerns of the State
concerned and of members of the Security Council,
the Council was unable to unanimously adopt an
extension of the mandate of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL). China expresses its regret
about that.
Respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity
of the State concerned is a basic prerequisite for
peacekeeping operations. And the consent of the
State concerned constitute a fundamental guiding
principle for such operations, while the understanding
and cooperation of the local population provide
the necessary conditions for a mission to conduct
its work smoothly. We support UNIFIL in further
enhancing its communication with the Lebanese
Government and military when fulfilling its mandate,
while also engaging in positive interactions with the
local population in order to increase mutual trust,
dispel misgivings and enhance the effectiveness of its
peacekeeping work in earnest.
The current security situation near the Blue Line
remains complex and fragile. We hope that all the
relevant parties will strictly implement the provisions
of the Security Council’s resolutions, make full use of
the liaison and coordination arrangements of UNIFIL to
strengthen communication and refrain from any action
that may escalate the situation. Lebanon has on many
occasions sent letters to the President of the Council
on the issue of the geographical names of relevant
places north of the Blue Line. The Council should take
seriously and properly address the views and appeals of
the country.
As one of the major troop-contributing countries
to United Nations peacekeeping operations, China
has always attached great importance to the safety of

S/PV.9409

peacekeepers, and we hope that the relevant parties
will create a favourable environment for UNIFIL to
implement its mandate and fully guarantee the safety of
its peacekeepers. As a permanent member of the Council
and a major troop-contributing country to UNIFIL, we
stand ready to work with the international community
to continue to support UNIFIL in fulfilling its mandate
and make positive contributions to maintaining peace
and stability in Lebanon.
Mrs. Shino (Japan): We thank the penholder,
France, for its tireless efforts to strike a sensitive
balance in the text of resolution 2695 (2023), taking
into consideration feedback from the ground, voices
from the host State and the region and various views in
the Security Council.
The activities of the United Nations Interim Force
in Lebanon (UNIFIL) are carried out for security and
stability in southern Lebanon and to support the people
who live there. Since 2006, UNIFIL has conducted its
operations in accordance with the mandate it was given
in resolution 1701 (2006). As UNIFIL finds itself in an
ever-more challenging environment, it is imperative
for the Council to support its irreplaceable function
in Lebanon and the region. For UNIFIL to continue to
fulfil its mandate and serve the people there, we believe
it is important to ensure that UNIFIL has freedom of
movement as it has had. We also acknowledge the fact
that UNIFIL works closely with the Lebanese Armed
Forces, as that has always been the case. With this
renewed mandate strongly supported by the Council,
we trust that UNIFIL will continue to play a critical role
in bringing stability to the region. We look forward to
continuing to engage with our fellow Council members
and other stakeholders on this important issue.
Finally, on this occasion, as I believe that this will
be the last meeting before the closure of the United
States Council presidency, I would like to thank the
United States, under the leadership of Ambassador
Thomas-Greenfield and her team, for its excellent work
during its presidency.
Mr. Issahaku (Ghana): We thank the penholder,
France, for its efforts in working with all members of
the Security Council to ensure broad agreement on
resolution 2695 (2023), on the renewal of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL).
As a long-standing troop-contributing country, we
believe that UNIFIL continues to have an important
role in preserving international peace and security,

23-257743/7

S/PV.9409

The situation in the Middle East

and we reaffirm the independence of UNIFIL in the
execution of its mandate.
We continue to urge the Governments of Israel and
Lebanon to work towards a permanent ceasefire and to
fully respect the Blue Line.
We emphasize the urgency of consolidating the
authority of the Lebanese Armed Forces and State
security institutions over Lebanese territory and note,
in that regard, the necessity for an early and nationally
oriented resolution of Lebanon’s political arrangements.
We reiterate the importance of the safety and
security of UNIFIL personnel and of all the parties
desisting from actions that could put the safety and
security of the personnel at risk.
In consonance with our support in the Council
during the adoption of resolution 1701 (2006), we
remain resolved to support international efforts towards
maintaining the ceasefire between Israel and Lebanon
and the promotion of peace between the two countries.
Mr. Hoxha (Albania): The situation in Lebanon
remains difficult, and the presence and action of the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL) are
of paramount importance for the peace and stability of
the country. It is with that imperative in mind that we
worked with France, the penholder, whom we thank
for its diligent work and efforts, and other Council
members in the process of the renewal of the mandate
adopted today.
UNIFIL’s presence remains critical for peace and
stability in the region as well. We profoundly believe
that the strengthening of UNIFIL’s mandate better
serves the country and its people, as well as peace
and security on the ground and beyond. Therefore,
consistent with our position on the issue, we highlight
the importance of unimpeded access for UNIFIL with
regard to its freedom of movement and independence
in carrying out its mandate, the necessity of which is
reflected by the security situation on the ground. We
believe that both the freedom of movement and the
security of UNIFIL peacekeepers remain of paramount
importance for the implementation of the mandate. We
voted in favour of resolution 2695 (2023) and reiterate
that UNIFIL must be able and fully empowered to
carry out its important mandate, without interference
or impositions, in support of the country, its people and
their future, as well as the United Nations action for
Lebanon and peace and security in the wider region.
4/7

31/08/2023

Mr. Nebenzia (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): The Russian Federation abstained in the
voting on resolution 2695 (2023), submitted by France,
on the mandate renewal of the United Nations Interim
Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), as a result of a series of
very contentious amendments made to the text at the
final stage of the difficult negotiation process. We
regret that the final text put to the vote today failed
to maintain the fragile compromise that had been
previously found by the penholders.
We have consistently always proceeded from the
need to take into account the opinion of the country that
is hosting a United Nations peacekeeping contingent
on its territory. In this case it is Lebanon, whose
leadership has repeatedly conveyed to the members of
the Security Council an unequivocal message on the
need to strengthen the coordination among the Interim
Force, the Government and the army of the Republic
of Lebanon, including with a view to ensuring the
protection and security of United Nations personnel on
the ground.
We would like to emphasize that our position
during the voting was based solely on our disagreement
with some of the wording in the resolution. At the same
time, we continue to support the activities of the United
Nations Interim Force in Lebanon, which play a key
stabilizing role in the context of the ongoing tensions
along the Blue Line. We hope that the resolution
adopted today will not complicate the situation in
southern Lebanon. We call on the leadership of
UNIFIL to continue to coordinate its actions in its area
of operations with the Government of Lebanon.
Mrs. Nusseibeh (United Arab Emirates): The
fact is that tensions on the Blue Line are at a level
unseen since the 2006 war. Over the past year, on a
daily basis, Hizbullah has been making a mockery of
resolutions 1701 (2006) and 1559 (2004). It has erected
concrete military outposts and observation towers,
conducted military drills with live fire and prevented
the freedom of movement of the United Nations
Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL), while brazenly
attacking peacekeeping forces. It has also actively
perpetuated Lebanon’s myriad crises, obstructed the
investigation into the devastating Beirut port explosion
and paralysed key institutions of the State. Those
extremely inflammatory actions threaten a dangerous
escalation in our region. That is why the United Arab
Emirates worked hard with the penholder and Security
Council members in extensive negotiations to ensure
23-25774

31/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

that UNIFIL’s mandate addresses developments on the
ground that strike at the core of UNIFIL’s ability to
fulfil that mandate.
UNIFIL continues to face challenges to its freedom
of movement and the lack of access to locations of
interest, as reported by the Secretary-General. As
such, we sought to improve the text to better address
those challenges and to support UNIFIL’s efforts
to maintain calm and stability in south Lebanon and
the entire region. We therefore welcome the clear
language added to the text of resolution 2695 (2023)
on the independence of UNIFIL. The text calls on the
Government of Lebanon to facilitate UNIFIL’s prompt
and full access to sites requested by UNIFIL, including
“all locations of interest”. We underscore that the
Government of Lebanon must meet its responsibilities
with regard to UNIFIL’s freedom of movement, which
it has been failing to do on several occasions.
While we would have liked to have seen no ambiguity
in paragraph 15, as in resolution 2650 (2022), let us be
clear that the text of paragraph 15 simply recognizes
what the status-of-forces agreement foresees with
regard to coordination for large movements of troops.
In no way can it be interpreted or misused to delay,
hinder or restrict UNIFIL’s freedom of movement or
ability to operate independently.
We are also pleased that, for the first time and at the
request of the United Arab Emirates, the resolution has
specifically addressed the need for UNIFIL to access
unauthorized firing ranges. UNIFIL’s clear freedom
of movement is further affirmed by the unambiguous
language in paragraph 16, which makes it clear that
announced and unannounced patrols should not be
restricted or hindered.
We thank the penholder, France, for its positive
engagement with our proposals and their reflection of
them in the final text. Accordingly, the United Arab
Emirates voted in favour of the resolution.
However, we are disappointed with the needless
compromise to remove the unqualified reference to
the Israeli occupation of Al-Ghajar, which was in
previous drafts and, we think, enjoyed widespread
support in the Council. We would also have preferred
clear references to the increasing obstacles hampering
UNIFIL’s freedom of movement and its ability to reach
all important sites, including areas where containers
are placed by the Hizbullah-affiliated Green Without
Borders. The language around locations of interest

S/PV.9409

should help UNIFIL monitor that activity more closely
in future.
The United Arab Emirates also fails to understand
the hesitation to name Hizbullah and its group, who are
actively undermining UNIFIL’s ability to conduct its
mandate within its areas of operation. No amount of
accommodation will change the fact that the pursuit of
progress in Lebanon through partnership with Hizbullah
has yielded only disappointment and misery, not least
of all for the people of Lebanon. We also condemn the
agendas aimed at silencing voices calling for peace in
Lebanon while providing platforms to hostile voices
who seek to undermine its security and stability.
The United Arab Emirates has always been and
remains committed to supporting Lebanon’s security
and stability. Seventeen years ago, the United Arab
Emirates was closely involved in regional and
international efforts to bring the war between Israel
and Hizbullah to an end, not least by helping to convey
the regional point of view to the Council. Today we
continue that role by putting the interests of the people
of Lebanon and the entire region first and foremost. We
look forward to the day when Lebanon can move steadily
towards stability, reform, peace and development.
As this is your last meeting, Madam President, I
wish to join others in congratulating you and your team
on a successful presidency and wish Albania all the
best next month.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of the United States.
The United States is pleased to vote “yes” on the
United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon (UNIFIL)
mandate. We thank France, the penholder, for all its
efforts to bring us to this point.
We are extremely grateful for the service and
sacrifice of the men and women who staff that
important mission in pursuit of a more stable and
prosperous future for the Lebanese people and the
greater region. The ability of UNIFIL personnel to
carry out their responsibilities independent of any
restrictions is essential. And we have had long-standing
concerns regarding actions by some actors to obstruct
the mission’s freedom of movement.
Significantly, resolution 2695 (2023) adopted today
includes language strongly reaffirming UNIFIL’s
full freedom of movement, and its ability to conduct
announced and unannounced patrols. It is imperative

23-257745/7

S/PV.9409

The situation in the Middle East

that be fully implemented and that UNIFIL not face
unacceptable obstacles to carrying out its mission.
We know UNIFIL has been unable to access a
range of troubling sites across the Blue Line, including
illegal firing ranges, Green Without Borders sites,
rocket launch sites and tunnel sites. It is clear the
main purpose of those sites is to facilitate Hizbullah’s
operations in southern Lebanon along the Blue Line.
That constrains the mission from fully achieving the
directives set forth in the mandate and hinders the
mission’s ability to reduce the likelihood of conflict.
The United States, as a steadfast partner of Lebanon,
calls on the Government to take additional steps to
ensure full implementation of the mandate, consistent
with the terms of the status-of-forces agreement. That
includes additional steps to mitigate any restrictions
on UNIFIL’s freedom of movement. We continue to
support efforts to address other restrictions and believe
it would be valuable for the Secretary-General to
produce a report on that issue with recommendations
for a way forward.
We are committed to addressing the activities of
Green Without Borders. The United States Treasury
Department sanctioned Green Without Borders, as
well as its leaders, earlier this month for its activities
in support of Hizbullah. And we made clear when
announcing those sanctions that we will continue
to support Lebanese civil society groups protecting
Lebanon’s natural environment while relentlessly
pursuing Hizbullah and its support networks.
We believe the resolution adopted today and the
broad support for it reaffirm UNIFIL’s strong mandate
and its freedom of movement. We therefore strongly
endorse it.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Lebanon.
Ms. Mrad (Lebanon) (spoke in Arabic): As a matter
of fact, I was not planning to take the floor, and I did
not prepare a written statement. However, I have just
jotted down some points on the paper in front of me.
My statement will therefore be improvised and coming
from the heart.
At the outset, I would like to express, in my
capacity as the representative of the Permanent Mission
of Lebanon to the United Nations and on behalf of the
6/7

31/08/2023

Government of Lebanon, our thanks to all Council
members who have tried over the course of this longwinding path to listen to Lebanon’s concerns and reflect
them in resolution 2695 (2023) adopted today. I also
specially thank the penholder, France, for the efforts
undertaken to arrive at a text that could at a minimum
win the consensus of all members.
Unfortunately, this is the first time that two
Security Council members abstained in the voting on
the resolution concerning the extension of the mandate
of the United Nations Interim Force in Lebanon
(UNIFIL). That is a very significant indicator.
I would like, first of all, to reaffirm from this
rostrum my country’s commitment to resolution 1701
(2006) and to the request to have peacekeeping troops
on the ground in Lebanon. That request has been
submitted year after year through an official letter from
Lebanon addressed to the President of the Security
Council and the Secretary-General demanding an
extension of UNIFIL’s mandate. That is to say, their
presence in Lebanon is upon Lebanese request. The
troops are for peacekeeping, not for imposing peace.
Regrettably, the text did not fully reflect all
Lebanese concerns. It failed to take into consideration
the particular characteristics of the situation on the
ground. I am not saying that there are certain groups or
individuals in Lebanon rejecting this resolution, whereas
others approve of it. I am referring instead to the issue
of sovereignty. Lebanon made great efforts to introduce
amendments to the text only to maintain Lebanese
sovereignty and that of the Lebanese Government.
UNIFIL troops have full freedom of movement, but
only in coordination with the Lebanese Government.
Lebanon has never rejected, denounced or objected to
the freedom of movement that UNIFIL troops enjoy.
However, it was clear throughout the long path of
negotiation that such freedom of movement must be
controlled, first to maintain the safety of the troops and
secondly to deliver on their tasks, pursuant to resolution
1701 (2006) and the Headquarters Agreement.
With regard to AL-Ghajar, or the area north of
Al-Ghajar, Lebanon did not request to change the
name of the geographic location. Instead, it asked
for correcting and rectifying the use of the name,
specifically that north of Al-Ghajar village is simply
a notion of direction, not a new name. In that regard,
the area north of Al-Ghajar was used the first time in
the extension of the mandate-related resolutions. That
23-25774

31/08/2023

The situation in the Middle East

S/PV.9409

is why any correction in that context should be made
through extension resolutions. As such, the request is
related to editing rather, than to changing the name.

VII, as if we are dealing with a disguised Chapter VII
resolution? Why should we stick a finger in our eye?
Why create tension where there is no reason for it?

With regard to the occupation or presence north
of Al-Ghajar, we must call a spade a spade. In his
letter (S/2023/587, the Secretary-General was clear,
and the United Nations narratives are clear when they
describe that presence as occupation. We value the
reports of the Secretary-General for their consistent
language. We cannot cherry-pick; that fails to take into
consideration the particularities of those countries.
What we discuss in the corridors of the United Nations
and in the decision-making organs takes us to platonic
realms. Those narratives and utopias that we all read
as diplomats working here make us look forward to
reaching such realms in reality, but the real world is
totally different. Those texts and narratives must be
able to reflect the realities on the ground and to take
into consideration the sensitivity and particularities
of the situation. Otherwise, there will be a separation
between the text and the reality. That, in turn, would
cause a setback and will not allow us to reap the benefits
that we all seek. All of us have the same common goal,
but we differ in the modalities and approaches that we
take. The devil is in the details, as they say.

This resolution and the presence of UNIFIL troops
in south Lebanon are the result of a conflict between
Lebanon and Israel. It is not a resolution due to a conflict
between a group of Lebanese people and UNIFIL. Why
distort the conflict and give the impression that the
problem is between a group of Lebanese people, who
are part of the national fabric in Lebanon, and UNIFIL?
That is not the case. There is very good relationship
between UNIFIL and the people in the south.

In conclusion, the resolution to extend the mandate
of UNIFIL falls under Chapter VI of the Charter of
the United Nations. It was prompted by a request from
Lebanon. It was not imposed on Lebanon. Why, then,
resort to language in the resolution that looks very
similar to that in resolutions adopted under Chapter

UNIFIL undertakes development projects along
with its peacekeeping role. Those are quick-impact
projects that establish bridges between UNIFIL and the
people of the south. When I say people, I do not mean a
certain group of people. Rather, I refer to all the people
of south Lebanon. There is no need to create disputes,
because there is no reason for such disputes. The text
should help to establish security, stability and peace,
which we all want as a goal. Let the text be a supporting
element, not a source of tension.
Through you, Madam President, we reiterate our
thanks to all Security Council members. Lebanon
reaffirms its commitment to all Council resolutions.
Our request is a right one. When we discuss texts of
resolutions, we must take into account peoples’ concerns
and governmental requests — because Governments
know better.
The meeting rose at 11.10 a.m.

23-257747/7
