A/56/432–S/2001/934

United Nations

General Assembly
Security Council

Distr.: General
3 October 2001
Original: English

General Assembly
Fifty-sixth session
Agenda item 43
The situation in Afghanistan and its implications
for international peace and security

Security Council
Fifty-sixth year

Identical letters dated 3 October 2001 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the General Assembly and the
President of the Security Council
In view of the grave humanitarian and political situation affecting Afghanistan
and the surrounding region, it is my intention to reappoint Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi as
my Special Representative for Afghanistan. It may be recalled that in 1999 I
indicated that Mr. Brahimi’s activities would be “frozen” until such time as
circumstances changed to justify his renewed intervention (see A/54/536S/1999/1145). I believe strongly that the time has come for him to resume his role.
I would want to entrust my Special Representative with overall authority for
the humanitarian and political endeavours of the United Nations in Afghanistan. He
will also initiate preparations for the development of plans for the rehabilitation of
that shattered country. Mr. Brahimi will oversee the activities of, and will be
supported by, the two existing pillars of the United Nations system specifically
responsible for activities in Afghanistan: the United Nations Special Mission to
Afghanistan and the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Assistance of the
United Nations Secretariat.
My Special Representative will keep the members of the General Assembly
and of the Security Council regularly informed of his ongoing activities.
Attached is a copy of Mr. Brahimi’s terms of reference (see annex).
I would be grateful if you would bring this matter to the attention of the
members of the General Assembly and of the Security Council.
(Signed) Kofi A. Annan

01-56315 (E) 031001

*0156315*

A/56/432
S/2001/934

Annex
Special Representative for Afghanistan
Terms of reference
The mandate of the Special Representative encompasses political and
humanitarian aspects. In this connection, he will have overarching authority over
United Nations activities in Afghanistan and the region. While focusing initially on
peacemaking efforts and humanitarian needs, he will also initiate preparations for
the transition to the rehabilitation phase. He will oversee and provide guidance and
direction to relevant United Nations programmes and offices in order to ensure
overall coordination and coherence of action.
With regard to political activities, the Special Representative will work closely
with the Department of Political Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat and the
Personal Representative of the Secretary-General for Afghanistan and with the
United Nations Special Mission to Afghanistan, which was established by the
General Assembly in its resolution 48/208. He will manage peacemaking activities
involving the warring parties and others concerned, with a view to facilitating the
establishment of a fully representative multi-ethnic and broad-based government.
The humanitarian dimensions of the mandate of the Special Representative
will be carried out in close consultation with the Emergency Relief Coordinator and
the Regional Humanitarian Coordinator for the Afghan Crisis. He will oversee
negotiations with all concerned parties for safe and unhindered humanitarian access
to all populations in need, and will advocate for humanitarian space and the rights
and protection of affected populations. The Special Representative will ensure that
the humanitarian and human rights dimensions of the evolving situation are central
to political and security discussions.

2
