United Nations

A/54/PV.88

General Assembly

Official Records

Fifty-fourth session

88th plenary meeting
Thursday, 23 December 1999, 6 p.m.
New York

President:

Gurirab . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Namibia)

The meeting was called to order at 8.50 p.m.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/235).

Agenda item 99
Sustainable development and international economic
cooperation
(f)

Implementation of the Programme of Action for
the Least Developed Countries for the 1990s

The President: We shall now turn to the draft
decision, entitled “Documents relating to the
implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the 1990s”.
The Second Committee adopted the draft decision.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

Report of the Second Committee (A/54/587/Add.6)
The draft decision was adopted.
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/693)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Second Committee in paragraph 9 of its report
(A/54/587/Add.6) and on the draft decision recommended
by the Second Committee in paragraph 10 of the same
report.
We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled
“Implementation of the Programme of Action for the Least
Developed Countries for the 1990s”.
The report of the Fifth Committee on the programme
budget implications of the draft resolution is contained in
document A/54/693.
The Second Committee adopted the draft resolution.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the
same?

00-22263 (E)

The President: May I take it that it is the wish of
the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
sub-item (f) of agenda item 99?
It was so decided.
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded its consideration of all the reports of the
Second Committee before it.
Reports of the Fifth Committee
The President: The General Assembly will now
consider the reports of the Fifth Committee on agenda
items 117, 120, 123, 125, 126, 142, 143, 150 and 172,
151, 163, 164, 166, 173, 12, 119, 124, 121 and 118.
I request the Rapporteur of the Fifth Committee,
Mr. Jan Piotr Jaremczuk of Poland, to introduce the
reports of the Fifth Committee in one intervention.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of speeches
delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original speeches only.
They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room C-178. Corrections will
be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mr. Jaremczuk (Poland), Rapporteur of the Fifth
Committee: I have the great honour today to present to the
General Assembly the reports of the Fifth Committee on
the agenda items it considered during the main part of the
fifty-fourth session of the Assembly. It should be noted that
during the main part of the session the Fifth Committee
dealt with 25 agenda items that were allocated to it.
Concerning agenda item 12 entitled, “Report of the
Economic and Social Council”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/54/668. In
paragraph 4 of that report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly that it decide to take note of the
relevant chapters of the report of the Economic and Social
Council, namely chapters I, VII (sections B and C) and IX.
That draft decision was adopted by the Committee without
a vote.
With regard to agenda item 117, entitled “Financial
reports and audited financial statements, and reports of the
Board of Auditors”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/54/506/Add.1. In paragraph 7 of
document A/54/506/Add.1, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
which was adopted by the Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 118, entitled “Review of
the efficiency of the administrative and financial
functioning of the United Nations”, the report of the
Committee is contained in documents A/54/511 and
A/54/511/Add.l. In paragraph 7 of document
A/54/511/Add.1, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of two draft decisions. Both draft
decisions were adopted by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 119, entitled “Programme
budget for the biennium 1998-1999”, the report of the
Committee is contained in documents A/54/508 and
A/54/508/Add.1, and in paragraph 6 of the latter document
the Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 120, entitled “Programme
planning”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/676. In paragraph 8 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution which was adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 121, entitled “Proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001”, the report

2

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
of the Fifth Committee is contained in document
A/54/691. In paragraph 5 of that report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of five
draft resolutions, all of which were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 123, entitled “Joint
Inspection Unit”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/54/507/Add.1. In paragraph 7 of that
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft decision, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 124, entitled “Pattern of
conferences”, the report of the Fifth Committee is
contained in document A/54/690. In that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee later
adopted without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 125, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/54/685. In that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution and of two draft decisions.
The draft resolution and both draft decisions were adopted
by the Committee without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 126, entitled “United
Nations common system”, the report of the Committee is
contained in document A/54/677. In that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.
Regarding agenda item 142, entitled “Financing of
the International Tribunal for the Prosecution of Persons
Responsible for Serious Violations of International
Humanitarian Law Committed in the Territory of the
Former Yugoslavia since 1991”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/54/678. In
paragraph 6 of that report, the Committee recommends to
the General Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution,
which the Committee adopted without a vote.
With regard to agenda item 143, entitled “Financing
of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Prosecution
of Persons Responsible for Genocide and Other Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law Committed
in the Territory of Rwanda and Rwandan Citizens
Responsible for Genocide and Other Such Violations

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Committed in the Territory of Neighbouring States between
1 January and 31 December 1994”, the report of the
Committee is contained in document A/54/679. In that
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which the
Committee adopted without a vote.
Concerning agenda item 150, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Observer Mission in Sierra Leone”, and
item 172, entitled “Financing of the United Nations Mission
in Sierra Leone”, the report of the Committee is contained
in document A/54/686. In that report, the Committee
recommends to the General Assembly the adoption of a
draft resolution, which was adopted by the Committee
without a vote.
In connection with agenda item 151, entitled
“Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing of
the United Nations peacekeeping operations”, the report of
the Fifth Committee is contained in document A/54/684. In
that report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of two draft resolutions, three draft
decisions and one oral draft decision on the question of
death and disability benefits. The draft resolutions, the three
draft decisions and the oral decision were adopted by the
Committee without a vote.

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
Administration in East Timor”, the report of the Fifth
Committee is contained in document A/54/687. In that
report, the Committee recommends to the General
Assembly the adoption of a draft resolution, which was
adopted by the Committee without a vote.
The President: If there is no proposal under rule 66
of the rules of procedure, I shall take it that the General
Assembly decides not to discuss the reports of the Fifth
Committee that are before the Assembly today.
It was so decided.
The President: Statements will therefore be limited
to explanations of vote or position.
The positions of delegations regarding the
recommendations of the Fifth Committee have been made
clear in the Committee and are reflected in the relevant
official records.
May I remind members that under paragraph 7 of
decision 34/401, the General Assembly agreed that
“When the same draft resolution is considered
in a Main Committee and in plenary meeting, a
delegation should, as far as possible, explain its vote
only once, i.e., either in the Committee or in plenary
meeting unless that delegation's vote in plenary
meeting is different from its vote in the Committee.”

With regard to agenda item 163, entitled “Review of
the implementation of General Assembly resolution 48/218
B”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in
document A/54/673. In paragraph 6 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.

May I also remind delegations that, also in
accordance with General Assembly decision 34/401,
explanations of vote are limited to 10 minutes.

Regarding agenda item 164, entitled “Human resources
management”, the report of the Committee is contained in
document A/54/680. In paragraph 7 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.

Before we begin to take action on the
recommendations contained in the reports of the Fifth
Committee, I should like to advise representatives that we
are going to proceed to take decisions in the same manner
as was done in the Fifth Committee, unless otherwise
indicated.

Concerning agenda item 166, entitled “Financing of
the United Nations Interim Administration Mission in
Kosovo”, the report of the Fifth Committee is contained in
document A/54/674. In paragraph 7 of that report, the
Committee recommends to the General Assembly the
adoption of a draft resolution, which the Committee
adopted without a vote.

Agenda item 117 (continued)

Finally, in connection with agenda item 173, entitled
“Financing of the United Nations Transitional

Financial reports and audited financial statements,
and reports of the Board of Auditors
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/506/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Committee

3

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999

adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May I consider
that the Assembly wishes to do likewise?

decisions recommended in paragraph 10 of the same
report.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/13 B).

We turn first to the draft resolution, entitled “Scale
of assessments for the apportionment of the expenses of
the United Nations”. The Fifth Committee adopted the
draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?

The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 117.
Agenda item 120
Programme planning
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/676)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 8 of its report. The Fifth
Committee adopted the draft resolution without a vote. May
I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/236).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 120.

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/237
A to C).
The President: We will now turn to draft decision
I, entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft decision I without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President: We now turn to draft decision II,
entitled “Scale of assessments for the apportionment of
the expenses of the United Nations”. The Fifth Committee
adopted draft decision II without a vote. May I take it
that the General Assembly wishes to do the same?

Agenda item 123 (continued)
Draft decision II was adopted.
Joint Inspection Unit
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/507/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Committee
adopted the draft decision without a vote. May I take it that
the General Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 123.
Agenda item 125 (continued)
Scale of assessments for the apportionment of the
expenses of the United Nations

The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 125.
Agenda item 126
United Nations common system
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/677)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report. The Committee
adopted the draft resolution entitled “United Nations
common system: report of the International Civil Service
Commission” without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/238).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/685)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 9 of its report and the two draft

4

The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 126.
Agenda item 142

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Financing of the International Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Serious
Violations of International Humanitarian Law
Committed in the Territory of the Former Yugoslavia
since 1991
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/678)
The President: The Assembly will take a decision on
the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted
the draft resolution without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/239).
The President: The General Assembly has thus
concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda item
142.
Agenda item 143
Financing of the International Criminal Tribunal for the
Prosecution of Persons Responsible for Genocide and
Other Serious Violations of International Humanitarian
Law Committed in the Territory of Rwanda and
Rwandan Citizens Responsible for Genocide and Other
Such Violations Committed in the Territory of
Neighbouring States between 1 January and 31
December 1994

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
hoped to have adequate time to address the issues related
to the proposed budgets thoroughly. As we have said, it
is fundamentally important for the Tribunals to be able to
carry out their functions effectively and with an efficient
use of resources. We have expressed our concern about
the important issues relating to administrative functions
that remain to be addressed. We are pleased that the
resolutions just adopted will allow a thorough discussion
of these issues while guaranteeing that the functioning of
the Tribunals will not be hampered in any way.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 143.
Agenda items 150 and 172
Financing of the United Nations Observer Mission in
Sierra Leone
Financing of the United Nations Mission in Sierra
Leone
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/686)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/679)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended in paragraph
6 of its report. The Fifth Committee adopted the draft
resolution without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly
wishes to do likewise?

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/241).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda items 150 and 172.
Agenda item 151 (continued)

The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/240).
The President: I call on the representative of Finland,
who wishes to speak in explanation of position on the
resolution just adopted.
Mr. Kääriäinen (Finland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union was pleased to join the consensus
on the adoption of resolutions 54/239 and 54/240. The
European Union has continuously supported the work of the
International Criminal Tribunals. For that reason, we had

Administrative and budgetary aspects of the financing
of the United Nations peacekeeping operations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/684)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 13 of its report and on the
four draft decisions recommended by the Fifth Committee
in paragraph 14 of the same report.

5

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The Assembly will first turn to draft resolution I,
entitled “Administrative and budgetary aspects of the
financing of the United Nations peacekeeping operations”.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/242).
The President: Draft resolution II is entitled “Support
account for peacekeeping operations”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution II
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/243).
The President: The Assembly will now turn to draft
decision I, entitled “Placement of the Republic of Kiribati
for peacekeeping assessments”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I without
a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President: Draft decision II is entitled
“Placement of the Republic of Nauru for peacekeeping
assessments”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision II without
a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft decision II was adopted.
The President: The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision III, entitled “Placement of Tonga for peacekeeping
assessments”, without a vote. May I take it that the General
Assembly wishes to do the same?
Draft decision III was adopted.
The President: Draft decision IV is entitled “Death
and disability benefits”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision IV
without a vote. May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to do likewise?

6

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
Draft decision IV was adopted.
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 151.
Agenda item 163
Review of the implementation of General Assembly
resolution 48/218 B
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/673)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (54/244).
The President: We have concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 163.
Agenda item 164
Human resources management
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/680)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft decision
without a vote. May I take it that the General Assembly
wishes to do likewise?
The draft decision was adopted.
The President: The Assembly has thus concluded
this stage of its consideration of agenda item 164.
Agenda item 166
Financing of the United Nations
Administration Mission in Kosovo

Interim

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/674)

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999

The President: The Assembly will now proceed to
take a decision on the draft resolution recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I consider that the Assembly wishes to
do likewise?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/245).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 166.

Agenda item 119
Programme budget for the biennium 1998-1999
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/508/Add.1)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/54/508/Add.1).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Agenda item 173
Financing of the United
Administration in East Timor

It was so decided.

Nations

Transitional
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution
54/247).

Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/687)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/54/687).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
The draft resolution was adopted (resolution 54/246).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 173.
Agenda item 12 (continued)

The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 119.
Agenda item 124
Pattern of conferences
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/690)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft resolution recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 6 of its report (A/54/690).
The Fifth Committee adopted the draft resolution
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?

Report of the Economic and Social Council
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/668)
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the draft decision recommended by the Fifth
Committee in paragraph 4 of its report (A/54/668).

The draft resolution was adopted (resolutions 54/248
A to E).
The President: We have thus concluded this stage
of our consideration of agenda item 124.
Agenda item 121

May I take it that the Assembly wishes to adopt the
draft decision?

Proposed programme budget for the biennium 20002001

The draft decision was adopted.
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/691)
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of those
chapters of the report of the Economic and Social Council
which were allocated to the Fifth Committee?

The President: I call on the representative of the
United States of America for an explanation of vote
before the voting.

7

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mr. Hays (United States of America): I wish to
comment on agenda item 121, “Proposed programme
budget for the biennium 2000-2001”. This year's
programme budget process was an exhausting one for all
involved. Nonetheless, we believe that the outcome reflects
in large measure the combined interests of many nations
and regional groupings. Any process that involves 188
Member States and that aims for fairness and transparency
will inevitably entail a rigorous debate that requires each
nation to prioritize its goals. Creativity and flexibility are
essential if consensus is to be achieved. That was certainly
the case this year and we wish to express our gratitude to
the many Member States that approached this process
openly and were ready and willing to engage in substantive
negotiations on the merits of the United Nations budget.
That the product of this arduous shared effort is a budget
premised on fiscal discipline is a tribute to the shared
interest of Member States in a United Nations that is more
streamlined, efficient and effective than ever before.
As we have indicated, the United States is unable to
associate itself with the consensus on this budget because
it is not in keeping with our national policy requiring strict
budget discipline. It is our view, however, that this budget
represents an important step in the direction of a revitalized
United Nations that is stronger and more relevant than ever
before. Setting this world body on a sound footing requires
more than simply balancing the budget; it requires the
active participation of the family of nations coming together
around a common set of priorities and embracing sound
management principles. We sense a growing awareness of
this need within this body and an increased commitment to
meeting it.

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
Overall, we are pleased to say that this process has
brought us closer together in our common commitment to
the United Nations global agenda.
The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the five draft resolutions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 5 of its report (A/54/691).
We turn first to draft resolution I, entitled “Questions
relating to the proposed programme budget for the
biennium 2000-2001”.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft resolution I
without a vote. May I take it that the Assembly wishes to
do the same?
Draft resolution I was adopted (resolution 54/249).
The President: Draft resolution II, entitled
“Programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001”, was
adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly too wishes to adopt the draft
resolution?
Draft resolution II was adopted (resolution 54/250).
The President: Draft resolution III, entitled “Special
subjects relating to the proposed programme budget for
the biennium 2000-2001”, was adopted by the Fifth
Committee without a vote. May I take it that the
Assembly wishes to adopt the draft resolution?
Draft resolution III was adopted (resolution 54/251).

For our part, we believe that the United States has, as
a priority, set a course that, once completed, will strengthen
the underpinnings of this institution. Our Government is
committed to working vigorously towards resolving the
arrears issue with the active participation of the Member
States over the course of the next year.

The President: The Fifth Committee adopted draft
resolution IV, entitled “Unforeseen and extraordinary
expenses for the biennium 2000-2001”, without a vote.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to do the same?

We feel that this budget is sound and structured to
meet the Secretary-General's priorities, while adhering to
the mandate given to this body to operate responsibly and
within financial limits. For the future, the United States
wishes to express its firm support for a budget process that
is transparent and efficient and adheres to the policies
endorsed by the General Assembly and the Secretariat
regarding budget and personnel practices.

The President: Draft resolution V, entitled
“Working capital fund for the biennium 2000-2001”, was
adopted by the Fifth Committee without a vote. May I
take it that the Assembly likewise wishes to adopt the
draft resolution?

Draft resolution IV was adopted (resolution 54/252).

Draft resolution V was adopted (resolution 54/253).
The President: I now call on those representatives
wishing to explain their positions on the resolutions just
adopted.

8

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mr. Kääriäinen (Finland): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union.
The European Union expresses its deep appreciation
to the coordinator for agenda item 121, Mr. Nester OdagaJalomayo of Uganda, for a truly outstanding job. We want
to express our gratitude and admiration also to the
Controller, Mr. Jean-Pierre Halbwachs, to the Director of
the Programme Planning and Budget Division, Mr. Warren
Sach, and to their team. Over the past weeks, along with
the Fifth Committee secretariat, and in particular Ms. Nora
Benary, they have served the Committee in its informal
consultations tirelessly and with grace in the context of the
very difficult modus operandi of the Committee.
The European Union approached the negotiations on
the proposed programme budget determined to review each
and every section of the budget on its own merits. We
wanted to see the United Nations perform effectively, with
budgetary discipline, efficiency and an overall approach of
getting value for money.
During the negotiations, the European Union was
never guided by a need to reach a “benchmark” on the
budget. Furthermore, we made an honest effort to meet the
substantive concerns of other delegations, such as those
belonging to the Group of 77. The result reflects the
objectives of all delegations. We would, however, have
preferred a more dynamic budget, more oriented towards
the priorities of the Organization.
We are happy that the budget has been adopted
without a vote. That reflects the spirit of resolution 41/213.
Mr. Barnwell (Guyana): I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the Group of 77 and China. The adoption of
the draft resolutions on which we have just taken action
concludes protracted, arduous, intense and painful
negotiations. During the entire negotiating process, the
Group of 77 and China participated in a spirit of mutual
understanding, cooperation and great flexibility. However,
we regret to note that some of our negotiating partners took
totally unrealistic positions, which made the process very
complex and cumbersome.
The Group of 77 and China recognize the role of the
Secretary-General as the chief administrative officer of the
Organization under Article 97 of the Charter. It is his
responsibility to submit to the General Assembly for its
consideration and approval the proposed programme budget
of the Organization under the Regulations and Rules
Governing Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
the Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the
Methods of Evaluation. In accordance with the
Regulations and Rules, the Secretary-General has to
submit the proposed programme budget on the basis of
the General Assembly's decisions on the budget outline.
The Group of 77 and China reaffirm that the level of
resources for the programme budget should be adequate
for full implementation of all mandated programmes and
activities. There cannot be any arbitrary decision to lower
the level of resources or to impose a ceiling which could
have an adverse impact on effective programme delivery.
The allocation of resources to the budget has to be
justified on the basis of the requirements of output
delivery and the priorities set in the Medium Term Plan,
in accordance with the Regulations and Rules Governing
Programme Planning, the Programme Aspects of the
Budget, the Monitoring of Implementation and the
Methods of Evaluation.
We recall that, at one stage during the negotiating
process, efforts were made to take decisions outside the
Fifth Committee. In this regard, the Group wishes to
reaffirm the role of the Fifth Committee under rule 153
of the rules of procedure of the General Assembly, by
which the Committee is entrusted with considering all
administrative, financial and budgetary questions.
We would like to conclude by stating that the Group
of 77 and China remain attached to the current budgetary
process, which should be fully respected. In that
connection, the Group stresses that any changes in that
process must be subject for prior consideration and
approval by the General Assembly. We would like to
underscore that it is the exclusive prerogative of the
General Assembly to determine and decide on the
budgetary process.
The Group of 77 and China regret that the
negotiating process throughout the consultations on the
proposed programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001
left room for improvement. The conditions under which
the Fifth Committee was forced to work did not promote
smooth and transparent negotiations. The extraordinary
delay in the submission of a number of documents
multiplied the difficulties faced by the Committee during
the process. That caused extreme difficulties, particularly
for small delegations. We emphasize that in the future the
Secretariat should submit all documents in accordance
with the six-week rule. And all draft resolutions with
financial implications should be submitted in accordance

9

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
with the provisions of paragraph 13 of General Assembly
decision 34/401.
Finally, the Group would like to express its deep
appreciation for the efforts made by the coordinator for this
agenda item, Mr. Nester Odaga-Jalomayo of Uganda. His
tireless efforts helped the Committee reach consensus on
this important agenda item. We also appreciate the
commendable efforts made by all the Secretariat staff and
their invaluable assistance to the Fifth Committee in this
prolonged negotiating process.
Mr. Duval (Canada): I have the honour to speak on
behalf of the delegations of Australia, New Zealand and
Canada in explanation of position following the adoption of
the programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001.
We are pleased that, overall, fiscal discipline has been
maintained. We are also pleased that considerable savings
have been achieved to compensate for increased costs. The
Fifth Committee agreed to some justifiable reductions in the
new budget as well as to some additional proposals.
Such negotiations inevitably entail political
compromises on the part of all delegations, but the fact
remains that the Secretary-General, in his role as chief
administrative officer of the Organization, had not requested
most of these additional proposals. Nor were the proposals
reviewed and scrutinized by the Advisory Committee on
Administrative and Budgetary Questions or by the
Committee on Programme and Coordination.
In our view, significant departures from the SecretaryGeneral's proposals and from the advice of the expert
bodies mandated to review the budget undermine the
established budgetary and programme procedures of the
United Nations.
In his statement on the proposed programme budget,
Ambassador Fowler, speaking on behalf of Australia, New
Zealand and Canada, stated our desire to see a more
concise budget resolution that focused on governance issues
and not on administrative minutiae. Unfortunately, that was
not the case. We will continue to advocate a more strategic
approach.
We regret that one Member State was unable to join
the consensus, but we take note of the explanation given.
Nonetheless, we are pleased with the outcome and join in
the consensus.

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
Negotiations have been lengthy, difficult and
delicate. We would, of course, have preferred an outcome
in which no additions were made to the original proposals
of the Secretary-General. However, we recognize that
compromises were necessary in order to achieve the
desired result. We welcome this agreement and urge all
Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full,
on time and without conditions.
In conclusion, I should like to thank the coordinator
of the resolution, Mr. Nester Odaga-Jalomayo of Uganda,
for his tireless efforts, and Mr. Warren Sach and the
personnel of the Budget Division for their high level of
professionalism and for the expert advice they provided
to the Committee in the pursuit of its goals.
Mr. Belinga-Eboutou (Cameroon) (spoke in
French): Cameroon is speaking on behalf of the African
Group at this meeting devoted to the budget. Since this is
the last meeting of the fifty-fourth session to be held
before the third millennium, I would like to convey the
views of the African Group on the chairing of our work
to date and on the budget.
First of all, Mr. President, regarding the way our
work has been guided, the African Group is pleased to
say that you have shouldered this task with great
diplomacy and wisdom and, above all, with clearsightedness. The African Group feels that during the first
part of the session you have been a good President, a
very good President — in fact, an excellent President.
You have continued this tradition of excellence, which
began with Alex Quaison-Sackey, Angie Brooks,
Abdelaziz Bouteflika, Salim Ahmed Salim, Paul Lusaka,
Joseph Garba and Amara Essy. The African Group is
proud of you.
I should now like to turn to the resolution regarding
the budget for the biennium 2000-2001.
The African Group joined the consensus and would
like to congratulate those who helped achieve it: our
experts in the Fifth Committee, naturally; the Bureau of
the Fifth Committee; the Group of 77 and China; and our
partners. They have made considerable efforts and spent
sleepless nights to provide our Organization with its first
budget for the twenty-first century. This resolution,
however, does give rise to certain considerations on the
part of the African Group.
First, we take note of the fact that the global level of
resources is for the most part below that requested by the

10

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Secretary-General, who more than anyone is aware of the
genuine needs of our Organization. Of course, we regret
that. Significant reductions were made to attain this level of
consensus. We hope that those reductions will not have an
adverse impact on the implementation of the various
programmes mandated here.
The African Group welcomes the importance accorded
to certain projects to which it attaches particular
significance, notably to the United Nations Centre in
Nairobi. We are gratified to note that the required resources
were allocated to provide this Centre, by 1 January 2001,
with a permanent interpretation system. We would also like
to mention the Centre for Human Rights and Democracy in
Central Africa, as well as the revitalization of Swahili and
of the African Institute for the Prevention of Crime.
This list would have been even more striking if our
partners had, despite budgetary constraints, given favourable
consideration to the request for use of the positive balance
relating to the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development. We hope that this has merely been postponed
and can be done later.
The General Assembly in plenary has had the working
hours of the Fifth Committee imposed on it, and, in view
of the lateness of the hour, I shall conclude.
We are now only a few days from Christmas and the
New Year. So to you, Mr. President, to all of our
colleagues and to each Ambassador — that is to say, all
those who work for peace — I wish to say, “Happy
holidays and a happy New Year”.

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
assessed contributions in full, on time and without
conditions.
Regarding section 27C of the programme budget, my
delegation wishes to place on the record its continuing
reservations regarding section V, paragraph 22, of General
Assembly resolution 53/221. We will pursue this question
under the agenda item on human resources management
at the first resumed session of the Fifth Committee.
In conclusion, my delegation would like to thank the
coordination of agenda item 121, on the proposed
programme budget for the biennium 2000-2001, Mr.
Nester Odaga-Jalomayo, representative of Uganda, for the
manner in which he conducted informal consultations on
this item.
My delegation would also like to thank all the
Secretariat officials who provided us with their technical
assistance during the informal consultations, as well as all
delegations that participated in the informal consultations.
The President: We have heard the last speaker in
explanation of position.
We have thus concluded this stage of our
consideration of agenda item 121.
Agenda item 118
Review of the efficiency of the administrative and
financial functioning of the United Nations
Report of the Fifth Committee (A/54/511/Add.1)

Mrs. Aragon (Philippines): First of all, my delegation
would like to associate itself with the statement made by
the representative of Guyana speaking on behalf of the
Group of 77 and China. My delegation has noted that the
level of resources for the biennium 2000-2001, which we
have just approved, is lower than the amount proposed by
the Secretary-General.
My delegation hopes that the level of resources which
we have just approved will enable the Secretary-General to
implement fully and effectively all mandated programmes
and activities, in particular those activities with respect to
the budget sections relating to international and regional
cooperation for development.
Since we have just adopted this budget, we would like
to join others in appealing to all Member States to pay their

The President: The Assembly will now take a
decision on the two draft decisions recommended by the
Fifth Committee in paragraph 7 of its report.
The Fifth Committee adopted draft decision I,
entitled “Action taken on certain items”, without a vote.
May I take it that the General Assembly wishes to do the
same?
Draft decision I was adopted.
The President: The Fifth Committee adopted draft
decision II, entitled “Biennial programme of work of the
Fifth Committee for 2000-2001”, without a vote. May I
take it that the General Assembly wishes to do likewise?
Draft decision II was adopted.

11

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
The President: We have thus concluded this stage of
our consideration of agenda item 118.
Agenda item 12 (continued)
Report of the Economic and Social Council (A/54/3 and
Add.1)
The President: Members will recall that chapters I to
VI, sections A to C of chapter VII, and chapters VIII and
IX of the report of the Economic and Social Council were
assigned for consideration directly in plenary meeting.
May I take it that the Assembly wishes to take note of
those chapters and sections of the report?
It was so decided.
The President: May I take it that it is the wish of the
General Assembly to conclude its consideration of those
chapters and sections of the report of the Economic and
Social Council that were assigned for consideration in
plenary meeting?
It was so decided.
The President: May I also take it that it is the wish
of the General Assembly to conclude its consideration of
agenda item 12?
It was so decided.
Programme of work
The President: With regard to the programme of
work of the General Assembly — apart from organizational
matters and items that may have to be considered by
operation of the rules of procedure of the Assembly, and
bearing in mind the action already taken by the Assembly
thus far — I should like to propose that the following
agenda items remain open for consideration during the
fifty-fourth session of the General Assembly: 10, 11, 15,
17, 20, 22, 27, 37, 38, 42 to 44, 46 to 50, 59 to 61, 63, 90,
97, 99, 101, 106, 110, 116, 117 to 151, 160, 163, 164, 166,
169, 170, 172 and 173.
May I take it that it is the wish of the General
Assembly that those agenda items remain open for
consideration during the fifty-fourth session of the General
Assembly?
It was so decided.

12

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
Statement by the President
The President: Before suspending this session of the
General Assembly, I would like to offer some
observations and assessments of what we have done so
far. At the close of the general debate in October, I did
the same by underlining certain issues and directions.
To begin with, during the first three months of its
work, the General Assembly considered 148 items. All in
all, we had a total of 174 agenda items. Despite the
divergence of the views presented by various delegations
and political differences on some of the issues, the
atmosphere in the General Assembly's deliberations was
businesslike and characterized by cooperation and mutual
respect. The Assembly adopted some 250 resolutions,
about 180 of them by consensus, and 77 decisions, on
those issues that are of major concern to the Members
and the Organization.
As regards the Security Council, many speakers
addressed the following issues: humanitarian intervention;
conflict situations in Africa; regional initiatives; sanctions;
and reform of the Council itself, including its expansion,
representativeness, transparency, openness and working
methods. Some delegations praised the improvement in its
format — more open meetings — while others reiterated
calls for a more analytical Council report on the ongoing
activities and inclusion of more information on its
informal consultations of the whole. A large number of
delegations stated that humanitarian intervention without
the Council's authorization is unacceptable, yet even they
accepted that the subject must still be discussed in
appropriate forums. Concerns were expressed by Member
States over the Council's slow response to the conflicts in
Africa, and they called for a more balanced approach to
important events, especially in respect of United Nations
peacekeeping and financing, where speed and evenhandedness were called for.
During the debate on the enlargement of the
membership of the Security Council, 85 speakers — a
record number — took the floor in plenary meeting. The
tone of the comprehensive exchange of views on this
subject was more encouraging than in past years, although
wide areas of differences persist concerning cluster 1
issues and the exercise of the veto. Most delegations
continued to insist on a more representative Council to
reflect changes in the world since the Second World War,
and to enhance the Council's credibility, legitimacy and
effectiveness. Clearly, this is one of the main challenges
that the United Nations is going to be facing in 2000.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Although all members shared the same belief that
there is an urgent need now for changes in the composition
and methods of work of the Security Council to prevent an
endemic gridlock, it became clear once again that no
concrete conclusions could be drawn at this time.
The Assembly devoted three meetings to the
implementation of the outcome of the World Summit for
Social Development. During the debate, the following major
points emerged: globalization and the international financial
crisis; the decline of official development assistance and
debt-relief initiatives; good governance; people-centred
development; poverty eradication; the creation of productive
employment opportunities; basic social services; and the
role of civil society in decision-making, resource allocation,
development and human security.
It was stressed that while some countries enjoyed
economic growth and the benefits of globalization, the
vulnerable economies of the developing countries continued
to be negatively affected by uncontrolled circumstances. In
this light, the forthcoming special session, which will be
held in Geneva in 2000, should serve as a crucial pillar in
the deliberations on the redesign of the global financial
architecture.
The consensus was that the commitments agreed upon
at Copenhagen should be reaffirmed and transformed into
concrete realities. The special session should identify
progress made and obstacles encountered in implementing
the Programme of Action, and agree on new initiatives.
What is needed is a frank assessment of the factors
hampering implementation and progress.
On the causes of conflict and the promotion of durable
peace and sustainable development in Africa, the SecretaryGeneral stated that urgent priority should be given to
Africa. This must be reflected in the budget and priorities
set by the General Assembly. He also expressed the view
that the Assembly should establish its own working group
to take stock of the progress so far in implementing the
proposals contained in his earlier report, which was
extensively discussed by both the General Assembly and
the Security Council, as well as other United Nations
bodies.
The Secretary-General further proposed that the
working group focus on new ways to mobilize assistance to
post-conflict societies, including debt cancellation. He
added that while almost every agency and operational arm
of the United Nations had a special programme devoted to
Africa, and even though the Organization had spent

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
generous amounts of its resources on the continent, the
United Nations still needed to be more involved in Africa
and play a more effective role, as it does elsewhere,
without undue preconditions. In this connection, I intend
to announce soon the names of the two coordinators for
the working group. To make the conflicts in Africa a
fixation — even an obsession — would not do justice to
the people who are trying so hard every day to carry out
the necessary political, economic and legislative reforms
and to devote their time and energies to ensure sustained
peace, stability and development.
The eradication of poverty is an essential
prerequisite for development. The more Africa has
worked, however, the fewer benefits it has drawn from its
efforts. There are severe problems, such as those relating
to financing, a skilled labour force and the difficult
struggle against widespread epidemics. For example, the
fight against the HIV/AIDS pandemic must be intensified
because it is a threat to the very existence of many
African countries. The United Nations must, more than
ever, take the leadership to combat this devastating
menace and help save millions of lives. This year's
collaboration between the United Nations and civil society
on World AIDS Day was most laudable. It set a
wonderful example worth pursuing further, on an ongoing
basis.
Under the item on emergency assistance to
individual countries, the Assembly adopted 19 resolutions,
to provide emergency international assistance to regions
and individual countries, including the Balkans, Central
America, Venezuela — which is particularly affected at
the present time — the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Djibouti, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Afghanistan, East
Timor, Tajikistan, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and
others. In this context, Mr. Jørgen Bøjer, the Permanent
Representative of Denmark, was industrious and
imaginative in taking the time to coordinate the
negotiations to reach consensus on the many draft
resolutions that were eventually adopted by the Assembly.
I wish, on behalf of the General Assembly, to thank him
for his outstanding service.
Dialogue among civilizations has continued to draw
the serious attention of Member States. The General
Assembly adopted a resolution on this important subject
and invited Governments and other interested parties to
further intensify their actions to promote widely the
concept of dialogue among civilizations. The Islamic
Republic of Iran has provided committed leadership by
spearheading an open-ended and robust dialogue on the

13

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
subject at the United Nations and by inviting influential
personalities from outside to share their thoughts with
United Nations representatives. Let us keep this dialogue
alive and lively.
The importance of the item on oceans and the law of
the sea was underscored by several speakers, and the
Assembly adopted three resolutions. The need for wider
acceptance of the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea and its consistent application was stressed by
many, as was the importance of the harmonization of
national legislation with its provisions. Throughout the
debate, the responsible use and sustainable development of
ocean resources was highlighted. So, too, was the protection
and preservation of the marine environment and the
implementation of the Global Plan of Action for land-based
sources of pollution and maritime safety.
Assistance in mine action was discussed at length and
a resolution was adopted. The speakers repeated their
outrage at the destructive effects of landmines, expressed
their concern over the humanitarian suffering and socioeconomic impact of landmines and noted the need for a
continued commitment of the international community in
the field of clearing anti-personnel landmines. Another
major contribution to disarmament was the adoption by the
Assembly of the resolution on a nuclear-weapon-free zone
for Central Asia. The adoption of the International
Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of
Terrorism is another key achievement. This timely action
will fill a lacuna in the international law on terrorism and
further strengthen efforts to combat this savage crime.
Other major issues of global concern that the
Assembly or its Committees covered dealt with a number
of fields: children trapped in and brutalized by armed
conflicts; gender equality; the proliferation of small arms
and their negative impact; assistance to small island
developing States; the International Criminal Court and its
role in inter-State relations; the World Conference against
Racism, Racial Discrimination, Xenophobia and Related
Intolerance, to be convened in 2001; and the high-level
international forum on financing for development, which is
also envisaged for 2001.
The reviewing and streamlining of the new scale of
assessments is a difficult question, bearing as it does on the
United Nations budget itself and resources available to the
Organization to carry out its work globally. The resolutions
and decisions of the Fifth Committee that the Assembly
adopted give an indication that we are nowhere near

14

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
achieving the ideal end to this longest-running agenda
item. But we must continue the search.
Since the founding of the United Nations in 1945,
the General Assembly has reached this stage of its work
many times in the past, but none has been as propitious
and pregnant with expectations as its fifty-fourth session
at the century's and the millennium's end. The past is the
mother of the future, with the present acting as midwife,
but it is the future that matters most for human survival
and progress.
No human generation has ever had the opportunity,
the resources, the knowledge or the power at its disposal
that ours has to meet the pressing human needs to save
our children, to wipe out the killer diseases, to protect the
environment and to empower the people with the
productive skills to create and distribute wealth justly in
society.
That obligation should also impel us, representing as
we do all nations, cultures and civilizations and belonging
to one human family, to bring together Governments, big
business, workers, non-governmental organizations,
academia and the media, on the one hand; to wage an allout war against HIV/AIDS, poverty and abuse of
children; and, on the other, to strengthen the United
Nations to become a truly democratic, effective,
transparent and people-driven Organization.
I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude and
indebtedness to all representatives for the encouragement
and assistance they extended. They did so here in the
Assembly, in the General Committee and in other major
Committees, as well as during all types of informal
consultations and in group or bilateral meetings.
Our illustrious Secretary-General and his Deputy
have been generous with their time and advice. I thank
them warmly. The Vice-Presidents were always readily
available to assist and provide insight in our deliberations,
including Mr. Abdelaziz Bouteflika, President of People's
Democratic Republic of Algeria and the current Chairman
of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), and His
Serene Highness, Prince Albert of Monaco.
I had excellent interactions with the dedicated
Chairpersons of the Main Committees, who contributed so
much to our common achievements. Many sincere thanks
to all of them.

General Assembly
Fifty-fourth session
Mr. Jin Yongjian and his able senior assistants and
secretaries are exemplary United Nations civil servants and
a hard-working team of professionals. My own office staff
and security officers carried the heaviest burden by being
always there within my shooting range and bore it all with
remarkable excellence and a sense of humour. I am
immensely grateful to them all.

88th plenary meeting
23 December 1999
There are many contingents of wonderful friends and
supporters of the United Nations and its activities out
there. How fortunate the United Nations community is to
have such trusted and loyal members of our common
extended family who care.
Before I conclude, may I say, partly on a lighter
note and partly with sincere appreciation, that this
plenary session was originally supposed to have recessed
on 14 December. That recess was moved to 17 December,
then 22 December, and now finally to 23 December.
Delegations and Secretariat members serving on and
responsible for the Fifth Committee, respectively, worked
hard and long to finalize their work and to produce the
recommendations, draft resolutions and decisions that the
Assembly has just acted upon.
I wish to commend the Chairperson of the Fifth
Committee, Ambassador Wensley of Australia. I also
want to commend the Coordinator of the Fifth
Committee, the representative of Uganda, for his tireless
efforts. Tough negotiations are the name of the game.
Hopefully, whenever they are undertaken, it is in the
spirit of fairness. As the saying goes, all is well that ends
well.
In conclusion, I wish one and all a very happy
holiday season and renewed vitality for the heavy
schedule of activities that awaits us in 2000 and beyond.
Tomorrow will be another day and when it comes, as it
will, let it bring a new dawn and a triumphant take-off for
the benefit of all the peoples of the world.
To those who must travel far, I wish them bon
voyage. To those who must travel from this building to
their homes, I wish them, too, bon voyage.
The meeting rose at 10.30 p.m.

15
