A /67/PV.47

United Nations

asdf

General Assembly

Offi cial Records

Sixty-seventh session

47th plenary meeting
Friday, 30 November 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Jeremić . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Serbia)

In the absence of the President, Mr. Charles
(Trinidad and Tobago), Vice-President, took the
Chair.
The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Agenda item 36
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/342
and A/67/364)
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.23 and A/67/L.24)
The Acting President: I give the floor to the
representative of Egypt to introduce draft resolutions
A/67/L.23 and A/67/L.24.
Mr. Khalil (Egypt) (spoke in Arabic): At the outset,
I would like once again to congratulate Palestine on
its new status as a non-member observer State in the
United Nations, following the Assembly’s adoption of
its historic resolution 67/19 by a landslide majority, on
29 November.
Today the Assembly will consider the situation in the
Middle East in the framework of addressing the conflict
in the region, which is the result of Israel’s occupation
of Arab territories since 1967 and its refusal to accept
the will of the international community and to abide
by international law and by international humanitarian
law, as well as by resolutions of the General Assembly
and the Security Council, despite international and
regional efforts to arrive at a peaceful, lasting and just
settlement for the question of Palestine.

In the past few years, Israel’s violations of
international law, human rights and international
humanitarian law have increased in the occupied
Palestinian territories, as has become apparent in
Israel’s recent assault on Gaza. Moreover, the occupation
authorities are continuing their oppressive policies,
which include the detention of thousands of Palestinians
and holding them in prison and detention centres
without any legitimate grounds. The construction of the
racial separation wall also continues, in contravention
of international law. The oppressive siege of Gaza
goes on, in blatant violation of resolution ES-10/18 and
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009). There also
continue to be checkpoints in the West Bank, as well
as other violations and contraventions that cannot all be
mentioned within the time we have.
Regrettably, all those practices are related to
Israel’s deliberate attempt to undermine all efforts to
bring about direct negotiations with the Palestinian
side. That confirms that Israel does not want to arrive at
any peaceful settlement. That will cause extreme harm
not only to the Palestinians and Israelis but to all the
countries of the region and the entire world.
To express the international community’s rejection
of Israel’s continued occupation and illegitimate
practices in the occupied Arab territories, today I
introduce to the General Assembly, on behalf of this
year’s sponsoring States, two draft resolutions under
agenda item 36, entitled “The situation in the Middle
East”. The first draft resolution is entitled “Jerusalem”
and the second is entitled “The Syrian Golan”.

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. Corrections should be submitted to the original
languages only. They should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature
of a member of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room
U-506. Corrections will be issued after the end of the session in a consolidated corrigendum.

12-62371 (E)

*1262371*

A/67/PV.47

The draft resolution on Jerusalem, A/67/L.23,
reaffirms the terms of reference constituted by General
Assembly and Security Council resolutions pertaining
to the status of the occupied territories, especially
Jerusalem, which stress that all the illegitimate
administrative measures and procedures taken by
Israel to impose its laws on Jerusalem are null and void.
Moreover, the draft resolution stresses that any just and
comprehensive resolution to the issue of Jerusalem
must include internationally guaranteed provisions to
ensure of freedom of belief and religious practice for
its inhabitants. There must be an end to settlement
activities and to illegal attempts to judaize Jerusalem,
which Israel and the Israeli settlers are perpetrating. It
also calls for a guarantee to end the continued violations
of the Palestinians’ right to religious freedom and to
end the repeated assaults on the Al-Aqsa Mosque, as
well as to end excavation in the Old City, including in
and around religious sites.
The second draft resolution, A/67/L.24, pertains to
the occupied Syrian Golan. It recalls Security Council
resolution 497 (1981) and again expresses the General
Assembly’s deep concern over Israel’s continued
non-compliance with the relevant Security Council
resolutions. It reaffirms that the Hague Convention
IV of 1907 and the Fourth Geneva Convention of 1949
apply to the Syrian territory occupied since 1967. It
also asserts the illegality of imposing Israeli laws on
the Syrian Golan and the illegitimate nature of Israel’s
settlements there. It demands that Israel withdraw
completely from the Golan to the line of 4 June 1967. It
also calls upon Israel to respect previous arrangements
in that regard.
The States sponsoring the two draft resolutions see
that the time has come for the international community
to deal with the Middle East conflict in an integrated
way. The peoples of the region are still suffering from
the effects of war and aggression. They look forward
to peace, stability and coexistence, which will be
achieved only through the political will of the entire
international community and by Israel committing
to fully withdraw from all occupied Palestinian and
Arab land, in accordance with General Assembly and
Security Council resolutions and on the basis of the
principle of land for peace and the rules of international
law.
For all that to be achieved, we seek the support
of all Member States in the General Assembly for the
two draft resolutions. We urge everyone here to vote

2

in favour of them, in affirmation of the strength of
international will and its adherence to international
legitimacy, to an end to occupation and aggression and
to the primacy of the noble purposes and principles of
the Charter.
Mr. Çevik (Turkey): Yesterday, in adopting
resolution 67/19, the Assembly extended its
overwhelming support to the people of Palestine at yet
another historic moment in the history of the United
Nations. With that historic vote, Palestine took a
great step towards gaining the position it deserves
as an independent and sovereign State recognized by
the international community. We sincerely hope and
believe that that development will lead the way to a just
and comprehensive peace and will break the stalemate
in the peace process.
Therefore, yesterday’s vote should immediately be
utilized as new momentum to revitalize the peace talks
and Palestinian reconciliation. The recent ceasefire
sets the appropriate circumstances for both parties to
focus on diplomacy. Today, we should all encourage the
parties to take that step. It is our foremost objective to
find a solution to the Palestinian question on the basis
of relevant United Nations resolutions, the road map
and the Arab Peace Initiative.
We all have to be sure about one fact. The
stalemate is neither sustainable nor acceptable. The
recent operation in Gaza, resulting in the loss of many
innocent civilian lives, was testimony to that. Needless
to say, illegal settlement activities and the ongoing
blockade on Gaza, for over five years, seriously harm
the prospects for peace in the future. Therefore we
repeat our calls for the immediate implementation of
Security Council resolution 1860 (2009) to end the
restrictions on the inhabitants of Gaza, which affect
their basic human rights each and every day.
Along with our international partners, we will
resolutely maintain our efforts for Palestine to be
granted United Nations membership in the near future
and will continue to defend the just cause of the
Palestinian people.
The situation in Syria continues to be a grave
humanitarian crisis. As winter’s cold arrives, the
humanitarian situation is getting even more dramatic.
This morning we heard in detail from Mr. Lakhdar
Brahimi, Joint Special Representative of the United
Nations and the League of Arab States, that the crisis
has gone beyond being local and has unfortunately

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

spilled over into neighbouring countries, whether in the
form of cross-border fire or in the massive movement
of civilians seeking safety and shelter. Turkey lost
five citizens in the town of Akçakale to cross-border
shelling. More were injured as a result of stray bullets
and shell fragments.
Nevertheless, we shall continue to utilize all our
efforts, with the support of the international community,
to continue extending our helping hand to the Syrian
people. As of today, Turkey hosts 130,449 Syrians
in 14 camps with sanitation, health and education
facilities. Some 80,000 are residing elsewhere in
Turkey, making their way to various cities and towns by
their own means. To cope with the increasing numbers,
we are building more facilities and trying to meet the
humanitarian demand. However, as highlighted by the
Secretary-General and the Special Joint Representative
this morning, plans for humanitarian response to the
crisis in Syria are severely underfunded and require
further attention from the international community.
Still, efforts on the humanitarian front are not
enough to address the root cause of the crisis. Towards
that end, Turkey will continue to support Special
Representative Brahimi and the legitimate aspirations
of the Syrian people.
The people of the Middle East rightfully deserve a
dignified life and the dividends of democracy and peace.
Each and every nation will have its own way of addressing
the question. Yet the international community’s stance
in each case should be identical — a staunch support
for universal values and principles that uphold human
dignity, and respect for unity and territorial integrity.
On that note, allow me to commend the leadership
of President Mahmoud Abbas and to conclude by
congratulating the Palestinian delegation in the Hall,
as well as the people of the State of Palestine. Now it is
time for all of us to encourage the two States to live side
by side in peace.
Mrs. Comesaña Perdomo (Cuba) (spoke in
Spanish): Cuba once again congratulates the Palestinian
people and leaders on their historic victory yesterday.
Cuba believes that this is a further step on the path
towards the recognition of a State of Palestine. We
call on the Security Council to take a decision in this
respect and respond to the demands of the Palestinian
people and the majority of the Member States.
The situation in the region, especially in the occupied
Palestinian territories, continues to be deplorable. In
12-62371

the Gaza Strip, the most recent escalation of violence
unleashed by Israeli military forces left hundreds of
innocent victims dead, including women and children,
and more than a thousand wounded. Cuba reiterates its
serious concern regarding the continuing deterioration
of the situation in the region, particularly as a result
of the excessive and indiscriminate use of force by
Israel against the civilian Palestinian population and
many other illegal policies and practices, such as
the expansion of Israeli settlements, the continued
violations of human rights and systematic war crimes,
which inflict great suffering on the Palestinian people.
Israel’s bellicose policy undermines the stability of
the entire Middle East and thus international peace. Its
lack of respect for international law and its continued
illegal occupation of the Palestinian territories and
other Arab territories continue to be the major obstacles
to the achievement of a just, lasting and comprehensive
peace in the region.
We repeat the call on the international community to
require the Israeli authorities to abstain from any action
that would lead to a new escalation of the situation. We
demand the immediate lifting of the illegal, cruel and
genocidal blockade against the Palestinian people in
the Gaza Strip, the opening of border crossings and
the free circulation of goods to and from that area.
Permanent humanitarian access must be guaranteed,
as must the implementation of legal obligations under
the Fourth Geneva Convention and the relevant United
Nations resolutions. In the same vein, we call for an
immediate end to the demolition of Palestinian houses,
the construction of the wall and the displacement
of Palestinian families in East Jerusalem, as well as
all other acts of incitement, provocation and illegal
aggression carried out by extremist settlers against the
Palestinian people and holy sites.
Another obstacle to the achievement of a lasting
peace in the region is the ongoing occupation and de
facto annexation of the Syrian Golan. Cuba regards as
null, void and without legal effect all legislative and
administrative measures and actions that Israel has taken
or could take with the aim of changing the legal status,
physical character or demographic composition of the
occupied Syrian Golan and its institutional structure,
as well as Israeli measures to enforce its jurisdiction
and administration in that area. Israel’s decision of
14 December 1981 to impose its legislation, jurisdiction
and administration in the occupied Syrian Golan and the
illegal settlement construction and expansion activities

3

A/67/PV.47

in that territory since 1977 constitute a flagrant
violation of international law, international conventions
and the Charter and resolutions of the United Nations,
in particular Security Council resolution 497 (1981)
and the Geneva Convention relative to the Protection
of Civilian Persons in Time of War, of 12 August 1949.
Cuba strongly condemns the brutal Israeli practices
in the prisons created since the occupation and reiterates
its serious concern about the inhumane conditions
experienced by those detained in the occupied Syrian
Golan. This has harmed their physical health and put
their lives at risk, in clear violation of international
humanitarian law.
Cuba has closely followed the events in Syria.
We reiterate our position on the manoeuvres by
certain NATO countries to get the Security Council to
legitimize aggression against Syria. In doing so, they
are counting on the complicity of major media outlets,
which are used to distorting reality and not having
to answer for the consequences of their actions. The
incitements to violence, military aggression and foreign
intervention advocated in some of the press and by highranking politicians are cause for serious concern. Cuba
denounces those actions aimed at justifying aggression
against the Syrian people.
Cuba shares the concern about the loss of innocent
lives in Syria, as in any part of the world, and condemns
all acts of violence taking place in that country. At the
same time, we reiterate our categorical rejection of any
type of foreign intervention, whether direct or indirect,
including logistical support to irregular armed groups.
An intervention by foreign forces in Syria would have
serious consequences for international peace and
security, in particular for the Middle East. Given the
experiences and precedents created by recent cases
in which we saw manipulation of the Charter of the
United Nations, double standards and flagrant violation
of international law, we reiterate our rejection of any
attempt to undermine the independence, sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Syria.
The role of the international community in these
times of difficulty for a Member State is to provide
assistance in order to safeguard peace and stability in
that country. We reaffirm our confidence in the capacity
of the Syrian people and Government to resolve their
internal problems without foreign intervention. We
demand full respect for the self-determination and
sovereignty of that Arab country.

4

Cuba reiterates once more its support for the Middle
East peace process on the basis of the provisions of the
Arab Peace Initiative, the road map and the principle
of land for peace. We reject the attempts to change the
mandate of the peace process, and we denounce Israel’s
implementation of unilateral measures and strategies
aimed at imposing an illegal unilateral solution. The
Palestinian people have the inalienable right to establish
an independent, sovereign State, with East Jerusalem
as its capital. We call for the unconditional return of
all Arab territories occupied in June 1977. This is the
only way to achieve a just and lasting peace for all the
peoples of the region.
Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): Please allow me, at the outset, to extend our
sincere thanks to my dear colleague, the Permanent
Representative of the Arab Republic of Egypt, for
his introduction of draft resolutions A/67/L.23 and
A/67/L.24, on occupied Jerusalem and the occupied
Syrian Golan, respectively.
I would also like to begin my statement with a special
appeal to all colleagues, in particular those who extend
their goodwill to my country, not to discuss the issue of
my country, since we are now discussing the situation in
the Middle East. As we all know, this is an item that for
decades has been mostly concerned with putting an end
to the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. No matter
how good the intent, any discussion of the situation in
my country at present would distract from the central
issue, which is the situation in the Middle East. Those
who would like to discuss the issue of the Syrian Arab
Republic may do that when the issue of the Syrian Arab
Republic is under discussion.
Perhaps it would be useful at the outset to recall that
all laws, including international law, are promulgated
for the purpose of being implemented, and that the
Charter of the United Nations and other international
instruments were adopted for the purpose of being
respected, and that resolutions of the United Nations,
particularly those regarding the rejection of foreign
occupation of the land of others, were also adopted
to be implemented. That is all supposed to be taken
seriously and to be applied to all without exception.
I do not believe that any representative of a State
that joined the Organization for its noble objectives,
with a view to establishing international peace and
security and justice, would think that he came here
to adopt resolutions that later become dead letters or
to only invoke certain provisions of international law

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

when making statements under the auspices of the
Organization.

peoples and our region, and it would also undermine
the United Nations in its entirety.

Here we are today, meeting again for perhaps
the hundredth time, or maybe the thousandth or tenthousandth time, to call on Israel to end its occupation
of Arab territories, to end its racist and inhumane
policies, its violations of international instruments
and norms, its feverish settlement campaigns and the
systematic killing of civilians in the occupied Arab
territories. In spite of the foregoing, in spite of all the
appeals of the international community, there has been
no progress whatsoever so far in putting an end to
Israeli occupation or stopping its politics of aggression.

In that connection, we would like to note that
transferring the issue of peace in the Middle East from
the United Nations to the international Quartet has not
accomplished anything with respect to the issue at hand.
In some ways, it has diminished the role of the United
Nations and paralysed it, transferring its leading role to
suspect mediators whose role is confined to providing
blind support to Israel and continued justification for
that country’s criminal behaviour and aggression.
There has not been a single meeting of the Quartet
during the current session of the General Assembly or
even during the Israeli aggression against Gaza. For
that matter, the United Nations itself failed to hold even
a single meeting during the recent Israeli aggression
against Gaza.

On the contrary, matters have gotten worse in the
light of Israel’s flagrant disregard for international
legitimacy and for all human and moral values and
of its complete disregard for the United Nations
resolutions on the issue. In addition, there has been
an unprecedented wave of settlement-building and
continued escalation of Israeli violence, most recently
the aggression against Gaza, threatening the region
with catastrophic consequences and raising the spectre
of war at the expense of the prospects for peace.
Settlement activities, which have been condemned
and declared objectionable legally and internationally,
continue. There seems to be acceptable settlement
activity pursuant to the policy of fait accompli, and
there is settlement activity that is justified in the name
of so-called demographic expansion. Then there is
settlement activity that is maintained for the purpose
of negotiating exchange for other lands, and there is
blind, indiscriminate settlement activity that is subject
to negotiations. There is also settlement activity that is
not to be discussed because it touches on the sanctity
of the Israeli occupation of Arab territories. Even
internationally and legally condemned and rejected
settlement activity has become, for some, a negotiable
issue.
The manner in which the United Nations and
its Member States have dealt with the Arab-Israeli
conflict can no longer be a routine act of solidarity
without serious activity and tangible results. Israel’s
intransigence and the support it gets from certain
countries should not lead to an admission of failure by
the United Nations to uphold its duties pursuant to the
Charter and its own resolutions. If that were to happen,
it would lead to catastrophic consequences for our

12-62371

More than 45 years have passed since Israel occupied
the Syrian Golan. However, those long years do not
seem to be enough for Israel to abide by relevant United
Nations resolutions that require it to end its occupation
of the Syrian Golan and to cease its systematic and
serious violations of human rights and the policies of
terror, oppression, racial discrimination and arbitrary
arrest of Syrian citizens suffering under the yoke of
occupation in the Syrian Golan. Those policies place
restrictions on all aspects of their lives, including their
right to stay in contact with their motherland, Syria.
Matters have reached the point where the Israelis have
put a 2-year-old child under house arrest and separated
him from his mother, a student at Damascus University,
because she gave birth to him in Syria. When she took
him back to the Golan, that Syrian child of the age of
2 did not have the right to go to the Golan, in the view
of the Israelis.
The Israeli occupation authorities continue their
feverish settlement activities in the Golan and have
built an apartheid wall east of the Syrian city of Majdal
Shams and refuse to turn over maps of landmines planted
in the Golan territories to international organizations,
including our Organization. The explosions of cluster
bombs and mines planted by the Israelis in the Golan
have so far taken the lives of 726 Syrians, 227 of whom
were children, most recently two children who lost their
lives early last month due to the explosion of a mine.
We have informed the Secretariat of all those
violations, the most recent of which is an increase in
the number of kidnappings of Syrian citizens from the

5

A/67/PV.47

Syrian side of the disengagement area by the Israeli
occupying forces. Things have become so serious that
Israel is now supporting armed terrorist groups that are
spreading east of the United Nations Disengagement
Observer Force area of operation. It is truly regrettable
that in spite of all of the documented Israeli crimes
and the United Nations resolutions condemning those
crimes without reservation, the Israeli civilian and
military authorities continue to avoid international
accountability, thanks to the illegitimate immunity
permitted them by certain States.
Certainly, it was noticed by all who were present in
this Hall yesterday that the officials of the occupying
Israeli Government justified their objection to the
according of United Nations non-member observer
State status to Palestine by stating that if Palestine
were accorded its full right to membership, it would
later become possible for the Palestinian State to
pursue claims against Israeli war criminals before the
International Criminal Court. That was the justification
for their objection, and thus their admission proves that
they truly are war criminals.
Perhaps it is clear to all that the illegitimate
immunity the Zionists have enjoyed since they took
over Palestine has acted as a green light that has not
changed to date. Rather, that green light has allowed
the Israeli leaders to continue their intransigence and
their escalated crimes of aggression. It has prompted us
not only to condemn the Israeli occupying authorities,
but also to place responsibility, clearly, on the shoulders
of certain influential States that ensure Israel’s
immunity and provide it with protection and cover in
international forums, including in the Security Council
and within the Quartet. It has exposed the politics of
double standards used by those States, as well as their
unprecedented hypocrisy in terms of certain noble
issues, such as protection of civilians, promotion of
human rights, respect for international law and the
implementation of United Nations resolutions.
The option of a just and comprehensive peace will
not be possible absent the complete withdrawal by Israel
from all of the Arab territories to the borders of 4 June
1967, the establishment of the independent Palestinian
State with Al-Quds Al-Sharif as its capital, and a just
solution to the issue of Palestinian refugees, based
on resolution 194 (III) of 1948. All actions must be
carried out in accordance with relevant United Nations
resolutions, foremost among them Security Council

6

resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), on
the occupied Syrian Golan.
In conclusion, I call upon Member States to vote
in favour of draft resolution A/67/L.23, on occupied
Jerusalem, and draft resolution A/67/L.24, on the
occupied Syrian Golan, in order to uphold international
law and promote the purposes and principles of the
Charter of the United Nations.
Mr. Haniff (Malaysia): Developments over the past
few weeks, in particular Israel’s attack on the people
of Palestine in Gaza, have sparked an international
crisis that nearly caused instability and turmoil in the
whole region. What deeply concerns my delegation is
that despite the gravity of the situation, the Security
Council was rendered powerless, not just to bring about
an immediate cessation of hostilities, but even to decide
whether to act or not. We, the international community,
cannot allow that to happen again. We cannot remain
unwilling to act, as failure to act would demonstrate
the ineffectiveness of the current multilateral system,
particularly the Security Council and the United
Nations.
Time and again, we are faced with the situation in
the Middle East, especially the question of Palestine.
Malaysia believes that in order to avoid being faced
with a similar situation in the future, we need to address
the crux of the issue and resolve the conflict once and
for all.
Today we are still no closer to resolving the
question of Palestine. In fact, if we were to take a closer
look, we would find that we are much further away
from a peaceful settlement than at any time before,
because the situation on the ground has deteriorated.
Israel has continued to take all measures to change
the demographic features of the occupied territory,
systematically displacing Palestinians from the West
Bank and East Jerusalem. At the same time, the illegal
blockade of Gaza continues to suffocate the people.
When will this end? Do not the people of Palestine
deserve a better future and to live in dignity?
Israel has continued to violate international law,
including humanitarian and human rights law, for far
too long. It has continued to ignore international calls to
respect, adhere to and abide by the Geneva Conventions
and all relevant Security Council resolutions. The
international community has not been able to hold
Israel accountable for all its deliberate acts of violence.

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

Instead, Israel continues to act aggressively against
Palestinian civilians, and it does so with impunity. I
wonder why.
The only way forward is for Israel to respect
international law, including humanitarian and human
rights law. It should cease all illegal settlement
activities and restart negotiations in good faith, which
would demonstrate its intention to truly bring an end to
the conflict. It must realize and accept that a lasting and
just solution to the question on Palestine will not only
benefit the Palestinians, but would contribute to Israel’s
own safety and security.
For our part, the international community must
reject any further delay in the resumption of peace talks.
We must ensure that the parties return to the negotiating
table without further delay. We must continue to uphold
the principles for the establishment of a Palestinian
State under the two-State solution based on the pre1967 borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital. Only
then can Israelis and Palestinians have any chance for a
stable and better future.
I call upon the Security Council and the Middle
East Quartet to do what they have been mandated to
do, namely, to find a just and lasting solution to the
question of Palestine. Further inaction is not a choice,
and time is not on our side.
Malaysia is fully aware of the situation in the
occupied Syrian Golan. Malaysia will continue to
support the restoration of Syrian sovereignty over the
occupied Syrian Golan. We urge Israel to withdraw
from the occupied Syrian Golan to the line of 4 June
1967. All measures and actions undertaken by Israel,
including the construction and expansion of illegal
settlements in the occupied Syrian Golan since 1967,
constitute flagrant violations of international law, the
Charter of the United Nations and relevant United
Nations resolutions.
The same can be said for the territories of Lebanon
under Israeli occupation. We condemn the continued
violations and aggression by Israel. We strongly urge
Israel to fully implement Security Council resolution
1701 (2006), which calls for a permanent ceasefire, the
complete withdrawal of Israeli troops from Lebanon,
and full respect for the Blue Line. Israel must withdraw
from the Shab’a farmlands, the Kafr Shuba hills and
the Lebanese part of Ghajar village up to behind the
Blue Line.

12-62371

Yesterday we celebrated the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. Palestine has
been accorded the status of a non-member observer
State in the General Assembly. It is something to
celebrate, although full membership in the United
Nations is the ultimate goal. Malaysia believes that this
marks the first step for Palestine towards becoming
a sovereign State. In moving forward, we call on all
Member States, including the permanent members of the
Security Council, to support the admission of Palestine
as a full State Member of the United Nations, as that
is a legitimate aspiration shared by an overwhelming
majority of Member States.
Mr. Li Baodong (China) (spoke in Chinese): China
has always firmly supported the just cause of the
Palestinian people in seeking to restore their legitimate
rights as a nation and to establish a fully sovereign and
independent Palestinian State on the basis of the 1967
borders, with East Jerusalem as its capital.
Yesterday, the General Assembly adopted resolution
67/19, granting Palestine the status of non-member
observer State. That is a further positive development
towards the realization of independent Palestinian
statehood. The resolution also shows the international
community’s extensive support for the just cause of the
Palestinian people in seeking to restore their legitimate
rights.
Dialogue and negotiation are the only viable means
for resolving the question of Palestine and Israel. China
has always maintained that the two parties should settle
their differences through dialogue and negotiation and
on the basis of the relevant resolutions, the principle of
land for peace, the Arab Peace Initiative and the road
map for peace in the Middle East, so as to achieve the
goal of two States, Palestine and Israel, living side by
side in peace.
China is greatly concerned about the continuing
deadlock in the peace talks between the two parties. The
recent clashes in the Gaza Strip once again demonstrate
that the current status quo in the Palestinian question
is not sustainable. China calls on both parties, in
particular Israel, the stronger Power, to move forward
in the general interest of peace, take specific measures
to remove obstacles and build mutual trust with the
Palestinian side, so as to establish favourable conditions
for the early resumption of peace talks and to achieve
meaningful progress.

7

A/67/PV.47

The international community should fully
recognize the importance and urgency of the need to
promote progress in the Middle East peace process. It
should make even greater efforts to support the peace
talks. It should urge the two sides to meet each other
halfway, so as to overcome the current impasse in the
peace talks as soon as possible.
The current humanitarian situation in the Gaza
Strip and the other occupied Palestinian territories
remains severe. The Palestinian economy is facing
serious difficulties. None of the above conditions is
conducive to progress in the Palestinian-Israeli peace
process or to regional stability. China calls on Israel to
fully implement the relevant United Nations resolutions
and to remove the blockade on the Gaza Strip, so as
to alleviate the humanitarian plight of the inhabitants.
The international community should provide more
assistance and support to Palestine. China will provide
all possible assistance to the Palestinian people.
The Syrian-Israeli and Lebanese-Israeli tracks are
also important components in the Middle East peace
process. A comprehensive solution to the Middle East
question will not be achieved without fully resolving
the issues between the three countries. China firmly
supports the legitimate aspirations of Syria and
Lebanon to maintain their national sovereignty and
territorial integrity and to recover the occupied
Palestinian territories. We support the efforts and
strategic choices of Member States in seeking a lasting
and comprehensive peace in the region.
China attaches great importance to the Middle
East issue and will always support the peace talks and
promote progress in the peace process with its own
approach. China supports the role of the United Nations
in the Middle East issue and stands ready to work
together with the parties concerned to play a positive
and constructive role in achieving a comprehensive,
just and lasting peace in the Middle East region as soon
as possible.
Mr. Khazaee (Islamic Republic of Iran): At the
outset, I would like to congratulate Palestine on the
overwhelming support that it received during the voting
on resolution 67/19 on the enhancement of its status at
the United Nations. I once again wish to express our
solidarity with the people of Palestine.
Palestine lies at the core of the Middle East issue.
The tragedy of Palestine is a major source of the
resentment and desperation that is felt throughout the

8

world, especially in the Muslim world. This meeting is
taking place a week after yet another tragic episode in
the series of repeated and grave crimes perpetrated by
the Zionist regime against the Palestinian people in the
occupied Palestinian territories.
The Israeli regime, with unbridled impunity,
intensified its military aggression against the Gaza
Strip, killing, wounding and maiming Palestinian
civilians, including women, the elderly and children.
In a statement welcoming the recent ceasefire, the
Committee on the Rights of the Child said that the
attack by Israel would have a “devastating and lasting
impact” on children and stressed that the recent crisis
would have long-term psychological effects on young
people:
“This impact extends from a large number of
deaths and injuries in Gaza to deep trauma and
other psychological effects on children … These
experiences may affect them for many years to
come, including into adulthood.”
The Israeli regime’s deadly air strikes and shelling
of Gaza should be considered as part of a broader policy,
marked by expansionism, aggression, oppression,
collective punishment, extrajudicial killings, targeted
assassinations and State terrorism, all in gross violation
of international law, as was the act of occupation from
the very outset. The recent Israeli crimes in the Gaza
Strip would undoubtedly create more instability, serve
to inflame tension and threaten to further destabilize
the situation in the region. The question is, “How much
longer is the world willing to endure this spectacle of
wanton cruelty?”, to quote Bertrand Russell.
The international community should live up to its
responsibilities by preventing Israel from continuing to
commit atrocities and to flout international law, norms
and standards. Regrettably, some powerful Member
States that happen to be permanent members of the
Security Council have, as a result of their unconditional
support for Israel, prevented the Security Council from
taking concrete action against the crimes committed
by Israel. The obstructionist role played by those same
members in the General Assembly, notably yesterday
on the issue of upgrading the status of Palestine at the
United Nations, was another manifestation of those
States’ blind support for Israel with regard to preventing
the Palestinian people from exercising their legitimate
rights. Restrictions by the same States with respect to
assistance to Palestine are tantamount to punishing the

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

Palestinians for exercising their basic rights to shape
their fate and future.

to have. That is the only solution, in our view, for a
peaceful settlement of the Palestinian crisis.

In the same vein, the provocative declarations
by the Israeli regime concerning the acceleration
of construction and the revocation of Palestinian
residency rights amount to political extortion of the
Palestinian people. Such statements confirm that the
Israeli regime has opted for settlement and residency
issues as an instrument to block legitimate Palestinian
demands. It should be noted that the Israeli demolition
of Palestinian homes and property, accompanied by
escalating violence by settlers and forced evictions, is
seriously exacerbating the situation on the ground.

Before concluding, I would like to place on record
that my delegation rejects the baseless allegations
raised against my country in this Hall yesterday by
the representative of Israel. This is yet another weary
practice by the Israeli regime and its advocate to divert
the international community’s attention from the Israeli
crimes in Palestine and elsewhere in the region by
raising unfounded allegations against others. I do not
want to take up the Assembly’s time to respond to those
irresponsible claims. However, in the context of Israel’s
defiance of the international community, I would like
to refer to only one aspect of the dangerous behaviour
of that regime — the infamous Israeli nuclear weapons
programme, which is a showcase of five decades of
concealment and deception and of total disregard for
the demands of the international community.

The humanitarian situation of the Palestinians,
especially in the Gaza Strip, also remains a source of
grave concern. That disastrous situation must be ended
by calling on the Israeli regime to lift the siege of
Gaza and open all border crossings for the movement
of goods and persons, in accordance with international
humanitarian law and the relevant resolutions of the
United Nations.
Yesterday we observed the International Day of
Solidarity with the Palestinian People. The solidarity
and support enjoyed by the Palestinian people will
undoubtedly have strengthened their steadfastness
against injustices and occupation. The result of
yesterday’s vote on resolution 67/19, granting
non-member observer State status to Palestine, showed
the extent of the isolation of the Israeli regime. It sent
a signal to those who blindly support that illegitimate
regime that they seriously need to review their policies
and approaches vis-à-vis that regime.
With reference to that resolution adopted yesterday
under agenda item 37, and those to be adopted today
under agenda item 36, I would like to reiterate once
again that the solution to the question of Palestine,
which is at the crux of the conflict in the Middle
East, lies in compelling the Israeli occupying Power
to fully withdraw from the occupied territories and
enabling the Palestinian people to return to their land
and establish their independent State on the entirety
of Palestinian land. The Palestinian people, regardless
of their religion or ethnicity, should freely express,
through a democratic and peaceful mechanism — a
referendum, with the participation of all the inhabitants
of Palestine — their opinions regarding their fate and
future and the kind of State and Government they want

12-62371

Nuclear weapons in the hands of a regime with an
unparalleled record of State terrorism and of resorting
to aggression and threats of force against other countries
present a real threat to regional and global peace and
security and to the non-proliferation regime. That threat
needs to be urgently and decisively addressed by the
international community, and the initiative to create a
zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle
East should be actively pursued.
In that regard, I would like to echo the statement
issued yesterday by the Non-Aligned Movement,
registering its profound disappointment regarding
some of the statements issued by the conveners of the
2012 conference on the establishment of a Middle East
zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons on
mass destruction. Those statements called for a delay
in convening the conference, which was scheduled to
take place in 2012, out of fear that the conference would
further isolate the Israeli regime. We believe that the
failure to convene the conference before the end of this
year contradicts and violates the collective agreement of
the States parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation
of Nuclear Weapons and that it should therefore be held
as originally scheduled.
Mrs. Al-Mughairy (Oman): On behalf of the
delegation of the Sultanate of Oman, I have the pleasure
to express to President Vuk Jeremić our appreciation
for the convening of this special meeting to consider
the issue of Palestine and the situation in the Middle
East. My country’s delegation would like to convey,

9

A/67/PV.47

through him, its appreciation to Mr. Abdou Salam
Diallo, Permanent Representative of the Republic of
Senegal, for his efforts as Chair of the Committee on
the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights of the Palestinian
People and for its report (A/67/35).
I shall address the two items entitled “Question of
Palestine” and “The situation in the Middle East”.
At the outset, from the international forum of
the General Assembly, my country congratulates the
Palestinian people on the historic accomplishment
yesterday, 29 November, with the Assembly’s adoption
of resolution 67/19, promoting the State of Palestine to the
status of a non-member State in the United Nations. My
country hopes that this may lead to other achievements,
including the attainment of full membership in the
United Nations by the State of Palestine.
There is no doubt that the present meeting is of
special importance, as it will consider an issue — the
question of Palestine — that is a long-standing challenge
to the international community. Meanwhile, the
Palestinian people remain under occupation and
their situation worsens by the day as a result of the
systematic, oppressive practices by the occupying
Power. The international community must not remain
silent and allow this situation to continue.
We are now in the sixth decade of the occupation,
and the displacement and destruction of human
beings and infrastructure continues. Yet the proud
Palestinian people remain undiscouraged and continue
to insist their legitimate rights, represented through
the establishment of their independent State with East
Jerusalem as its capital.
The Government of my country expresses its
deep concern at the tragic situation in the occupied
Palestinian territories resulting from the continuous
Israeli blockade, the imposition of a humanitarian crisis
on civilians in the Gaza Strip, the intensive campaign of
inhumane and illegal acts in the form of fierce attacks
seeking to change the demographic composition of the
population and forced displacement of the indigenous
people, and the practices of the occupying Power in the
noble Al-Quds and around religious sites. In addition,
Israeli settlement activities, including the construction
of settlement units in occupied East Jerusalem, are
intensified and are consistently employed as punitive
measures.
This year marks the thirty-fifth anniversary of the
International Day of Solidarity with the Palestinian
10

People and marks as well the sixty-fifth anniversary of
the Assembly’s adoption of resolution 181 (II), on the
division of the land of Palestine into two States, in 1947.
The Palestinians are still prevented from exercising their
legitimate rights and their national sovereignty — their
right of self-determination. This situation has led to the
existence of more than 4 million Palestinian refugees
suffering from alienation, deprivation and the diaspora.
The Palestinian people depend on the international
community to protect them from the inhuman, illegal
and arbitrary acts against them by successive Israeli
Governments. Hence, the international community
should stand in opposition to those practices. They
include in particular the embargo on the Gaza Strip
launched in 2008, the attack on the freedom convoy
transporting humanitarian assistance, which was
undertaken to remove the unjust embargo imposed by
Israel on Gaza in flagrant violation of human rights,
and the war of November 2012, which proves that Israel
is not interested in achieving peace.
It is necessary for the international community to
send a clear message to Israel to cease those practices
and to call for genuine negotiations that will lead to
the establishment of security and stability on the basis
and principles of land for peace, Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967) and 338 (1973) and the Arab
Peace Initiative.
My delegation confirms what was stated in Oman’s
intervention during the general debate regarding the
complexities that arise in any discussion of the question
of Palestine at General Assembly sessions (see A/67/
PV.19). We are aware of the complexities of those issues.
The United Nations has adopted many resolutions and
policies, but this issue is still a source of concern and
represents a threat of conflict that goes beyond the
Middle East.
In this context, my country believes that the role
of the United Nations in relation to the question of
Palestine should be changed from managing the crisis
to seriously pursuing a just and lasting comprehensive
political solution that would take into account the
interests of the Palestinians and the Israelis, leading to
the establishment of the State of Palestine, living side
by side with the State of Israel. From that perspective,
my country supported the proposal and was among
the first sponsors of resolution 67/19, on Palestine’s
becoming a non-member State at the United Nations.
We did so hoping that would usher in a new phase in

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

the concept of the Palestinian-Israeli relationship, one
which could contribute positively to the settlement of
this problem.
The Government of the Sultanate of Oman is
looking forward to an effective and continuous role
of the United States of America, especially after the
positive position declared by President Barack Obama
during the Assembly’s sixty-fifth session, in September
2010 (see A/65/PV.11), which was welcomed by all. My
Government invites Israel to seize this opportunity
and take advantage of the international momentum in
support of direct negotiations to achieve a partnership
of peace and security with the Arab countries.
The Sultanate of Oman was one of the fi rst countries
to welcome the peace process and considered it a
natural and civilized approach to settling differences
through dialogue and negotiations. Oman invites the
concerned parties to the peace process to play an active
role in the settlement of the conflict in the Middle East
because of the seriousness of the situation in the region
and the crisis witnessed by the region. That will require
the Security Council and the Quartet to work more
vigorously and urgently for a just and comprehensive
solution to the Israeli-Arab conflict, according to the
relevant international resolutions, the principle of land
for peace and the Arab Peace Initiative.
Mr. Yamazaki (Japan): On the commemorative
occasion of the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People yesterday, the General Assembly
adopted historic resolution 67/19, regarding the status
of Palestine at the United Nations. Japan has long
understood the Palestinians’ aspiration to build an
independent State and has supported the right of the
Palestinian people to self-determination. Japan thus
endorses a two-State solution under which Israel and a
future independent Palestinian State would coexist side
by side in peace and security. In the light of that, Japan
voted in favour of this resolution.
Japan believes that following the adoption of the
resolution, Palestine will bear greater responsibility
vis-à-vis the international community. We strongly
urge Palestine to make more earnest efforts for the
realization of peace in the Middle East. We call on
Palestine to immediately resume direct negotiations
with Israel in order to move the peace process forward
in a tangible way, in cooperation with the international
community.

12-62371

It is not acceptable to use this resolution to act
in a way that might negatively affect or hinder direct
negotiations with Israel. We ask for prudence with
respect to conduct such as accession to international
organizations, action which might negatively affect the
prospect for the resumption of negotiations.
Israel, for its part, should improve the environment
for promoting the resumption of peace negotiations. In
particular, settlement activities need to be frozen, as
they are a violation of international law.
Japan requests both Palestine and Israel to establish
relationships of mutual trust and to promptly return to
the negotiating table with a view to realizing a twoState solution. Japan will continue to make an active
contribution to moving the Middle East peace process
forward, in cooperation with the United States, Arab
countries and other partners.
Regarding the situation in the Gaza Strip, Japan
welcomes the agreement reached by Israel and the
Palestinian armed groups on a ceasefire and strongly
hopes that the ceasefire will be a lasting one. Japan
had worked to help realize the ceasefire and highly
appreciates the mediation efforts by Egypt, the United
States of America, the Secretary-General and other
relevant countries and organizations. Japan continues
to support the efforts of the international community
for the stabilization of the Gaza Strip and progress in
the Middle East peace process, and provides its utmost
cooperation.
With respect to assistance to Palestine, Japanese
cooperation has been centred on humanitarian
aid,
assistance
for
State-building
efforts,
confidence-building and enhancing economic selfsustainability. Japan has extended approximately
$1.3 billion in total since 1993. In addition, Japan
promotes assistance to the Palestinians in cooperation
with East Asian countries and is planning to hold
the conference on cooperation among East Asian
countries for Palestinian development next February
in Tokyo, with East Asian countries and international
organizations attending. Japan will actively promote
assistance for the building of a future independent,
viable Palestinian State.
Let me now touch upon the ongoing situation in
Syria. Japan is deeply concerned by the serious and
worsening situation in Syria and profoundly deplores
the deaths of many thousands of people as a result of
the continued violence. Japan reiterates its call on all

11

A/67/PV.47

parties in Syria to immediately halt the violence and
abuses of human rights, and condemns the Syrian
authorities for not keeping their own commitments
and for not discharging their responsibilities to protect
their own citizens. Supporting the diplomatic efforts by
the Joint Special Representative of the United Nations
and the League of Arab States, Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi,
Japan once again urges the Syrian authorities to cease
the violence immediately and to carry out concrete
measures for a Syrian-led political transition.
In that regard, Japan welcomes the establishment
of the National Coalition for Syrian Revolutionary and
Opposition Forces this month. The Government of Japan
hopes that the coalition represents a wide spectrum of
Syrian society and will play a role in the common goal
of advancing a Syrian-led transition process as early as
possible. On that basis, the Government of Japan will
provide support to the coalition.
As a part of efforts by the international community
to promote the cessation of the violence in Syria, Japan
hosted the fifth meeting of the Friends of the Syrian
People International Working Group on Sanctions
today in Tokyo. The meeting sought to improve
the effectiveness of the sanctions implemented by
like-minded countries and to broaden the horizons of the
countries participating in the sanctions. Japan strongly
hopes that the Syrian regime will heed the voice of the
international community to stop the violence against its
own people.
The Middle East and North Africa have been
experiencing a series of movements towards
democratization. The Arab Spring was spawned by the
people’s desire for freedom and democracy. I would like
to take this opportunity to renew Japan’s commitment
to supporting reforms to achieve the transition to
democracy in the region.
Mr. Yudha (Indonesia): Let me begin by expressing
my delegation’s appreciation to the Secretary-General
for his reports on the situation in the Middle East,
contained in documents A/67/342 and A/67/364.
Our meeting here today comes against the
background of yesterday’s historic event, at which
the Assembly conferred non-member observer State
status on the State of Palestine in adopting resolution
67/19. Indonesia is one of many States Members of this
Organization that sincerely believe that the recognition
of Palestine as an important component and ally of the

12

international community is something to be proud of,
not afraid of.
Indonesia remains convinced of the viability
of two States living side by side in peace within the
framework of a comprehensive regional settlement that
includes Lebanon and Syria, and under the terms of
the relevant Security Council resolutions, the Quartet
road map, the Arab Peace Initiative and the principle
of land for peace. To achieve that, however, demands
that the parties sit at the negotiating table to hammer
out an agreement. And that, unfortunately, is where
we continue to be stopped. The reports before us make
clear that developments on the ground continue to
damage mutual confidence and make the resumption
of direct negotiations very difficult, if not impossible.
The reports are categorically clear that forward
movement is being hampered by the Israeli policy on
settlements, which breaches international law as well as
the obligations of Israel under the road map.
Indonesia has always been of the view that achieving
the objectives of the parties in the conflict is neither
unrealistic nor unrealizable. The fact that a mountain is
difficult to climb does not put it beyond conquest. That
depends on the commitment of the mountaineers.
The Secretary-General has stated that peace and
Palestinian statehood are long overdue. Indonesia
agrees, and would like to amplify on that. Like him, we
fully believe that direct and meaningful negotiations
are the main avenue towards a comprehensive, fair and
lasting solution that fulfils the aspirations of Israelis
and Palestinians, including an end to the occupation
and conflict and a just and agreed solution to the plight
of Palestinian refugees. The problem is that all of that
remains at the level of sentiment and rhetoric as long
as the Government of Israel proceeds with policies that
can only maintain the status quo.
We agree with the Secretary-General that, in view
of the dramatic developments in the region, progress on
the Israeli-Palestinian track is of tremendous urgency
and that we are increasingly moving away from a twoState solution into a one-State reality. Such a prospect
is very grim, and we must all come together and make
certain that we return to the path that leads to the
negotiating table, beginning with efforts to rebuild
mutual confidence. To that end, we once again call on
Israel to cease all settlement activity in the occupied
West Bank, including East Jerusalem, and to avoid
contravening its obligations under the road map to

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

freeze all settlement construction, including natural
growth, and to dismantle all the outposts. We reiterate
that those policies simply compound the challenges and
amount to deliberate hurdles on the road.
Finally, Indonesia wishes to state that, while it will
continue to support a two-State solution, such a solution
can succeed only if it is comprehensive and includes
both the Israeli-Syrian and Israeli-Lebanese tracks.
Towards that end, Indonesia again calls on Israel to
withdraw completely from the occupied Lebanese land,
as well as from the occupied Syrian Golan, and comply
fully with Security Council resolutions 242 (1967) and
338 (1973).
On the current situation in Syria, my delegation
wishes to thank Mr. Lakhdar Brahimi, the Joint Special
Representative of the United Nations and the League
of Arab States, for his briefing to the Assembly this
morning. We continue to witness, in Syria, worsening
violence and an unfolding humanitarian catastrophe
on the ground, with the international community in
paralysis as to how to respond. In the view of Indonesia,
that represents a challenge to us to commence, as a
matter of urgency, earnest work aimed at ensuring the
end of the violence and to address the dire humanitarian
needs of the people. We must also, without delay, start
a political process aimed at finding solutions that are
in accordance with the wishes and aspirations of the
Syrian people.
Mr. Khan (Pakistan): I thank the President of the
General Assembly for convening this meeting on the
situation in the Middle East. We align ourselves with the
statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of
Iran on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement.
In adopting resolution 67/19 yesterday, the Assembly
took a historic decision by admitting Palestine into its
family as a non-member observer State. The decision
coincided with the International Day of Solidarity with
the Palestinian People.
We congratulate President Mahmoud Abbas and
the people of Palestine on that historic verdict by the
Assembly. The decision is a step in the right direction.
It is a step towards acceptance of the realities on the
ground, and it should be a step towards recognition of
Palestine as a full Member in the United Nations.
Pakistan was one of the sponsors of resolution
67/19. The Assembly’s decision came after a bloody
week of killings in Palestine and a very welcome

12-62371

ceasefire. We condemn the killings. Sophisticated
weapons — warships, aircraft, artillery and
missiles — were used against the people of Gaza.
The military campaign left over 160 dead and more
than 1,200 injured in Gaza. It has left behind a trail
of destruction that has worsened the humanitarian
situation. However, that recurring phenomenon must
end. We urge the international community to take
immediate and effective steps to ensure that violence
does not erupt again.
But today, let us not talk only about violence, death
and destruction. Let us talk about peace, security and
stability in the region. Let us talk about resumption
of the peace process and full engagement between
Palestine and Israel.
Some countries were disappointed by the General
Assembly’s decision last evening. They thought that
it was a unilateral action. The fact is that the people
of Palestine have waited for far too long to exercise
their right to self-determination and for recognition of
their legitimate statehood. It is our earnest hope and
appeal that following yesterday’s decision there will
be no reprisals or retaliation against Palestine. The
people of Palestine need compassion and solidarity, not
estrangement and punishment. We hope that instead
of punitive measures, the emphasis will now shift to
resuming dialogue on implementing the agreed twoState solution.
Serious doubts have recently been expressed
about the viability of the two-State solution, and there
has been talk of a one-State solution. As noted by the
Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People, the status quo would delay
the two-State solution and might usher in a one-State
reality with unpredictable consequences, and, may I say,
disastrous consequences. Similar concern is expressed
in the report of the Secretary-General (A/67/364). As
the window of opportunity for a two-State solution
continues to narrow, it is urgent to reactivate the
Middle East peace process, based on internationally
agreed terms of reference, including Security Council
resolutions, the Arab Peace Initiative, the Quartet road
map and the Madrid principles.
For a serious quest for peace and a two-State
solution, the construction of illegal settlements must
cease. The Secretary-General has noted that 43 per
cent of the West Bank has been allocated to local
and regional settlement councils, with the result that

13

A/67/PV.47

those areas are off-limits to Palestinians, leaving the
Palestinian territory divided into enclaves with little or
no territorial contiguity. Israel must heed the SecretaryGeneral’s call to freeze all settlement activity, in line
with the Quartet road map.
The blockade of Gaza is a violation of Security
Council resolution 1860 (2009). We call for an end to
the policy of collective punishment being meted out to
1.5 million Palestinians.
The immobility of the Quartet leaves the people of
Palestine with little hope. The winds of change blowing
through the wider Middle East region demand fair and
just dispensation for the Palestinians in terms of their
destiny.
Pakistan believes that comprehensive peace in the
Middle East will remain elusive without the creation
of an independent, viable and contiguous State of
Palestine, based on pre-1967 borders and with Al-Quds
Al-Sharif as its capital. Resolution of the Arab-Israeli
conflict, including through Israeli withdrawal from the
Lebanese territories and the Syrian Golan, is the only
guarantee of sustainable peace in the region.
The dark night of suffering of the people of Palestine
must end now. A Palestinian State living side by side
in peace and security with its neighbours is the only
guarantee of security and stability in the region. The
international community must rise to deliver justice.
The Acting President: We have heard the last
speaker in the debate under this item.
I would like to inform members that action on draft
resolutions A/67/L.23 and A/67/L.24 will be taken after
we take action on draft resolutions A/67/L.17, L.18,
L.19 and L.20, under agenda item 37.
The General Assembly has thus concluded this
stage of its consideration of agenda item 36.
Agenda item 37 (continued)
Question of Palestine
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.17, A/67/L.18,
A/67/L.19 and A/67/L.20)
The Acting President: The General Assembly
will resume its consideration of agenda item 37,
entitled “Question of Palestine”, to take action on
draft resolutions A/67/L.17, A/67/L.18, A/67/L.19 and
A/67/L.20. Before the Assembly takes action on the

14

draft resolutions, one by one, members are reminded
that they will have an opportunity to explain their vote
on all four before and after action is taken on all of the
draft resolutions.
I give the floor to Israel on a point of order.
Mr. Magid (Israel): I call for a recorded vote on all
of the draft resolutions.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolutions A/67/L.17, A/67/L.18,
A/67/L.19 and A/67/L.20.
We turn first to draft resolution A/67/L.17, entitled
“Committee on the Exercise of the Inalienable Rights
of the Palestinian People”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to
announce that since the submission of draft resolution
A/67/L.17, in addition to those delegations listed in
the document, the following countries have become
sponsors: Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Brunei
Darussalam and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.17. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Cape Verde,
Chile, China, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte
d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Fiji, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal,
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan, Paraguay,
Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela (Bolivarian
Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Colombia,
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, El Salvador,
Estonia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Ireland,
Italy, Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro,
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tonga, Ukraine,
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/67/L.17 was adopted by 106
votes to 7, with 56 abstentions (resolution 67/20).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/67/L.18, entitled “Division for Palestinian
Rights of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.18, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.18: Afghanistan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia
and Brunei Darussalam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.18. A recorded
vote has been requested.

12-62371

A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Azerbaijan, Bahamas,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belize, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Botswana,
Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Comoros,
Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus,
Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Grenada, Guinea,
Guyana, Haiti, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s
Democratic Republic, Lebanon, Lesotho, Libya,
Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Philippines, Qatar, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia,
Senegal, Singapore, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian
Arab Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela
(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Denmark, El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland,
France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Japan, Latvia, Liberia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Monaco, Montenegro, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Republic of
Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian
Federation, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tonga,

15

A/67/PV.47

Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and
Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/67/L.18 was adopted by 103
votes to 7, with 61 abstentions (resolution 67/21).
The Acting President: We turn next to draft
resolution A/67/L.19, entitled “Special information
programme on the question of Palestine of the
Department of Public Information of the Secretariat”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to those delegations listed in document
A/67/L.19, the following countries have become
sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.19: Afghanistan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the Plurinational State
of Bolivia and Brunei Darussalam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.19. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire,
Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic
People’s Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti,
Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,

16

Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda,
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United
Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Australia, Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands,
Micronesia (Federated States of), Palau, United
States of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, El Salvador, Honduras, Papua New
Guinea, Togo, Tonga, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/67/L.19 was adopted by 160
votes to 7, with 7 abstentions (resolution 67/22).
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.20, entitled
“Peaceful settlement of the question of Palestine”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I should like to inform
the Assembly that, since the introduction of draft
resolution and in addition to those delegations listed
in document A/67/L.20, the following countries have
also become sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.20:
Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei Darussalam and
Burkina Faso.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.20. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Austria,
Azerbaijan,
Bahamas,
Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Hungary,
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic
of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Lao
People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia,
Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua,
Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal,
Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova,
Romania, Russian Federation, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Togo, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Vanuatu, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet
Nam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America
Abstaining:
Australia, Cameroon,
Guinea, Tonga

12-62371

Honduras,

Papua

New

Draft resolution A/67/L.20 was adopted by 163
votes to 6, with 5 abstentions (resolution 67/23).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolutions just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Lee (Singapore): Singapore voted in favour of
resolution 67/20 on the understanding that the reference
in paragraph 2 to “the achievement of the two-State
solution on the basis of the pre-1967 borders” should be
interpreted in the same manner as set out in paragraph
1 of resolution 67/23, which is “the two-State solution
of Israel and Palestine, living side by side in peace and
security within recognized borders, based on the pre1967 borders”.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 37.
Agenda item 36 (continued)
The situation in the Middle East
Reports of the Secretary-General (A/67/342
and A/67/364)
Draft resolutions (A/67/L.23 and A/67/L.24)
The Acting President: The Assembly will now
take a decision on draft resolutions A/67/L.23 and
A/67/L.24. We turn first to draft resolution A/67/L.23,
entitled “Jerusalem”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, since the submission of the draft resolution and
in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/67/L.23, the following countries have also become
sponsors of draft resolution A/67/L.23: Afghanistan,
Bahrain, Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia,
Brunei Darussalam and Viet Nam.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.23. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.

17

A/67/PV.47

In favour:
Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola,
Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational State of),
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei
Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Colombia,
Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica, Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia,
Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Grenada,
Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic
Republic of), Iraq, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Latvia,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, New Zealand,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Qatar, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Serbia,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands,
Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syrian Arab
Republic, Tajikistan, Thailand, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Nauru, Palau, United States
of America
Abstaining:
Cameroon, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Togo,
Tonga, Vanuatu

18

Draft resolution A/67/L.23 was adopted by 162
votes to 7, with 6 abstentions (resolution 67/24).
The Acting President: Draft resolution A/67/L.24
is entitled “The Syrian Golan”.
I give the floor to the representative of the
Secretariat.
Mr. Botnaru (Department for General Assembly
and Conference Management): I would like to announce
that, in addition to the delegations listed in document
A/67/L.24, the following countries have become
sponsors of the draft resolution: Afghanistan, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Brunei
Darussalam and the Democratic People’s Republic of
Korea.
The Acting President: The Assembly will now take
a decision on draft resolution A/67/L.24. A recorded
vote has been requested.
A recorded vote was taken.
In favour:
Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and
Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belarus,
Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia (Plurinational
State of), Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam,
Burkina Faso, Cambodia, Cape Verde, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Congo, Costa Rica,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Democratic People’s
Republic of Korea, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, Eritrea, Ethiopia,
Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guyana, Haiti,
India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Iraq,
Jamaica, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait,
Kyrgyzstan, Lao People’s Democratic Republic,
Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Malaysia,
Maldives, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico,
Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Oman, Pakistan,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Qatar, Russian
Federation, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore,
Solomon Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Syrian Arab Republic,
Tajikistan, Thailand, Timor-Leste, Trinidad and
Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu,
Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United Republic
of Tanzania, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela

12-62371

A/67/PV.47

(Bolivarian Republic of), Viet Nam, Yemen,
Zambia, Zimbabwe

so as to put an end to the occupation of the Golan
Heights.

Against:
Canada, Israel, Marshall Islands, Micronesia
(Federated States of), Palau, United States of
America

Therefore, on behalf of the Governments of Brazil
and Argentina, I once again stress the importance of
resuming negotiations in order to find a definitive
solution to the situation in the Syrian Golan, in
accordance with Security Council resolutions 242
(1967) and 338 (1973) and the principle of land for
peace.

Abstaining:
Albania, Andorra, Australia, Austria, Belgium,
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Burundi,
Cameroon, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
El Salvador, Estonia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Honduras,
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta,
Monaco, Montenegro, Nauru, Netherlands, New
Zealand, Norway, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of
Moldova, Romania, Samoa, San Marino, Serbia,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo,
Tonga, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain
and Northern Ireland, Vanuatu
Draft resolution A/67/L.24 was adopted by 110
votes to 6, with 59 abstentions (resolution 67/25).
The Acting President: Before giving the floor to
speakers in explanation of vote on the resolutions just
adopted, may I remind delegations that explanations of
vote are limited to 10 minutes and should be made by
delegations from their seats.
Mr. Fernandes (Brazil) (spoke in Spanish): I have
the honour to speak on behalf of the delegations of
Argentina and Brazil to explain our votes, as we have
in previous years, on resolution 67/25, on the Syrian
Golan, just now adopted by the General Assembly.
Brazil and Argentina voted in favour of the
resolution because they believe that its essential
character is linked to the illegitimacy of the acquisition
of territory by force. Article 2, paragraph 4, of the
Charter of the United Nations prohibits the use or threat
of use of force against the territorial integrity of a State.
At the same time, I want to clarify the position
of our delegations with respect to paragraph 6 of the
resolution. Our vote does not prejudge the content of
that paragraph, particularly the reference to “the line
of 4 June 1967”. Brazil and Argentina believe that it is
important to make progress in the search for a solution
to the Syrian-Israeli track of the Middle East conflict,

12-62371

The Acting President: We have heard the only
speaker in explanation of vote.
I now give the floor to the observer of the observer
State of Palestine.
Mr. Mansour (Palestine): I want to thank all of
my colleagues who gave the State of Palestine this
wonderful reception. I am delighted to hear you, Sir,
introducing our participation as the State of Palestine.
Yesterday was a historic day for the Palestinian
people, for the State of Palestine and for all those who
support peace and justice in the Middle East. It was a
historic day for the United Nations; it was a historic day
for all of us in the Assembly Hall. There is no way for me
to describe the enthusiasm that the General Assembly
demonstrated yesterday in receiving our President,
listening to him, legislating in this Hall the recognition
of the State of Palestine and changing our status to
that of a non-member observer State. Indeed that was a
historic day and an historic action, which was received
by our people in the streets of the occupied Palestinian
territory, where hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
joyfully celebrated the historic development.
In the name of the Palestinian people and in the
name of the State of Palestine, I want to thank all
those who sponsored resolution 67/19 and the other
resolutions adopted today under the item “Question of
Palestine” and on Jerusalem. We are also very grateful
to all those who voted in favour. They made history
yesterday and reiterated the principled positions in the
resolutions adopted today.
There are many people we can thank, including
those who were very instrumental in the collection
of sponsors. Among them is a person special to us,
Mr. Morsi from the Arab League, who has been here
for many years and has been an outstanding friend of
the State of Palestine. We want to thank him from the
seat of the non-member observer State of Palestine in
the United Nations.

19

A/67/PV.47

Today is the day after. Yesterday, when we
promoted our draft resolution in connection with our
status at the United Nations, we were contributing
to saving the two-State solution, contributing to
saving peace and contributing to opening doors to the
possibility of creating an atmosphere that is conducive
to negotiations with Israel to end the occupation that
started in 1967 and to allow for the independence of
our State. On the day after, we very sincerely hope that
we can give this option of peace a chance. We hope not
to continue with the option of denying the rights of the
Palestinian people in order to continue to occupy them
and impose wars on them, such as we saw ten days ago
during the war against our people in the Gaza Strip.
The reaction of the Israeli Government was an
immediate provocation, an immediate declaration
regarding building 3,000 illegal housing units and
expanding their illegal settlements. They are trying
to provoke us to react in some way. I do not know
how they expect us to react, but the international
community reiterated its position that settlements are
an illegal obstacle to peace and need to be stopped
immediately. We thus expect the international
community — not only the General Assembly, but also
the Security Council — to uphold international law
and bring Israel into compliance. They are unilaterally
creating illegal facts on the ground, and they are
unilaterally taking measures that are in contravention
of the provisions of international law, especially the
Fourth Geneva Convention.
For our part, having submitted that proposal with
a view to opening doors to peace, we will continue to
extend our hand in peace, but the continued provocation,
testing our resolve and our determination, must have
limits. We are ready and willing, if the other side is
ready, to negotiate in good faith on the basis of the wellknown terms of reference of the peace process. If they
respect and uphold international law, then perhaps we
can open doors for peace to move forward.
The insistence on the option of war and destruction,
violating the law, building illegal settlements, stealing
our land, destroying our homes, displacing our people
and building walls — these things need to be stopped,
and stopped immediately, because they are not things
that will create an atmosphere that will allow us to
negotiate to end the occupation and to achieve the
independence of our State.
The choice is theirs. If they want to move in the
direction of peace, our message and the message of
20

our President were crystal-clear yesterday. We will be
working together, with the international community, to
collectively bring those who are violating international
law, the provisions of the Fourth Geneva Convention,
human rights law and humanitarian law into compliance.
We should do so if we want to open the path of peace, put
an end to the agony and tragedy of our people, liberate
them from the shackles of occupation and allow us to
acquire our independence. More provocations would
be testing our resolve. The message that we pushed
yesterday should be the message that they should listen
to and take seriously into consideration if they want to
move in the direction of peace with us.
I again want to thank all those who have supported
our resolutions and who made history with us yesterday
in making the reality of the two States legally, politically
and diplomatically accepted by the General Assembly.
One State came into being in 1948. The Assembly
legislated its recognition of the other State through
yesterday’s well-known resolution 67/19 and gave it a
non-member observer seat in the General Assembly
with a view to, one day soon, it becoming a full Member
of the United Nations.
A majority of more than two thirds of the members
of the Assembly voted in favour of that resolution
yesterday. In fact, 71.5 per cent of the total membership
of the United Nations voted in favour of our resolution.
If we do not count those that abstained, we received
the votes of 93 per cent of those that were present and
voting in the Assembly.
We believe that this is a massive message to the
Security Council, calling on it to favourably recommend
to the General Assembly the acceptance of the State of
Palestine for full membership in the United Nations. We
hope that the Security Council will rise to the occasion
and listen to this massive message from the Assembly,
which is awaiting the recommendation to allow the
State of Palestine to become a full Member and for
our State’s flag to be put in its alphabetical place in
front of this building so that we can open a new chapter
of the relationship between us and our neighbour, the
State of Israel, and move in the direction of peace and
development. Again, our hand is extended in peace, but
we need the other side to reciprocate in the same spirit.
With that message, and on the eve of the holiday
season, we want to thank the Assembly again very
much for its support, and we hope that very soon, if we
come back to the General Assembly, it will be in order
to vote to grant the State of Palestine full membership.
12-62371

A/67/PV.47

The Acting President: I call on the representative
of the Syrian Arab Republic.

all means of international law, in whose headquarters
we meet today.

Mr. Ja’afari (Syrian Arab Republic) (spoke in
Arabic): My delegation would like to express its
sincere and deep appreciation and gratitude to the
General Assembly for its adoption — every year
without exception since 1981, and by a majority of
the voices promoting right, justice and law — of the
resolutions entitled “The Syrian Golan”, this year
resolution 67/25, as well as other draft resolutions
under the items concerning the situation in the Middle
East and the question of Palestine. The international
community’s continued support for such resolutions is
a clear expression of Member States’ commitment to
the purposes and principles of the Charter of the United
Nations, their rejection of foreign occupation and their
support for our right to recover the Syrian territories
that have been occupied by Israel since 5 June 1967.

It is regrettable that certain countries that have
been frequent advocates for human rights and the
protection of civilians and international law have
imposed sanctions on my country and have besieged it
on that pretext, while failing to vote on resolutions that
would end the Israeli occupation of part of our national
homeland in the Golan, resolutions concerning Syrian
citizens who have long suffered under occupation.

The overwhelming majority of the vote in favour
of these resolutions sends a clear message from the
international community to Israel and its politicians to
the effect that occupation, murder, policies of expansion
and aggression, racial discrimination, the establishment
of settlements, the imposition of a fait accompli and
the forcible annexation of other people’s lands are all
repugnant practices that violate every international
instrument and norm, foremost among them clearly the
Charter of the United Nations and the Fourth Geneva
Convention of 1949. Thus, the fate of all such practices
is denunciation and condemnation by the international
community in the General Assembly.
I would like once again to express my country’s
thanks to all the sponsors of resolution 67/25, entitled
“The Syrian Golan”, and to those who voted in favour
of it, and to reiterate our call for the establishment of a
just and comprehensive peace, based on international
legal resolutions, particularly Security Council
resolutions 242 (1967), 338 (1973) and 497 (1981), as
well as the principle of land for peace and the Arab
Peace Initiative. I would also like to stress Syria’s
unshakeable determination to liberate the entire Golan
to the pre-occupation borders of 4 June 1967 and to
remove all illegal settlements there, in accordance with

12-62371

Some countries voted against the resolutions on
both the Syrian Golan and the question of Palestine,
which enjoy unprecedented international support. That
only proves what we have often said, which is that the
actions of the representatives of those countries do not
match their words or reflect good faith. This is mere
political hypocrisy and a way of dealing with important
issues — such as the occupied Golan and the question
of Palestine — that is based on double standards,
an extreme bias in Israel’s favour and a logic of
aggression in international relations. Israel would not
have persisted with its occupation of Arab territories
if it were not for the direct support that its policies
of occupation and aggression receive from those who
abstained or voted against the resolution on the occupied
Golan. Thus, those countries that are not on the side
of the provisions of the Charter and international law
also bear responsibility for the consequences of the
continued Israeli occupation of the Syrian Golan.
The Acting President: The General Assembly has
thus concluded this stage of its consideration of agenda
item 36.
Programme of work
The Acting President: Before concluding, I
would like to inform members that consideration of
agenda item 35, “Zone of peace and cooperation of
the South Atlantic”, originally scheduled for Monday,
17 December 2012, has been postponed to a later date,
to be announced.
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m.

21
