United Nations

S/PV.6771

Security Council

Provisional

Sixty-seventh year

6771st meeting
Tuesday, 15 May 2012, 3 p.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Mehdiyev . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Azerbaijan)

Members:

China . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Colombia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Guatemala . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
India . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Morocco . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Pakistan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Portugal . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Russian Federation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Togo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . . .
United States of America . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

Mr. Wang Min
Mr. Alzate
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen
Mr. Eick
Mr. Rosenthal
Mr. Kumar
Mr. Loulichki
Mr. Tarar
Mr. Cabral
Mr. Churkin
Mr. Laher
Mr. Mbeou
Mr. Tatham
Mrs. DiCarlo

Agenda
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 9 May 2012 from the Secretary-General addressed to the
President of the Security Council (S/2012/307)

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the interpretation of
speeches delivered in the other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member of the
delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-506.

12-33985 (E)

*1233985*

S/PV.6771

The meeting was called to order at 3.05 p.m.
Adoption of the agenda
The agenda was adopted.
The situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
Letter dated 9 May 2012 from the
Secretary-General addressed to the President
of the Security Council (S/2012/307)
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representatives of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia
and Serbia to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, to participate in this meeting.
Under rule 39 of the Council’s provisional rules
of procedure, I invite His Excellency Mr. Thomas
Mayr-Harting, Head of the Delegation of the European
Union to the United Nations, to participate in this
meeting.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

I wish to draw the attention of Council members
to document S/2012/307, which contains a letter dated
9 May 2012 from the Secretary-General, transmitting
the forty-first report of the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I now give the floor to Mr. Inzko.
Mr. Inzko: I thank you, Sir, for giving me the
opportunity to present my seventh report as High
Representative — the forty-first report of the High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina (see
S/2012/307).
This month is special for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, as it will celebrate 20 years since its
admission as a Member State to the United Nations,
along with Croatia and Slovenia, on 22 May. But this
month is also special for my home country, Austria, as
it presided over the Security Council in the month of
May exactly 20 years ago. The then-Austrian
Ambassador, Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, as President of
the Security Council, proposed on 20 May 1992 to the
Council to adopt a draft resolution recommending to

2

the General Assembly that Bosnia and Herzegovina be
admitted to the United Nations (see S/PV.3079). At the
same meeting the Security Council unanimously
adopted resolution 755 (1992) endorsing his
recommendation. The Security Council President,
Mr. Peter Hohenfellner, also expressed in a prophetic
way that “[a]ll the members of the Council are
confident that Bosnia and Herzegovina will make a
significant contribution to the work of the
Organization” (S/PV.3079, p. 4). Upon this historic
recommendation, Bosnia and Herzegovina was
admitted, through General Assembly resolution 46/237,
adopted without a vote 20 years ago on 22 May 1992,
as a Member of the United Nations.
I wish to take this opportunity to congratulate
Bosnia and Herzegovina wholeheartedly, and I am very
glad that — as predicted 20 years ago — Bosnia and
Herzegovina is indeed making a significant
contribution to the work of the Organization, most
recently with its successful tenure as a non-permanent
member of the Security Council.
I also wish to take this opportunity to
congratulate both Croatia and Slovenia on this
occasion. In Slovenia, the date of admission to the
United Nations is even commemorated as the Day of
Slovenian Diplomacy. Such anniversaries are a time for
reflection. Looking back, nobody can dispute that
Bosnia and Herzegovina has come a long way, but
neither can we dispute that the country has some way
to go before the job is completed. At the same time, I
am very pleased to be able to report that 2012 has
started well, with signs of positive change in the
country. I should like to brief the Council on the most
notable positive developments of recent months, which
I believe offer real hope that 2012 can be a good year
for Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On 10 February — more than 16 months after the
elections — a State Government was finally appointed
with a Croat Chairman. The Government is based on a
coalition of the six strongest parties. I was especially
pleased by this outcome as I have consistently and
repeatedly insisted that the principle of rotation of the
ethnicity of the State Prime Minister between mandates
be respected. Accordingly, we now have a Prime
Minister who is from the constituent people of the
Bosnian Croats. And, by the way, his mandate is off to
an excellent start. Had the authorities not followed the
principle of rotation this time, it would be very

12-33985

S/PV.6771

difficult to re-establish what is, for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, a very important procedure.
Furthermore, I have also consistently and
repeatedly advocated that the six parties forming the
Council of Ministers, given the support they receive at
the elections, have the greatest responsibility for
forming the Government and taking the country
forward. I have encouraged the parties to do so, but I
have made it equally clear that it is up to them to form
a Government and that the international community
would not intervene. Government formation was
preceded by the adoption of two long outstanding
State-level laws — the State Aid Law and the Census
Law, both of which are important for the European
Union (EU) accession process.
Then, on 9 March, the leaders of the six leading
parties reached a political agreement on two of the
issues that have been identified as preconditions for the
closure of my Office: the issue of the ownership and
use of military property, and the broader question of
ownership and use of State property. Overall, the
9 March party leaders’ agreement is a positive step and
offers real hope of progress. Most significantly,
progress on the issue of military property would help to
set the stage for Bosnia and Herzegovina’s full
participation in NATO’s membership action plan — a
step that I have consistently and strongly supported. I
hope that, in a few days time, there will be good news
from the Chicago summit. This would be a real boost
for Bosnia and Herzegovina and a signal to the country
that progress on the Euro-Atlantic path is achievable.
Of course, the benchmark is implementation. What we
need to see now is action by the State and entity
authorities to implement their agreement.
In addition to the progress on defence and State
property, the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board is currently discussing the future of the
international supervisory regime in the Brcko district.
This question is another of the five objectives and two
conditions set for the closure of Office of the High
Representative. My Office will be encouraging and
supporting the domestic authorities to make progress,
but I will not do the job for them. Those times are over.
Progress can be delivered only by domestic
institutions.
This also applies to the implementation of the
Sejdic-Finci judgement of the European Court of
Human Rights, which requires Bosnia and Herzegovina

12-33985

to change the way its Presidency members and
representatives in the House of Peoples are elected.
Progress on this issue is important for Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s EU path, but first and foremost it is
important in and of itself because human rights and the
rule of law matter. Let me take this opportunity to once
again call on the leaders to go the extra mile and to
reach an agreement.
All the positive developments that I have just
mentioned are the result of politicians finally sitting
down and talking to each other. This is so simple, and
yet so elusive. At the same time, Bosnia and
Herzegovina continues to benefit from a positive
regional climate, to which President Josipović and
Foreign Minister Pusić of Croatia, as well as President
Tadić of Serbia, have contributed to greatly. The role of
Montenegro as third neighbour in this improved
regional environment has also been extremely
constructive.
So now, within Bosnia and Herzegovina, for the
first time in a long time we have a political process
based on dialogue and a readiness to compromise. This
long overdue return to political dialogue, negotiation
and compromise is very good news. If it is nurtured
and developed — if Bosnia and Herzegovina’s leaders
honour the commitments they have made — 2012
could indeed be a breakthrough year on the path
towards full Euro-Atlantic integration. In any case, it
has started as a very promising year.
At the same time, given my mandate, I must also
be on record in regard to less welcome developments.
Alongside this positive dynamic, we continue to see a
parallel dynamic of the divisive political agendas that
have been played out over the past six years. A number
of troubling challenges to the Dayton Agreement and
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s territorial integrity took
place during the reporting period, including a series of
statements challenging the statehood of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Relevant quotations and details of these
developments can be found in my report. These are
unwelcome aspects of an otherwise positive political
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and we must keep
them in view. Given my mandate, I must take these
challenges seriously.
Another issue I am watching closely is the issue
of the State budget. The 2011 State budget was not
adopted until 2012, and we still await the adoption of
the 2012 budget and a global fiscal framework for

3

S/PV.6771

2012-2014. The 2012 budget has now passed the first
reading in the Bosnia and Herzegovina House of
Representatives. I warmly welcome this step, and I am
hopeful that Parliament will finish the job swiftly so
that we can finally have a budget in place at the State
level. It remains to be seen how the budget, which is
smaller than the last regular budget, adopted for 2010,
will impact on the functioning of the State-level
institutions. We hope, however, that the basic functions
of the State, including those relevant to the country’s
EU and NATO perspectives, can be maintained.
This year is an election year and will bring
challenges of its own. The electoral rules for Mostar
and Srebrenica have been hotly debated and may very
well shape the election campaign. Both places are
special and deserve our ongoing attention. My Office
will certainly be making an extra effort in 2012 to help
both communities to make progress in the interests of
the citizens who live there and to contribute to the
creation of an environment that will enable selfsustaining coexistence for many generations to come.
While pointing to these difficulties and
challenges, I do not wish to diminish the very real and
long-awaited signs of positive political progress that
the European integration dynamic appears to be
delivering. At the same time, I want to recall that
Bosnia is a very specific country with a troubled recent
history. It needs a special and calibrated approach. We
should not ignore this as we look to the future.
As Bosnia and Herzegovina’s Constitution was
drafted as part of the Peace Agreement, the Dayton
factor will always be present in some form in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. However, it is vital that the European
Union factor continues to be steadily strengthened, as
the Euro-Atlantic future is Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
future — its only future. Needless to say, this trajectory
has my full respect and wholehearted support.
My hope is that the country will draw strength
from how far it has come during the past 20 years and
that this reality will inspire political leaders to meet
their responsibilities to their citizens and, I dare say, to
the international community as well.
Given how much the international community has
invested in Bosnia and Herzegovina over the years, it
is only natural that we have expectations of the
political leaders and authorities in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. They have proven in the past six months

4

that they can make progress; now we expect, and need,
to see more.
Allow me to conclude by making three points.
First, recent developments offer hope of genuine
progress, but it is still early days. We need to see far
more in the way of concrete results, and I believe that
we will. The year 2012 can be a breakthrough year for
the country in its efforts to progress towards full
Euro-Atlantic integration. NATO and European
Union’s membership are two parts of a single path for
Bosnia and Herzegovina. They are complimentary and
I fully support both.
Secondly, we cannot ignore that challenges to the
Peace Agreement continue. We must ensure that we are
equipped to deal with such challenges. In doing so, we
will also be supporting the efforts of those forces in the
country that want to move forward and progress
towards Euro-Atlantic integration.
Thirdly, our unity is our strength — the unity of
the international community. Bosnia and Herzegovina
could be a role model and an example of how the
international community works together successfully
and speaks with one voice. On the ground in Sarajevo
that has been achieved already. Peter Sørensen, the new
EU Special Representative, has had a brilliant start in
Bosnia and Herzegovina. Let us give him our full
support. He and I, as well as our offices, are working
together well. I stand ready to continue to cooperate
with him and all other actors, including the Security
Council, for I firmly believe that as long as we remain
united we will succeed.
We have come a long way in the past 20 years
and invested a huge amount of energy and resources.
Let us make sure we remain committed and complete
our mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina successfully. It
can be achieved.
The President: I thank Mr. Inzko for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to the members of the
Council.
Mrs. DiCarlo (United States of America): Let me
begin by welcoming High Representative Inzko back to
the Security Council. I also thank him for his
comprehensive briefing and his service and support of
the Dayton Peace Agreement.
The United States remains committed to the
success of Bosnia and Herzegovina, where we and our

12-33985

S/PV.6771

European Union (EU) allies have invested much over
the 16 years since the signing of the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We are very encouraged by the progress
made in recent months, and hope to see the leaders of
Bosnia and Herzegovina build upon that momentum to
resolve the remaining obstacles on the path towards
Euro-Atlantic integration, and to develop governing
institutions that will deliver results for all citizens
regardless of ethnicity.
I would like to make three points in reaction to
High Representative Inzko’s report (see S/2012/307).
First, the United States welcomes Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s significant progress on forming a
national Government since the last report (see
S/2011/682). We applaud the diligence with which the
new Government has approached its responsibilities,
including adopting a State budget and pursuing
EU-required reforms. The Parliamentary Assembly’s
adoption of two key EU-required laws — the Law on
State Aid and the Law on Population Census,
Households and Apartments — also are welcome and
critical milestones on the road to full European
integration. With that goal in mind, we encourage
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s compliance with the
European Court of Human Rights ruling in the SejdicFinci vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case, which would
allow the EU stabilization and association agreement to
enter into force. The United States strongly supports
the European Union’s increasing engagement under EU
Special Representative Peter Sørensen. The Office of
the High Representative and the EU complement one
another’s important roles in helping the Bosnian people
find a path forward. We welcome their excellent
cooperation on the ground.
Secondly, we share the High Representative’s
positive views on the 9 March political agreement on
principles to be used to resolve the issues of defence
and State property. We urge Bosnia and Herzegovina to
implement as soon as possible the defence property
portion of the agreement, through registration of
defence properties, in order to meet NATO’s condition
for participation in the membership action plan. The
implementation of both State and defence property
deals would complete two outstanding 5+2 objectives,
bringing Bosnia and Herzegovina closer to meeting the
Peace Implementation Council’s criteria for closing the
Office of the High Representative. Until the 5+2
criteria have been met, it is critical that that Office

12-33985

receive sufficient resources and political support to
uphold its mandate under the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Thirdly, the United States remains steadfastly
committed to preserving Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
sovereignty and territorial integrity. We remain deeply
concerned by ongoing rhetoric challenging Bosnian
sovereignty and attempting to roll back past reforms.
The High Representative’s latest report highlights
continued nationalistic statements made by senior
Republika Srpska officials acknowledging deliberate
obstruction of Dayton institutions and referencing the
dissolution of the State. Such statements do not help
the country move forward and are unacceptable.
Rather than attack the Dayton Peace Agreement
and the constitutional basis of the State, we hope that
all parties will continue to engage in political dialogue
with a view to serving the needs of all Bosnian
citizens. In that regard, it is imperative that Bosnians
work together responsibly in advance of October’s
municipal elections, to contribute to reconciliation and
strengthen Bosnian democratic institutions.
As Secretary Clinton stated in July 2010, on the
fifteenth anniversary of the Srebrenica genocide,
“a prosperous, free and unified Bosnia and
Herzegovina is the most worthy monument to
those who lost their lives at Srebrenica, and the
best guarantee against such a tragedy ever
repeating itself”.
Mrs. Le Fraper du Hellen (France) (spoke in
French): I should like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko,
High Representative of Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
his briefing. France certainly fully echoes his statement
on the unity of the international community.
I would like to associate myself with the
statement to be made by Mr. Mayr-Harting on behalf of
the European Union.
A 15-month period during which an outgoing
Government was only able to deal with daily business
has come to an end in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
situation on the ground has remained calm and stable
in spite of the nationalist rhetoric intended to challenge
the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. Unfortunately, the process of reforming
and strengthening the country’s institutions lost
momentum long ago.

5

S/PV.6771

As Mr. Inzko highlighted, however, the
establishment of a Government led by Prime Minister
Bevanda, the vote on the State Aid Law and the Census
Law and the agreement reached on 9 March on
principles to be used to resolve the issues of ownership
and use of defence and State property are steps that
have served to place the country back on track towards
Euro-Atlantic integration. Progress has also been made
towards establishing a budget for 2012 and a fiscal
framework for the period 2012-2014.
Mr. Bevanda’s statement during his swearing in
speech that his country’s European perspective and, in
particular, the entry into force of a stabilization and
association agreement would be his Government’s
priorities deserves our encouragement. We call on
Bosnian authorities to pursue their efforts to bring their
Constitution into line with the European Convention
for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms. We also encourage them to prepare for the
local elections of 7 October as well as possible and to
find lasting compromises for particular local situations,
such as specifically that in Srebrenica.
I also welcome, as High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina Inzko has done as well, the
efforts deployed since September by Mr. Peter
Sørensen, European Union Special Representative and
Head of its Delegation to Bosnia and Herzegovina,
who has contributed to that country’s progress towards
a European future. The European Union’s commitment
is bearing fruit and must continue.
As in any other place where the Council is
engaged, it is important that the United Nations adapt
is presence to developments in the political and
security situation. For its part, the European Union has
understood that in adjusting its civilian and military
presence. The Office of the Special Representative will
be further strengthened this summer, in particular with
regard to the rule of law. Contingents to the European
Union Force and Operation Althea will be further
reduced, with refocus on training and advice for
Bosnian armed forces while of course retaining the
capacity to take on tasks in support of Bosnian
authorities, should that become necessary.
Taking into account that the security situation has
been calm for several years now and that there has
been progress on political dialogue and reforms,
including moving towards the five objectives and two
conditions established by the Peace Implementation

6

Council (PIC) in 2008, there is justification for
enhanced commitment by the European Union, and it
calls for the continued reconfiguration of the
international presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The High Representative is the guarantor of
peace agreements on behalf of the international
community. His efforts and his dialogue with Bosnian
political representatives have our full support. His
mission and the resources available to him obviously
have to develop in accordance with the situation. We
trust that a first step in that direction will be taken
when the PIC Steering Board meets in Sarajevo next
week. A first step would be to decide on the end to
international supervision on the Brcko district.
Five months after the European Union Council of
Foreign Ministers adopted clear conclusions on
reducing the size of Office of the High Representative
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, on 5 December 201l, it is
time to move on to action. We should recalibrate the
work of the Office with a view to creating
complementarity vis-à-vis the work of the European
Union.
In conclusion, I would like to reassert our
commitment to the independence, unity and territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Like other
countries in the Balkans, that country has cast its sight
towards the European Union and its values. As a
Security Council member, it recently demonstrated that
it is also a responsible member of the international
community and of the United Nations. It has become
an important factor in regional stability, as was shown
by its hosting in April of the International Donors
Conference on Durable Solutions for Refugees and
Internally Displaced Persons. At a time when we have
just commemorated, among other events, the sad
anniversary of the beginning of the siege of Sarajevo,
we can only be grateful for the road travelled since
those terrible days.
Mr. Laher (South Africa): South Africa
welcomes Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina, to the Security Council once
again, and we thank him for his comprehensive
briefing.
We congratulate Bosnia and Herzegovina on the
upcoming twentieth anniversary of its membership in
the United Nations.

12-33985

S/PV.6771

We have seen notable progress during the
reporting period, which we hope will bode well in
resolving outstanding issues in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. South Africa is pleased that, after
16 months without a Government, the Council of
Ministers was appointed by the House of
Representatives on 10 February. We also welcome the
signing of the agreement on 9 March on defence and
State property. Those are positive developments
towards addressing two of the outstanding objectives
of the 5+2 agenda established by the Peace
Implementation Council (PIC) Steering Board. We are
hopeful that those important agreements will allow the
country to focus on fulfilling the remaining obligations
of the 5+2 agenda. In that regard, my delegation calls
on all sides to actively engage in the completion of the
process, which would result in the people of Bosnia
and Herzegovina gaining full responsibility for their
country.
It is our view that peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina is dependent upon a number of
elements. It is imperative that all parties respect the
rule of law and the legal instruments that underpin the
political structures in the country. The political
leadership and the international presence should
remain focused on recognizing the balance contained
in the Dayton Peace Agreement and the subsequent
political structures, and exert all efforts to ensure that
this balance is respected and maintained.
My delegation has noted the adoption of the 2011
budget at the end of last year and encourages all parties
to compromise and focus on adopting a budget for
2012 without delay, in order for the country to be able
to begin to respond to economic challenges, including
poor growth prospects and high unemployment.
We are reminded of the fact that the Dayton
Peace Agreement should be replaced by a permanent
constitution in Bosnia and Herzegovina. All parties
should commit to constitutional reform, the purpose of
which is to establish strong and representative State
structures.
No considerable progress can be made in
establishing lasting peace and stability without
constructive dialogue among the many ethnic groups
and entities, as well as between the various Bosnian
structures and the High Representative. It is only
through political dialogue that it will be possible to
resolve outstanding issues, such as the reform of the

12-33985

Constitution and the adoption of the country’s 2012
budget. A decision should also be made on whether the
Office of the High Representative should be closed as
soon as the outstanding objectives and conditions set
by the PIC Steering Board are met.
Reconciliation should be the ultimate aim of
continued dialogue. An essential aspect for
reconciliation is a commitment by all parties to fight
impunity by bringing to justice those accused of
committing war crimes. We call on the Government to
make resources available to the bodies authorized to
carry out that task.
My delegation reiterates that reconciliation is
jeopardized by provocative, divisive and nationalistic
rhetoric and by actions aimed at undermining the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Bosnian
State and the authority of the High Representative. We
call on all parties to refrain from actions that will
further undermine State institutions and prolong the
current tensions.
In conclusion, my delegation wishes to encourage
all parties in Bosnia and Herzegovina to recommit
themselves to the full implementation of their
obligations under the peace accords and agreements.
Political will is essential in moving forward the process
of long-term peace, stability and reconciliation. South
Africa remains dedicated to its task as a member of the
Security Council to support Bosnia and Herzegovina in
those efforts.
Mr. Wang Min (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for his
briefing.
At the moment, the situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina is generally calm. China commends the
progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina in
safeguarding peace, achieving national reconciliation,
rebuilding the economy and establishing the rule of
law. We welcome the agreements concluded by the
parties through dialogue and consultation, the
formation of the Council of Ministers and the signing
of an agreement on the ownership of defence and State
property.
China respects the independence, sovereignty,
national unity and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. We also respect the choice of its people
on the future of the country. We support the

7

S/PV.6771

harmonious coexistence of its many ethnicities in
seeking common development. We hope that the
country’s various ethnic groups will proceed from a
concern for the well-being of the nation and its longterm interests. We also hope that they will resolve their
differences through dialogue and enhanced mutual
political trust, promote national reconciliation,
implement
the
comprehensive
Dayton
Peace
Agreement and work towards accelerated progress in
all areas.
China welcomes the efforts made by High
Representative Inzko to promote the political process
in the country. We hope that, in accordance with his
mandate, he will continue to play a positive and
constructive role in implementing the Dayton Peace
Agreement. We have noted the decision to reduce the
size of the European Union Force (EUFOR). We hope
EUFOR will expand its support for the Armed Forces
of Bosnia Herzegovina so that the country can soon
assume comprehensive responsibility for safeguarding
its sovereignty, security and stability.
Maintaining peace and stability in the country
and promoting its economic and social growth are
common interests of all parties concerned. At the same
time, the question of Bosnia Herzegovina is complex
and sensitive. It does not only involve the country
itself, but also the peace and stability of the entire
Balkan region. When dealing with this issue, the
international community should exercise prudence and
listen attentively to the views and concerns of all
countries. China will work with the international
community and continue to provide support and
assistance, within our capacity, to help the country
achieve lasting peace, stability and development.
Mr. Tarar (Pakistan): We would like to join other
Council members in thanking High Representative
Valentin Inzko for his report (see S/2012/307) and for
his briefing this afternoon.
Pakistan is fully committed to the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
therefore support all efforts to strengthen the State at
the national level, while preserving the rights and
privileges of all communal entities. It is important for
all parties to recognize and abide by the international
and legal frameworks for the division of power.
We welcome the positive developments and the
progress achieved during the current reporting period,
which have included the formation of the State-level

8

Government and the adoption of the 2011 budget. The
authorities should now focus on the economic
development of the country, which, among other
factors, was affected adversely by the long stalemate
over the formation of the Government and over the
adoption of the budget. Amid poor growth prospects,
the country’s deteriorating fiscal position and its high
unemployment call for serious action by the
authorities, supported by the international community.
The agreement reached on the principles to be
used for resolving the issues of the ownership and the
use of public and military assets is a significant
development. We hope there will be progress on the
implementation of the agreement, which requires the
adoption of the necessary legal acts and the conclusion
of separate inter-Governmental agreements.
Pakistan shares the concern expressed by the
High Representative in his report over the trend of
nationalist politics and the statements by some
challenging the Dayton Peace Agreement, and in
particular challenging the sovereignty and territorial
integrity of the country. The reported legal and
political actions challenging State-level institutions,
competencies and laws, and challenging the authority
of the High Representative, are also a cause for serious
concern. Those developments can vitiate the
atmosphere and undermine the prospects for long-term,
peaceful coexistence. Challenges to the Dayton Peace
Agreement and its institutional arrangements, as well
as divisive rhetoric, should therefore be avoided.
We would urge the leaders of Bosnia and
Herzegovina to resolve their differences through
dialogue. The Office of the High Representative should
play an enabling role in that regard. We take note of the
fact that, while there were some signs of progress on
two issues, none of the outstanding items, out of the
five objectives and two conditions necessary for the
closure of the Office of the High Representative, was
fulfilled during the reporting period. Under the
circumstances it is only logical and imperative that the
High Representative continue his important work,
supported by an Office with adequate resources.
Pakistan supports all efforts to ensure a safe and
secure environment in Bosnia and Herzegovina and
sincerely hopes that the political leadership will join
hands, in a spirit of dialogue and cooperation, to
overcome the political and economic challenges facing
the country. We hope that we will see many more

12-33985

S/PV.6771

positive developments by the time of the next report of
the High Representative.
Mr. Cabral (Portugal): I would like to welcome
the High Representative, Ambassador Valentin Inzko,
and convey to him Portugal’s appreciation and support
for his important and demanding work and that of his
Office, in the interest of peace and stability in Bosnia
and Herzegovina. I also thank him for his very
comprehensive report (see S/2012/307).
Portugal naturally shares the views expressed in
the statement that will be made later by the observer of
the European Union, but allow me to underline some
issues of particular concern for my country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has undertaken
significant efforts to overcome the political impasse
following the October 2010 elections, which affected
the development of national policies, its progress
towards meeting the 5+2 agenda to close the Office of
the High Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina,
and its European Union and NATO integration. In that
regard, the constructive attitude of the political leaders
and the relevant authorities is much to be appreciated
and encouraged so that the positive momentum towards
the adoption of relevant reforms is not lost.
Among those reforms, the economic reforms are
of particular importance, given the difficult situation of
the country. In that context, we reiterate the urgent
need to adopt the 2012 State budget and the 2012-2014
global fiscal framework, as they would contribute to
the strengthening of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s social
and economic stability and, ultimately, to peace and
security throughout the region. Challenges to the fiscal
structure of Bosnia and Herzegovina at its different
levels, as we have witnessed over the past months,
directly threaten the operation and sustainability of the
federal Government and risk creating new obstacles for
a Government, and indeed for an entire country, that
faces a very complex situation in that regard.
In conclusion, the international community, and
notably the European Union, must continue to be fully
engaged with Bosnia and Herzegovina. We welcome
the reinforcement of the European Union presence in
the country and we support the European Union forces,
particularly the European Union Police Mission, the
competencies of which will soon be assumed by the
European Union Special Representative and by the
European Union Force-Operation Althea, the mission
and presence of which, we believe, continue to be of

12-33985

significant importance for Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
also bear in mind the ongoing discussions on the
reconfiguration of the international presence with a
view to reflecting on the specific needs of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and responding to them in an adequate,
constructive and open-minded manner.
Mr. Loulichki (Morocco) (spoke in French): I
would first like to thank Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, for
presenting his report (see S/2012/307) on the situation
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and on the progress
achieved in the implementation of the Peace
Agreement. I assure him of our full support.
Today’s Security Council debate is taking place at
an important moment in the history of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, because it coincides with the anniversary
of the admission of the country to the United Nations.
Mr. Inzko has described for us, with great eloquence
and passion, the symbolism attached to that event.
The latest report of the High Representative
comes at a time when national politics are difficult in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, but there are nevertheless
some significant and encouraging developments, from
the formation of a new Council of Ministers to the
adoption of the budget, the progress on the question of
military and public assets and the adoption of laws on
the census, public assistance and the distribution of
property. Those developments reflect a spirit of
dialogue, compromise and reconciliation, which we
welcome. It is a spirit that augurs well for the future of
the country and of the entire region. The progress to
date, however, is unfortunately overshadowed by real
threats, including those targeting the territorial
integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the cancellation
of laws and regulations adopted at the federal level and
the non-recognition of federal authorities by certain
regions. Should they continue, such machinations
threaten to undermine the efforts made in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and by the international community since
the Dayton Peace Agreement to put the country back
on the path of peace, harmony and reconciliation.
We therefore call on the various protagonists in
the Bosnian political arena to abstain from any word or
act that might undermine the current process of
national reconciliation or the efforts of Bosnian
authorities to establish a viable and peaceful country. It
is not in the interest of any community to exacerbate
the tension and sow discord and divisiveness at a time

9

S/PV.6771

when Bosnia and Herzegovina needs unity and the
support of the communities making it up in order to
take up the vast challenges of reconstruction and
development that it is facing.
As an ambassador accredited to Bosnia and
Herzegovina between 1995 and 1999, I was able to
take stock first hand of the extent of the destruction
and suffering in the aftermath of the war, but at the
same time I also witnessed the spirit of openness and
tolerance and the love of life of the people. Morocco
has always firmly believed in peace in that region and
it has contributed thereto and will continue to do so. It
is hard to establish such peace, and it will take a long
time to consolidate it, but it is vitally necessary and
beneficial for each of the peoples in the region.
The young Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has travelled a long way on the path to reconciliation
and the establishment of a democratic State. All
Bosnians feel protected by the rule of law. It is up to us
to help this country by every means possible to build
and develop.
Mr. Eick (Germany): I would like to join
colleagues in thanking the High Representative for
Bosnia and Herzegovina for his comprehensive and
informative briefing.
Germany aligns itself with the statement to be
made by the observer of the European Union (EU).
Seventeen years after a devastating war that put
Bosnia and Herzegovina on the brink of violence and
disintegration, the security situation remains calm and
stable. We acknowledged that fact already during our
last debate six months ago (see S/PV.6659). At that
time, however, the country was in a state of political
paralysis.
Today we can welcome significant improvements.
The political process in the country has tangibly gained
momentum. A new State-level Government has finally
been formed, more than 15 months after the elections.
With the budget for 2011, the country has started to
regain its capacity to act at a fiscal level. The recent
laws on State aid and on the census to take place in
2013 are equally important and prerequisites for the
EU accession process. The decision on the distribution
of State and military property between the State and
the entities has laid the groundwork for the activation
of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s NATO membership action
plan.

10

Germany commends Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
political leaders for beginning to overcome their
differences and for cooperating constructively in the
search for compromises. However, significant
challenges still lie ahead. The most imminent is the
long overdue implementation of the ruling by the
European Court on Human Rights on the Sejdic-Finci
vs. Bosnia and Herzegovina case, concerning the right
of minorities to be elected to the Bosnian Presidency
and to the second chamber of Parliament. A credible
effort in that regard is the prerequisite for the next step
towards EU membership, namely, the entry into force
of the stabilization and association agreement with the
European Union.
Bosnia and Herzegovina must remain firmly
anchored on the reform track, not least to catch up with
its neighbours on the path towards Europe. The
responsibility lies first and foremost with Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s political leaders. They should place
front and centre the interests of their country as a
whole and the well-being of all of its citizens.
The European Union has the proven political will
and the instruments necessary to support Bosnia and
Herzegovina in that task. The EU approach is based on
a clear and simple concept — in order to benefit from
what the EU has to offer, Bosnia and Herzegovina
needs to assume ownership of a comprehensive reform
process that will, step-by-step, lead the country
towards accession. Based on that approach, the EU
Special Representative in Sarajevo has worked
tirelessly to facilitate the positive developments of the
past months.
Close
and
far-reaching
monitoring
and
supervision by the international community was
undoubtedly a necessity in the past. It has not
succeeded, however, in creating incentives for
politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina to seek
compromise solutions rather than advancing their
nationalist
agendas.
Germany
wholeheartedly
welcomes the indispensable contribution to peace and
stability in Bosnia and Herzegovina that the High
Representative and his Office have made during the
past 17 years.
It is now time, however, to focus on concepts and
instruments that have shown to initiate positive
developments, rather than on obsolete approaches. The
EU perspective is finally occupying centre stage in
Bosnia and Herzegovina; we can now afford to relieve

12-33985

S/PV.6771

the Office of the High Representative of tasks that are
fulfilled by the EU and its representatives on the
ground.
With regard to the question of immunity from
legal proceedings of present and former staff of the
Office of the High Representative, we continue to
favour a sustainable and comprehensive solution at
some stage.
Let me conclude by underlining once again our
commitment to a sovereign and united Bosnia and
Herzegovina
that
enjoys
territorial
integrity,
contributes to peace and stability in the region and is
willing and able to conduct the EU accession process
by its own strength.
Mr. Rosenthal (Guatemala) (spoke in Spanish):
First of all, I would like to welcome Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and thank him for his briefing, to which
we listened carefully.
We are committed to the Dayton Agreement and
to defending and maintaining the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina. We
believe that it is vitally important for political leaders
and the international presence to remain focused on the
balance afforded by the Dayton Agreement and the
subsequent political structures. We are sure that all of
the parties to those agreements will continue to realize
the importance of the achievements of the past 15 years
and defend the General Framework Agreement for
Peace. The Agreement is a living document whose
meaning has evolved together with Bosnia and
Herzegovina over time.
We would just like to make four comments on
Mr. Inzko’s report. First, we are pleased that the
formation of the Government has been completed,
albeit 15 months late. It is obvious that the resumption
of a political dialogue is essential if tangible progress
is to be achieved. During the stalemate, Bosnia and
Herzegovina did not only suffer from political
instability, but also from economic instability. In that
regard, we trust that the important step of forming a
Government will provide a basis for institutional
progress and the groundwork for Bosnia and
Herzegovina to become a stable, economically
prosperous and democratic country. A clear example is
the recent adoption, on a first reading, of the budget for
2012, particularly since it allocates resources for
holding local elections this year and for the first census

12-33985

to be conducted since 1991 for the following the year.
We welcome the enactment of the country’s Law on
Population Census, Households and Apartments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina in 2013. We believe it is
important given the large number of people displaced
since the war.
Secondly, we also have a positive view of the
agreement adopted on 9 March on the principles to be
used to resolve the issues related to the ownership and
use of defence and State property. It should
undoubtedly facilitate the achievement of the five
objectives and two conditions necessary for the
transition from the Office of the High Representative.
We should take advantage of current political
circumstances and encourage all parties to redouble
their efforts to that end. We believe that at this stage of
the settlement of the Bosnian conflict the time is ripe
for transferring responsibility for the future of Bosnia
and Herzegovina to Bosnians themselves.
That brings me to our third point, on Brcko
district. We realize that it is vital to the stability of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. We await with interest the
forthcoming meeting of the Peace Implementation
Council Steering Board next week. There are various
issues to consider, in particular the possible adoption of
a decision on terminating the supervision of Brcko.
That requires an assurance that the local institutions
are functioning effectively and reliably. Similarly, it
also requires that the Arbitral Tribunal established
under annex 2 of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace be maintained as a mechanism for
guaranteeing all the important and binding obligations
imposed by the Final Award.
Fourthly, we should recall the fact that the
Dayton Peace Agreement is supposed to be replaced by
a permanent Bosnian constitution. We urge all the
parties involved to focus once again on constitutional
reform. Its goal is to establish strong and representative
State structures. We note the establishment of the
Parliamentary
Interim
Joint
Committee
for
Implementation of the European Court of Human
Rights ruling. We will follow with interest the results
of that important undertaking.
As we can see, peace and stability in Bosnia and
Herzegovina depend on various factors. The report (see
S/2012/307) treats the twentieth anniversary of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s independence and its unanimous
admission to the United Nations as an opportunity for

11

S/PV.6771

reflecting on lessons learned and on the road still to be
travelled. There is no doubt that the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina and the region is better today than it
was 20 years ago. The success of our mission will
depend on whether all the parties, including the
international community, respect the rule of law and
the legal instruments that support the country’s
political structures.
Mr. Alzate (Colombia) (spoke in Spanish):
Colombia thanks the High Representative for Bosnia
and Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his clear and
detailed briefing on recent developments regarding the
implementation of the General Framework Agreement
for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina. Similarly, we
would like to express our support for his work relating
to annex 10 of the Agreement.
We would like once again to reiterate our support
for the Dayton Peace Agreement and its annexes,
which we believe paved the way for peace and
coexistence in that important part of the world. We
note with satisfaction that out of this has evolved a
political dialogue among the parties, and progress has
been made in areas such as the appointment of the
Council of Ministers by the Bosnia and Herzegovina
House of Representatives on 10 February. That is the
spirit that we believe marks the path of reconciliation
and lasting peace.
We are aware that progress still has to be made on
other issues in order to achieve the five objectives and
two conditions necessary for the closure of the Office
of the High Representative. One step in that direction
is the agreement on the principles to be used to resolve
the issues of ownership and use of defence and State
property, signed on 9 March by the leaders of the six
political parties that make up the State-level governing
coalition and ratified by the Council of Ministers on
21 March. The implementation of the agreement on
defence property constitutes another step in Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s progress towards full participation in
the membership action plan of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization, which is unquestionably a very
important goal.
It is regrettable, however, that after several years
have gone by, and despite the support that the
international community has provided throughout the
process, political actions and legal measures are still
being put forward by regional entities that defy
institutions and undermine the implementation of the

12

Peace Agreement. It is a matter of concern that the
constitutional order is contested by actions such as
those seeking to repeal laws on the Court and the
Prosecutor’s Office of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We therefore urge the parties to commit
politically to ensuring that their administrative and
legislative acts align with the State institutions
established under the General Framework Agreement
for Peace, and to end those that might weaken,
duplicate or take over the competencies of State-level
institutions, taking into account that strengthening
institutions and peacebuilding are responsibilities that
belong to the people and the authorities of Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a whole.
No less prejudicial is the nationalistic rhetoric
employed by some senior officials of those same
entities, challenging the territorial integrity and unity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina and alluding to the possible
dissolution of the State. Once again, we call for the
avoidance of any aggressive rhetoric and urge the
parties to work to strengthen institutions and achieve a
political solution to such differences, preserving the
country’s sovereignty and territorial integrity.
There are other issues, such as macroeconomic
affairs, that while not peculiar to Bosnia and
Herzegovina nonetheless require special attention in
view of the deterioration of the country’s financial
situation, poor prospects for growth, unemployment
levels and social problems associated with a difficult
economic situation. One step towards dealing with
such challenges has been taken with the Fiscal
Council’s progress on adopting a global fiscal
framework for 2012-2014 for its budget. We are
convinced that through hard work and leadership the
authorities can overcome these and the other
challenges I have mentioned. Colombia is determined
to lend every support, in a spirit of cooperation and
friendship, to their just desires for the peace and
prosperity they deserve.
Mr. Kumar (India): At the outset, I would like to
welcome High Representative Valentin Inzko to the
Council and to thank him for his comprehensive
briefing and for the report on the situation in Bosnia
and Herzegovina (see S/2012/307).
It is a matter of satisfaction that there were
positive political developments in Bosnia and
Herzegovina during the reporting period. The parties
reached a broad agreement that facilitated the

12-33985

S/PV.6771

formation of a new Council of Ministers after nearly
15 months of stalemate following the October 2010
elections. The Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina
has been meeting regularly and has taken a number of
foreign policy decisions that should promote the
country’s eventual Euro-Atlantic integration.
It is also commendable that progress was
achieved on a global fiscal framework and that two key
European Union-related laws on State aid and the
census were adopted. The agreement on unblocking the
State-owned electricity transmission company was also
a welcome development.
The joint declaration of the Ministers for Foreign
Affairs of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia,
Montenegro and Serbia on cooperation to protect and
promote the rights of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons should serve as an important
confidence-building measure. Such cooperation will
not only promote regional cooperation but also
facilitate those countries’ common aspirations for
Euro-Atlantic integration.
We have noted that none of the outstanding items
among the five objectives and two conditions
necessary for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative has been fulfilled so far. However, we
are glad that the 9 March agreement on State property
and defence property has the potential for an
acceptable and sustainable resolution of the issue of the
apportionment of property that will meet two of the
five objectives and two conditions. In addition,
progress in the ongoing discussion on the future of
supervision of Brcko can help to meet another of the
five objectives.
We hope that the Bosnian parties will, in the
spirit of compromise and maturity, continue their
commitment to addressing fiscal problems so that the
current trend of deteriorating economic prospects is
reversed and the country returns to the path of high
growth of the pre-recession years.
Through their continued presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, the European Union and NATO military
missions have played an important role by ensuring the
safety and security of the country’s citizens, even when
the political situation has been tense. We commend
those efforts.
As we have said in previous Security Council
meetings, Bosnia and Herzegovina is a novel

12-33985

experiment in building a new nation from the rubble of
a civil war that the peoples of the former Yugoslavia
had to endure in the 1990s. It is never easy to build a
multi-ethnic, multilingual, multicultural and multireligious country. The problems discussed in the High
Representative’s report and briefing are those bound to
be encountered on the path of building a nation
inhabited by people of different faiths, ethnicities and
languages. Our own experience over the last six
decades has convinced us that, although the path
towards building such a nation is long and arduous, the
fruits are well worth the efforts.
Resolving the problems facing the Bosnian
peoples therefore calls for patience, determination and
mutual accommodation. Unilateral actions, mutual
suspicion, rhetorical statements and violation of the
General Framework Agreement for Peace will only
vitiate the political and social atmosphere and delay the
achievement of the peoples’ goals. We would therefore
urge the leadership of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
international community to persevere in spite of the
problems encountered.
In conclusion, I would like to highly commend
the work being done by High Representative Inzko in
assisting the people and leadership of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in their nation-building endeavours. We
fully support his efforts.
Mr. Tatham (United Kingdom): I, too, welcome
High Representative Inzko to the Security Council and
thank him for his report (see S/2012/307). The United
Kingdom would like to express its gratitude to the
High Representative for the tireless and principled
efforts he has undertaken to ensure the implementation
of the General Framework Agreement for Peace and to
promote stability and reform in Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
We welcome the High Representative’s
assessment of recent developments and join him in
welcoming Bosnia and Herzegovina’s tentative steps
forward on both European Union (EU) and NATO
paths. In February, we finally saw the formation of a
new State-level Government, focused on the common
goals of EU accession and economic stability. We
quickly saw positive results, with the passage of laws
on State aid and the census. The Government of Bosnia
and Herzegovina has made it a priority to secure the
entry into force of the stabilization and association
agreement with the European Union. It also hopes to

13

S/PV.6771

lodge a formal application for EU membership this
year. Both are achievable if the remaining criteria are
met. We join the High Representative in encouraging
political leaders to demonstrate their commitment by
delivering reforms through hard work and compromise.

collaborative relationship with High Representative
Inzko. There is no reason that the Office of the High
Representative and the EU cannot work together in a
complementary fashion, and every reason that they
should do so.

We also welcome progress towards the
completion of some of the five objectives and two
conditions necessary for the closure of the Office of the
High Representative. We urge the full implementation
of political agreements on the registration of defence
property and State property.

The European Union should provide the
incentives to lead Bosnia and Herzegovina forward
and, in response to genuine progress, increasingly take
the lead in the country, with the Office of the High
Representative gradually reducing its presence. That
Office will nevertheless retain a crucial role in
upholding the Dayton Agreement until the 5+2
conditionality is met. In the meantime, the executive
powers of the Office remain a crucial safeguard. We
must not lose patience or rush into significant changes
prematurely.

As the High Representative makes clear, it is
early days in the life of the new Government, and
progress remains fragile. Promises were made and not
delivered on in the past. There are still signs of
politicians putting their nationalist political agendas
above the needs of the country and its citizens. Of
particular concern are statements challenging the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of Bosnia and
Herzegovina, references to the dissolution of the State
and attempts to refer to entities as States. Such
statements are unacceptable and go against the interests
of the people of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Those threats
are a stark reminder of the continued importance of the
High Representative’s role in upholding the General
Framework Agreement for Peace.
We also note the rising tensions related to
municipal elections in October, in particular in
Srebrenica and Mostar, and call on leaders from all
parties and ethnic groups to refrain from divisive
rhetoric that increases tensions and instead serve the
interests of all people and promote reconciliation.
Twenty years since the start of the war in Bosnia
and Herzegovina, it is important to remember the
appalling human cost of that war and to commemorate
its victims. But we must also recognize that Bosnia and
Herzegovina today has much to be proud of and,
looking forward, it is clear that 2012 is a year of
opportunity for the country. In order to realize that, we
need to see urgent progress towards implementing the
judgement in the Sejdic-Finci vs. Bosnia and
Herzegovina case, so that Bosnia and Herzegovina’s
EU stabilization and association agreement can enter
into force.
We fully support the European Union’s strategy
for
Bosnia
and
Herzegovina.
EU
Special
Representative and Head of Delegation Peter Sørensen
has done an excellent job. We commend his

14

The United Kingdom strongly supports High
Representative Inzko’s assessment that the executive
mandate of the European Union Force-Operation
Althea continues to provide critical reassurance to the
Bosnian people and that it plays a central role in
supporting Bosnia and Herzegovina’s own efforts to
maintain a safe and secure environment. International
safeguards against instability remain essential
alongside a strong EU presence. We look forward to
the Security Council renewing European Union ForceOperation Althea executive mandate for an additional
year in the autumn.
Mr. Mbeou (Togo) (spoke in French): I would
like to thank the High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Mr. Valentin Inzko, for his presentation
of the biannual report on the situation in that country
(see S/2012/307).
Togo welcomes the important political progress
in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in particular the formation,
on 10 February, of a central Government, more than
16 months after the general elections held in October
2010.
My country followed with great concern the
ongoing political impasse that slowed the normal
functioning of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s institutions
and led, in particular, to the slower implementation of
the national and international obligations of that
country. The compromise reached by the political
leaders of the country is proof that, with political
resolve, Bosnia and Herzegovina is able to meet the
challenges facing it. The numerous actions undertaken
by Bosnia and Herzegovina, including the adoption of

12-33985

S/PV.6771

measures pertaining to the European Union integration
process, show that a new momentum is at work and
should be supported.
My country would also like to commend the
progress made by political leaders towards achieving
the five objectives and two conditions required for the
closing of the Office of the High Representative, and
the signing in March 2012 of an agreement that opens
the way to the resolution of questions concerning the
ownership of defence and State property. We hope that
the relevant authorities, at their respective levels, will
very swiftly take the appropriate measures to
implement this agreement.
Moreover, we welcome the ratification on
30 March 2012 by Bosnia and Herzegovina of the
International Convention for the Protection of All
Persons from Enforced Disappearance. By this
ratification, the country is committed to carrying out
investigations to locate those who have disappeared, to
prosecute the perpetrators of the disappearances, and to
provide families of the disappeared with access to full
compensation, which represents considerable progress
in terms of combating impunity.
These major achievements should not lead us to
ignore the remaining obstacles and challenges to
building a truly functioning, multi-ethnic State. Indeed,
according to the report, the political situation between
the different communities remains tense, and the
Dayton Peace Agreement is coming up against the
desire of some leaders to strengthen the autonomy of
their entity and to move towards independence,
circumstances allowing, while others call for the
creation of a third entity with a Croat majority.
In this respect, Togo deplores nationalist rhetoric
that undermines central State institutions and the
efforts of the international community to bring peace
and stability to the country and the region as a whole.
We continue to believe that only frank and sincere
dialogue and the quest for compromise will lead to a
lasting and definitive settlement of differences. That is
why we invite all Bosnian political leaders to refrain
from all unilateral and sectarian solutions and to
combat extremism, religious hatred and violence,
which destabilize the country. By the same token, Togo
urges them to work together in order to adopt the
reforms necessary to move the country onto the path
towards greater national and regional integration. It is

12-33985

only in doing so that they will be able to ensure peace
and prosperity for their citizens.
I would like to conclude by expressing my
country’s full support for the efforts of the High
Representative in his mission in Bosnia and
Herzegovina and to the civilian and military staff who
work to promote respect for the Dayton Peace
Agreement and stability in the country.
Mr. Churkin (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We welcome High Representative Inzko. We
must unfortunately note that his analysis today and on
previous occasions has not been objective. His analysis
of the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina is still
tainted by a biased criticism of the leadership of the
Bosnian Serbs.
For a more objective picture of the processes
taking places in Bosnia and Herzegovina, we would
recommend that members of the Security Council also
read the seventh report of the Republika Srpska to the
Security Council, in which the Bosnian Serbs’
commitment to international law and the spirit of the
Dayton Peace Agreement is self-evident. The points
cited in the document clearly confirm the significant
contribution made by Banja Luka to the positive
progress made in the country, as noted in the High
Representative’s report (see S/2012/307). They also
show that, in comparison with the Federation of Bosnia
and Herzegovina, the Republika Srpska has developed
more successfully in all areas, ranging from the
economy to inter-ethnic reconciliation and respect for
human rights.
We believe that the main responsibility of the
international community at this stage of the Bosnian
settlement is to transfer responsibility for the fate of
Bosnia and Herzegovina to the Bosnians themselves. In
practical terms, this means abolishing the Office of the
High Representative, and to that end, returning to the
five objectives and two conditions established by the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council.
We note that, for several years now, the security
situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina has remained
stable. This also reflects the maturity of the Bosnian
State. In recent months, progress has been made in
intra-Bosnian dialogue. The establishment of Bosniawide institutions has been completed. A compromise
has been reached on the 2012 budget. The political
leaders of Bosnia and Herzegovina have agreed to the
terms and timetable for the allocation of property,

15

S/PV.6771

including defence property, between the State and the
entities. Of particular importance is the recent
agreement that the issue of ownership of State property
is, in essence, the main condition that has yet to be met
under the international community’s five objectives
and two conditions agenda, the implementation of
which will enable the Office of the High
Representative to be closed.
Despite the ongoing differences, dialogue is
moving forward. This proves the Bosnian leaders’
ability to find compromises to current problems on
their own, without external involvement. In this
context, we would underscore the Russian Federation’s
principled opposition to interference by the
international community in the internal Bosnian
negotiation process. Any external support to one side
could undermine the fragile political balance in the
country. This fully pertains to the demands made by the
leaders of the Bosniak parties to amend the Electoral
Law through a decision of the High Representative,
bypassing the Dayton-mandated procedure. This is an
attempt to extend the term of the temporary
arrangements, enabling those citizens who do not live
in the enclave of Srebrenica to vote in municipal
elections in October 2012.
We are categorically opposed to the arbitrary use
by the High Representative of his Bonn powers. Our
fundamental position is that the use of emergency
measures can be justified only in exceptional
circumstances of gross violations of the Dayton Peace
Agreement that are likely to destabilize the situation in
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
We consider it realistic to contemplate the end in
the near future of the supervisory regime in the Brcko
district and the closure of a separate office of the High
Representative. We believe that the pertinent decision
should be taken at the forthcoming meeting of the
Steering Board of the Peace Implementation Council
on 22 and 23 May.
In this regard, we are concerned by the recent
step taken by Mr. Izetbegović, current Chairman of the
Presidency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, to ask the
representatives of the member countries of the Steering
Board of the Peace Implementation Council for a
decision not to be taken in May on the closure of the
mission in Brcko under the specious excuse that the
district is apparently not able to function
independently. This is acceptable neither in form or nor

16

in substance. Mr. Izetbegović, in violating the Dayton
Peace Agreement, has put forward his personal
opinion, which does not conform to the positions taken
by the other Governments of the constituent entities
and conflicts with both the international and the intraBosnian dialogues.
We consider the possibility of strengthening the
European Union (EU) military operation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina as a step in the direction of closing down
the Office of the High Representative. We welcome in
this context the partition of the post between the High
representative and the EU Special Representative. We
are convinced that a precondition for the successful
work of these two international presences in Bosnia
and Herzegovina should be the strict respect of their
mandates. We believe that they should not overstep
their respective responsibilities.
We acknowledge the importance of incorporating
amendments to the Constitution of Bosnia and
Herzegovina in line with the ruling of the European
Court of Human Rights on the Sejdic-Finci vs. Bosnia
and Herzegovina case. A compromise is possible in
this matter. We consider that decisions on key
settlement issues should be taken in international
forums such as the Security Council and the Steering
Board of the Peace and Implementation Council.
The President: I shall now make a statement in
my capacity as the representative of Azerbaijan.
At the outset, I would like to thank Mr. Valentin
Inzko, High Representative for Bosnia and
Herzegovina, for presenting the forty-first report on the
implementation of the Peace Agreement on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (see S/2012/307).
Azerbaijan welcomes the progress registered
during the reporting period, including the resumption
of political dialogue and the conclusion of a number of
significant agreements by the leaders of six political
parties. The positive developments also included
important steps towards meeting some of the objectives
for the closure of the Office of the High
Representative.
At the same time, we are concerned about a
number of remaining threats to the General Framework
Agreement for Peace. Azerbaijan condemns any action
to challenge the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
Bosnia and Herzegovina and attempts to roll back past

12-33985

S/PV.6771

reforms related to the implementation of the Peace
Agreement.
As the High Representative notes in his report,
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia was satisfactory during the
reporting period.
The economic and social situation in the country
is still complex. At the same time, we note with
satisfaction that the economic data for 2011 showed
some signs of improvement compared to 2010. We call
on all political factions of Bosnia and Herzegovina to
focus on its economic and development priorities.
We take positive note of the joint declaration
signed in November 2011 by the Foreign Ministers of
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia committing their respective Governments to
cooperate in a spirit of good faith to protect and
promote the rights of refugees, returnees and internally
displaced persons, to end their displacement, and to
enable them to live as equal citizens in those four
countries. In that regard, it is of the utmost importance
to address and to resolve all outstanding problems, in
particular those relating to property, in a way as to
ensure that the inalienable rights of returnees are fully
guaranteed and implemented.
I resume my functions as President of the
Council.
I now give the floor
Mr. Thomas Mayr-Harting.

to

His

Excellency

Mr. Mayr-Harting: I have the honour to speak
on behalf of the European Union (EU). The acceding
country Croatia; the candidate countries the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and
Iceland; the country of the Stabilization and
Association Process and potential candidate Albania;
the European Free Trade Association country Norway,
member of the European Economic Area; as well as
Ukraine and the Republic of Moldova align themselves
with this statement.
I would like to join other speakers in welcoming
High Representative Valentin Inzko back to the
Council.
We welcome the recent positive developments in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and reaffirm our strong
support for the country on its path towards European
integration. We commend the relevant authorities and

12-33985

political leaders for their concrete efforts to take
decisions in a spirit of compromise. After a prolonged
period of stagnation, the European Union perspective
has finally begun to dominate the political agenda. The
European Union welcomes the formation of the Statelevel Government, as well as the adoption of the State
Aid Law and the Census Law. The timely and proper
implementation of those laws will not only facilitate
further progress towards European Union membership,
but also contribute to the peace, stability and prosperity
of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The momentum in Bosnia and Herzegovina is
positive and must be maintained. In particular, Bosnia
and Herzegovina needs to urgently bring its
Constitution into compliance with the European
Convention on Human Rights. The implementation of
the ruling by the European Court of Human Rights in
the Sejdic-Finci case would be a key element for the
European Union to consider a membership application
credible in the foreseeable future.
Among other goals, socio-economic reforms are
also urgently needed. In that regard, we look forward
to the adoption of the 2012 State budget and the 20122014 global fiscal framework, which are essential to
the country’s ability to develop growth-oriented
policies, as well as to receive and utilize international
economic and financial assistance, including the
sizeable support provided by the European Union.
The European Union also welcomes and supports
further progress in the implementation of the five
objectives and two conditions, in line with the
agreement, in principle, among the political leaders on
defence and State property. The European Union
expects the Peace Implementation Council Steering
Board to take a decision on ending supervision of the
Brcko district at its meeting next week. It is important
to underline that it is the prime responsibility of Bosnia
and Herzegovina’s political leaders to achieve concrete
and tangible progress, and thus allow for the further
transformation of the international presence, including
the Office of the High Representative.
The European Union looks forward to continuing
discussion with the international community on the
reconfiguration of the international presence, including
its downsizing and the possible relocation of the Office
of the High Representative, in the appropriate forum.
In that regard, it notes the ongoing discussions on

17

S/PV.6771

overlapping tasks between the Office of the High
Representative and the European Union.
The European Union has recently strengthened its
engagement and political presence in Bosnia and
Herzegovina so as to facilitate its progress towards
European integration. The new single European Union
Special Representative and head of delegation, Peter
Sørensen, who leads the support for Bosnia and
Herzegovina in EU-related matters, has increasingly
engaged with its authorities and political leaders.
The two crisis management missions on the
ground are also an expression of the European Union’s
commitment. First is the European Union Police
Mission, which will be closed by the end of next month
and whose remaining strategic tasks will be transferred
to the European Union Special Representative and a
technical assistance programme. The second mission is
the EU-led force (EUFOR) Operation Althea, which
remains an important element of the European Union’s
overall strategy for the country. Operation Althea
continues to focus on capacity-building and training,
while maintaining situational awareness and a credible
reserve, in case it is called upon to support efforts to
maintain or restore the safe and secure environment, as
stipulated by resolution 2019 (2011).
The overall security situation in Bosnia and
Herzegovina remains stable. Security and political
stability need to be maintained during the upcoming
electoral period. In that regard, the European Union
encourages Bosnia and Herzegovina’s political
representatives to continue to act in a spirit of
compromise, to work for the long-term interests of the
country, and to refrain from divisive rhetoric and
actions that harm the interests of the citizens.
We stand fully behind the authority of the High
Representative and welcome the close cooperation with
the European Union Special Representative. Moreover,
we reiterate our unequivocal commitment to the
territorial integrity of Bosnia and Herzegovina as a
sovereign and united country.
Bosnia and Herzegovina has travelled far since
the end of the war in the 1990s. Its ongoing
transformation away from reliance on an international
presence into a position of being a responsible and
contributing member of the international community,
as represented by its 2010-2011 participation in the
work of the Council, is primarily a Bosnia and
Herzegovina-owned and -led process. The European

18

Union will proactively continue to support progress
towards a stable, viable, peaceful, multi-ethnic and
united Bosnia and Herzegovina cooperating peacefully
with its neighbours and irreversibly on track towards
membership of the European Union.
The President: I
representative of Serbia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Starčević (Serbia): It is a pleasure to see the
representative of friendly Azerbaijan in the chair of the
President of the Security Council. At the outset, allow
me to welcome Mr. Valentin Inzko, High
Representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and to
thank him for his report (see S/2012/307).
On this occasion too, I wish to point out the
consistent respect of the Republic of Serbia for the
Dayton Peace Agreement as the basis of stability in
Bosnia and Herzegovina and the whole region of the
Western Balkans. Serbia is committed to the territorial
integrity and sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina
and to non-interference in its internal affairs. We shall
support any agreement on the change of the internal
system defined by the Dayton Agreement so long as it
is reached by full consensus between the two entities
and the three constitutive peoples.
We expect that the recently completed process of
the establishment of all governmental bodies in Bosnia
and Herzegovina will make an additional contribution
to stabilization in Bosnia and Herzegovina and give
impetus to its faster European integration.
Serbia welcomes the decisions adopted recently
in Bosnia and Herzegovina and deems them important
steps forward on that country’s road to the European
Union. We believe that additional, concrete
encouragement from the European Union is needed to
further stabilize the situation in the country.
We appreciate and are very pleased by the fact
that Belgrade was the destination that Bosnia and
Herzegovina’s Foreign Minister Zlatko Lagumdžija
visited on his first trip abroad. On that occasion, the
two countries reiterated the importance they attach to
bilateral relations and expressed their desire to promote
further comprehensive advancement of their relations
and cooperation. We are ready to continue to promote
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina in the
exchange of experiences and in rendering reciprocal
support with respect to European integration in order to

12-33985

S/PV.6771

achieve our common goal of joining the European
family of nations.
In our opinion, sustainable solutions can be
achieved only through dialogue and compromise
between the two entities and the three constitutive
peoples. We believe that the international community
should treat relations between the three constitutive
peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina with great care and
respect for their interests. Serbia encourages all sides
in Bosnia and Herzegovina to invest additional efforts
in reaching sustainable solutions on all outstanding
issues.
We consider it counterproductive to criticize one
of the entities and to label it as anti-Dayton when the
representatives of the people of that entity are
sometimes vocal in their reactions to situations that
they consider detrimental to the rights of their people.
Further detailed analyses are needed in such situations
in order to find proper solutions. The unilateral use of
such situations in an attempt to effect potentially
punitive measures will certainly not help to build
confidence or to improve the functioning of institutions
in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Serbia has demonstrated its full readiness to
confront the past and to contribute to the better future
and well-being of the region. It has done everything
necessary in that respect. In our view, all war crimes
committed in the territory of the former Yugoslavia
must be prosecuted in order to establish lasting
stability and reconciliation in the region.
We believe that steps should be taken towards
closing the Office of the High Representative and
terminating the so-called Bonn powers, because the
legitimately elected representatives of all peoples and
entities have the ability and capacity to take over the
responsibility for independently managing the affairs
of the State.
Serbia is developing its relations with the
Republika Srpska on the basis of the Agreement on
Special Parallel Relations, but we are concentrating at
the same time on strengthening relations with the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. By actively
participating in and chairing numerous regional
initiatives, the Republic of Serbia has confirmed its
commitment to regional cooperation. Successful
cooperation with Bosnia and Herzegovina within,
among others, the South-East European Cooperation
Process, the Central European Initiative, the Regional

12-33985

Cooperation Council and the Adriatic-Ionian Initiative
contributes to further strengthening good-neighbourly
relations and to the common European future.
Serbia is fully committed to the achievement of a
just, comprehensive and sustainable solution to the
problem of refugees. We commend the excellent
organization of the International Donors Conference on
Durable Solutions for Refugees and Internally
Displaced Persons, organized in Sarajevo on 24 April.
The Conference fulfilled the expectations of all
participants and is a good example of the successful
cooperation of the four countries of the region —
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro and
Serbia — in achieving lasting housing solutions for the
most vulnerable refugees, with the assistance of
international organizations and the donor community.
This will no doubt contribute to the promotion of goodneighbourly relations and the achievement of lasting
stability and reconciliation in the region.
The President: I
representative of Croatia.

give

the

floor

to

the

Mr. Vilović (Croatia): Let me extend our
welcome to Mr. Valentin Inzko, High Representative
for Bosnia and Herzegovina, and thank him for his
briefing and his report (see S/2012/307). Croatia aligns
itself with the statement of the European Union (EU),
but I would like to deliver a statement in my national
capacity as well.
Reflecting on the past six months since the last
report of the High Representative (see S/2011/682), our
general conclusion is that while there are still reasons
for concern with the pace of progress of important
political and economic processes in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, there have also been important and
encouraging developments.
The meeting of six political parties in Banja Luka
on 9 March yielded tangible political results regarding
the distribution of defence and State property. Croatia
reads the successful agreement on the principles to be
used in resolving the property distribution issue as a
demonstration of political will and commitment to the
processes of Euro-Atlantic integration. We welcome
this breakthrough as an encouraging message to the
North-Atlantic Alliance in view of the forthcoming
Chicago summit. Croatia is convinced that a clear
perspective on NATO membership is of the highest
importance to the further strengthening of Bosnia and
Herzegovina. At the same time, the positive or negative

19

S/PV.6771

impact of Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability on the
region of South-East Europe and beyond should not be
underestimated.
The six parties of the State-level governing
coalition also discussed on 9 March the constitutional
changes that need to be undertaken for compliance
with the verdict of the European Court of Human
Rights in the Sejdic-Finci case. Despite the current
absence of concrete results, we can acknowledge that
the leaders recognized the importance of that issue and
that they succeeded in agreeing on the basic principles
that would have to be respected. We are hoping for
concrete results at tomorrow’s meeting in Mostar. An
agreement on constitutional changes that would
substantially address the identified weaknesses of the
election system would make a major contribution to the
political stability of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The progress of 9 March, however limited,
creates momentum, and the international community
should strongly encourage Bosnia and Herzegovina to
maintain its level of demonstrated effort and
commitment. It is our strong belief that this
encouragement should take the form of constant
attention and support, especially in the Euro-Atlantic
integration process, as that path provides the best
framework for strengthening institutions, the rule of
law and democratic life itself. The integration process
should take into account all the specificities of Bosnia
and Herzegovina and respect the basic principle of the
country’s political existence, namely, the equality of
the three constitutive peoples and all its citizens.
Politicians in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as
representatives of the international community, have
acknowledged that Croats, as one of the three
constitutive peoples of Bosnia and Herzegovina, do not
enjoy the same level of institutional rights as the other
two, and have expressed their willingness to work
towards solutions that would remedy that situation.
We strongly support all developments that would
ensure that every citizen of Bosnia and Herzegovina
feels equally protected and respected throughout the
country’s territory. We particularly encourage further
energizing the process of the return of refugees to their
pre-war homes. Unfortunately, there is still ground for
concern when it comes to the atmosphere and language
in the public space, especially calls for separatism or
any kind of extremism. Such language should not be
tolerated, and the international community should send
that message very clearly.

20

We are also concerned by the lack of full
functionality of institutions and of coordination
between the two entities, which are prerequisites for
the advancement of the European Union (EU)
integration process. Croatia strongly supports a more
robust presence of the European Union mission in
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as all efforts that
contribute to the further harmonization of laws and
practices within Bosnia and Herzegovina and with the
European Union.
Croatia and Bosnia and Herzegovina are two
neighbouring and friendly countries with significant
trade relations and a long common border that will
soon become the longest external border of the
European Union. In recent months, we have witnessed
increased dynamics in political contacts, ranging from
meetings by Croatian President Ivo Josipović with his
counterparts to the first official visit to Bosnia and
Herzegovina by the new Croatian Prime Minister
Zoran Milanović in February, which was followed by
direct working meetings at the line ministry level. In
all bilateral exchanges, Croatian officials encouraged
greater coordination and support of EU efforts to assist
Bosnia and Herzegovina in reaching European
standards and, in a constructive spirit of cooperation,
in finding ways of mitigating any possible negative
consequences of Croatia’s future membership in the
EU on Bosnia and Herzegovina’s economy and society.
Our own experience tells us that the process of
European integration goes hand in hand with the
process of institution-building, and we are confident
that it will enhance Bosnia and Herzegovina’s stability
and cohesion. Croatia has already started to share its
unique know-how with the leadership, State
administration and citizens of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
For that reason, we proposed to Bosnia and
Herzegovina a treaty on Euro-Atlantic partnership,
covering many areas of cooperation. For many of the
activities involved, Croatia and Bosnia and
Herzegovina will seek wider support and collaboration.
Let me conclude by stressing that Bosnia and
Herzegovina is a country with a burdened history and a
complex political system. Admittedly, it requires the
ongoing attention and support of the international
community. However, Croatia intends not to assume a
mentoring role, but rather to encourage the democratic
process to develop from within, as that is the only way
to reach long-lasting stability and prosperity for Bosnia

12-33985

S/PV.6771

and Herzegovina and for the region of South-Eastern
Europe as well.
The President: There are no further names
inscribed on my list of speakers. The Security Council

12-33985

has thus concluded the present stage
consideration of the item on its agenda.

of

its

The meeting rose at 4:55 p.m.

21
