UNITEDNATIOiVS

THIRTY-THIRD

YEAR

MEETING:
NEW

5 DECEMBER 1978

YORK

CONTENTS
Page

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2104)

...............,..............

Adoption of the agenda , . . . , . . . . . . , . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .
Admission of new Members:
Application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to membership in
the United Nations (S/l 2942) . . , . . . . . . . . , . . . , . . . . . , . . . . . . . . .
The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the Charge d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent
Mission of the Congo to the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security Council (S/ 12945) . . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . , . . . , . .

1
’

1

f’

.

S/PV.2104

2104th bJEEFISJ(;;
Held in New York

on Tuesday, 5 Dqxmher

President: Mr. Riidiger von WECHMAR
(Federal Republic of Germany).

197’8, at 5 pm1

3. The last sentence of rule 59 provides that the Committee sPaI report its conclusions to the Council not less
than 35 days in advance of a regular session of the General
Assembly. In accordance with past practice in the case of
applications which are submitted during a General Assembly session, I propose that the Council should waive that
rule.

Present: The representatives of the following States: Balivia, Canada, China, Czechoslovakia, France, Gabon, Germany, Federal Republic of, India, Kuwait, Mauritius, Nlv
geria, Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of
America, Venezuela.

4. I take it that the Council agrees to follow the procedure
I have just outlined.

Provisional agenda (S/Agenda/2104)

It was so decided.

1. Adoption of the agenda

5. The PRESIDENT: I would suggest that the members of
the Committee on the Admission af New Members should
meet in 10 minutes in order to examine the appiication of
the Commonwealth of Domlnica and prepare the Committee’s report to the Council, Accordingly, the Committee
will meet at 4.Q5 p.m. in Conference Room 5. I would
further request the Committee to be ready to submit its
report ta the Council at a meeting to be held tomorrow at
3 pm.

2. Admission of new Members:
Application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for
admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/12942)
3. The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the Charge
d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the
Congo to the United Nations addressed to the
President of the Security CounciI (S/12945)

The situation in Namibia:
Letter dated 1 December 1978 from the ChargC d’Affaires a.i. of the Permanent Mission of the Congo to
the United Nations addressed to the President of the
Security CounciI (S/l 2945)

The meeting was called to order at 3.50 p,nz.
Adoption of the agenda

6. The PRESIDENT: I have been informed that there are
no speakers inscribed to take the floor on the agenda item
dealing with the situation in Namibia. With the consent of
the Council, I therefore propose that we should adjourn
this meeting and fuc the date of the next meeting on that
question in consultations,

The agenda was adopted.
Admission of new Members:
Application of the Commonwealth of Dominica for
admission to membership in the United Nations
(S/12942)

7. Mr. N’DONG (Gabon) (interpretation from French):
Mr. President, I wish of course to congratulate you on
behalf of the delegation of Gabon, but I wish also to tell
you that this morning the African Group met precisely to
consider the follow-up to be given to the request made by
its Chairman for the month concerning the question of
Namibia. A decision was taken. That decision was to
suspend the debate in the Security Council and to transfer
it to the General Assembly, which enables me to inform
you now that the African Group decided to suspend sine
die the discussion on the question of Namibia and to
transfer it to the General Assembly.

1. The PRESIDENT: On 29 November 1978, the Secretary-General, acting in accordance with rule 59 of the
provisional rules of procedure of the Security Council,
circulated in document’ S/12942 the application of the
Commonwealth of Dominica for admission to membership
in the United Nations.
2. Under the further provisions of rule 59, unless the
Council decides otherwise, such application shall be referred by the President of the Council to the Committee on
the Admission of New Members. Accordingly, unless I hear
a proposal to the contrary, I shall refer the application of
the Commonwealth of Dominica to the Committee on the
Admission of New Members for examination and report.

The meeting rose at 4 p.m.
1
