S/PV.8530

United Nations

Security Council

Provisional

Seventy-fourth year

8530th meeting

Tuesday, 21 May 2019, 10 a.m.
New York

President:

Mr. Djani. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

(Indonesia)

Members:

Belgium. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
China. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Côte d’Ivoire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Dominican Republic. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Equatorial Guinea. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
France . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Germany . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Kuwait. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Peru. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Poland . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Russian Federation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
South Africa . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland . . 
United States of America. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

Mrs. Van Vlierberge
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu
Mr. Adom
Mr. Singer Weisinger
Mr. Sipaco Ribala
Mr. Delattre
Mr. Schulz
Mr. Alotaibi
Mr. Ugarelli
Ms. Wronecka
Mr. Safronkov
Ms. Bekwa
Ms. Pierce
Mr. Cohen

Agenda
The situation in Libya

This record contains the text of speeches delivered in English and of the translation of
speeches delivered in other languages. The final text will be printed in the Official Records
of the Security Council. Corrections should be submitted to the original languages only. They
should be incorporated in a copy of the record and sent under the signature of a member
of the delegation concerned to the Chief of the Verbatim Reporting Service, room U-0506
(verbatimrecords@un.org). Corrected records will be reissued electronically on the Official
Document System of the United Nations (http://documents.un.org).

19-14763 (E)
*1914763*

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

The meeting was called to order at 10.10 a.m.
The situation in Libya
The agenda was adopted.
The President: In accordance with rule 37 of the
Council’s provisional rules of procedure, I invite the
representative of Libya to participate in this meeting.
In accordance with rule 39 of the Council’s
provisional rules of procedure, I invite the following
briefers to participate in this meeting: Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security.
Mr. Chergui is joining via video-teleconference
from Addis Ababa.
The Security Council will now
consideration of the item on its agenda.

begin

its

At this meeting, the Security Council will hear a
briefing by Mr. Salamé, Mr. Chergui and by Ambassador
Juergen Schulz, Deputy Permanent Representative
of Germany, in his capacity as Chair of the Security
Council Committee established pursuant to resolution
1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I now give the floor to Mr. Salamé.
Mr. Salamé: Let me start by wishing Ramadan
Kareem to our Muslim colleagues on the occasion of
the holy month of Ramadan.
Allow also me to congratulate the Republic of
Indonesia on its presidency of the Security Council this
month. I am grateful for this opportunity to brief the
Council in person on our work in Libya.
This is the report that I have spent nearly all of the
past two years trying to avoid delivering. Forty-eight
days into the attack on Tripoli by General Haftar’s
forces, there has already been too much death and
destruction. Libya is on the verge of descending into a
civil war, which could lead to the permanent division of
the country. The damage already done will take years
to mend, and that is only if the war is ended now.
The consequences and the risks of the conflict
are already painfully clear, especially for the Libyan
people: more than 460 dead, 29 of them civilians; more
than 2,400 injured, the majority of them civilians; and
more than 75,000 people forced from their homes, all
2/21

21/05/2019

of them civilians. More than half of the displaced are
women and children. Humanitarian actors estimate that
more than 100,000 men, women and children remain
trapped in immediate frontline areas, with over 400,000
more in areas directly impacted by the clashes.
While the conditions for migrants and refugees
in Libya were already dire prior to the conflict, those
conditions have now gone from bad to worse. Nearly
3,400 refugees and migrants are trapped in detention
centres exposed to, or in close proximity to, the
fighting. United Nations humanitarian agencies have
been working around the clock to transfer the most
vulnerable from the conflict-affected areas to safer
locations, and I am very, very proud of their work.
When the Secretary-General visited Libya on
3 April, his visit was intended to show the full support
of the international community for the peaceful
resolution of Libya’s long period of upheaval. The
capital was enjoying a measure of increased security
and the population a much more stable currency and an
improved economic outlook, and the political process,
despite many obstacles, was moving forward.
Indeed, we were on the eve of hosting the national
conference in the Libyan city of Ghadames, an event
that would have brought together more than 150
Libyans from across the country. There was great
public excitement about what the conference could
yield in terms of a way forward to end Libya’s eightyear-long period of transition and usher in a new period
of stability and security through the ballot box. To see
those who had enthusiastically accepted our invitation
to Ghadames suddenly take up arms against one another,
to attack the capital or to defend it, has plunged me into
the deepest level of sadness for the opportunity lost and
for a hope killed exactly 10 days before its realization.
The attack on Tripoli also imperilled the potential
of the talks that had been held on 27 February in Abu
Dhabi between Prime Minister Serraj and General
Haftar, the sixth of its kind between them. At those
talks there had been a real opportunity to replace the
Government of National Accord in Tripoli, dissolve
the parallel Government in Al-Bayda and create an
inclusive, unified national Government that would have
shepherded the country through the election process to
the end of the transitional period. The understandings
reached in Abu Dhabi had also placed the military under
civilian control, a key demand of the vast majority of
Libyans and many in the international community.
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

I am no Cassandra, but the violence on the outskirts
of Tripoli is just the start of a long and bloody war on
the southern shores of the Mediterranean, imperilling
the security of Libya’s immediate neighbours and the
wider Mediterranean region. The security vacuum
created by the withdrawal of many of General Haftar’s
troops from the south, coupled with the focus of the
western forces on the defence of the capital, is already
being exploited by Da’esh and Al-Qaida. In the south of
Libya, the black flags of Da’esh are appearing, and I am
dismayed to report that since April 4, there have been
four separate Da’esh attacks in the south of Libya: two
attacks in Ghodwa, one in Sebha and one just a few days
ago in Zella. The cumulative toll of the attacks has been
17 killed, more than 10 wounded and eight kidnapped.
Libyan forces that had in the past courageously
defended their country against these terrorist groups
are now busy fighting one another. In addition to the
innocent Libyans being ruthlessly subjected to the
increasing terror of Da’esh, there will be a spillover of
this violence to Libya’s immediate neighbours.
There are numerous reports of extremists, persons
under international sanctions and individuals wanted
by the International Criminal Court (ICC) appearing
on the battlefield on all sides. All parties must publicly
disassociate themselves from such elements without
delay and refer to the ICC those for whom arrest
warrants have been issued. I recommend that the
Council support the formation of a commission of
inquiry to determine who has taken up arms and that it
also support the establishment of mechanisms to ensure
the exclusion of unwanted elements.
No less worrying is the fact that arms are pouring
in again to all sides. The blatant and televised breach
of the arms embargo by the apparent delivery of a
large quantity of weapons and armoured vehicles to
Government of National Accord forces in Tripoli a few
days ago comes on the heels of earlier and ongoing
deliveries of banned modern weaponry to the Libyan
National Army. Many countries are providing weapons
to all parties in the conflict without exception. The
amount and sophistication of such weapons are already
causing greater numbers of casualties. Without a robust
enforcement mechanism, the arms embargo on Libya
will become a cynical joke. Some nations are fuelling
this bloody conflict; the United Nations should put an
end to it.
The conflict has been characterized by the use
of airstrikes, heavy artillery and the indiscriminate

S/PV. 8530

shelling of residential areas. Ramadan nights, normally
convivially spent in the company of one’s neighbours
and family, have become periods of sheer terror for
the residents of the capital, waiting in fear for the
next attack. Since mid-April there has been a rising
number of night-time precision strikes on Government
of National Accord positions in and around Tripoli by
unknown aircraft, averaging five a night. On May 8
an ammunition depot belonging to the Government of
National Accord-aligned Janzour Knights was hit in
an airstrike that was within a kilometre of the United
Nations compound where we work and live.
The large number of casualties has overburdened
the already weakened health facilities struggling with
shortages of medical personnel and supplies. Eleven
ambulances were directly hit by airstrikes, rockets
and shelling while on duty. I am appalled by the
apparent disregard for the due protection of personnel
engaging in vital medical tasks and recall that attacks
against health workers constitute a serious violation of
international humanitarian law.
We are also deeply concerned about the sharp
increase in abductions, disappearances and arbitrary
arrests since the start of the current conflict. At least
seven officials and employees have been arbitrarily
detained or kidnapped in eastern and western Libya.
The fate of all those individuals remains unknown,
and there may be others who have disappeared under
similar circumstances. Journalists also face increasing
threats, intimidation and violence, often in connection
with reporting on the conflict. I therefore call for
the Council’s unequivocal support in insisting on the
application of international humanitarian law for all
parties to the conflict. We need to demonstrate to those
who commit violations that impunity will not prevail.
We need to sanction those who use the fog of war to
violently settle personal or political scores.
As the conflict rolls on, Libya’s social fabric
is unravelling at an alarming rate. Calls for a halt to
the fighting and reconciliation amongst the warring
parties are being drowned out by internal and regional
parties that have weaponized social media to drive
fake news, false narratives and expressions of hatred
that more deeply divide the population. The Mission
has established a mechanism to monitor hate speech
online and the Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights has already referred a number of cases
of incitement to Facebook.

19-147633/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

The United Nations maintains an active presence
on the ground in Libya, in Tripoli and through our
hub in Benghazi. Naturally, given the situation, we
have scaled down our non-essential personnel, but we
remain in Libya, alongside the Libyan people, to deliver
as best we can. Over 42,000 people have received some
form of assistance through United Nations programmes
since the start of the conflict.
Food prices are rising across the country as shortages
start to occur. Insecurity and the resource demands of the
parties to the conflict are exacerbating those shortages,
particularly with regard to fuel. Another casualty of the
conflict is Libya’s infrastructure, including electricity
and water. Already unable to meet demand, the water
supply to the capital and the whole of north-west Libya
has been weaponized as armed groups have cut off the
Great Man-Made River to extract concessions. That act
put tens of thousands of people in immediate danger
and may constitute a war crime. Such acts must be
condemned in the strongest terms.
The only positive economic indicator is that all
parties have so far acted in the national interest by not
impeding the oil supply. However, there are indications
that the eastern branch of the National Oil Corporation
is again attempting to export oil, in violation of the
sanctions regime. This illegal attempt risks dividing the
National Oil Corporation, which remains the primary
source of revenue for the country and the national
social safety net.
We should not discount Libyan resilience in the
face of this tragic turn of events. Since 30 March,
Libyan citizens have shown admirable resolve in
democratically electing new municipal councils in 22
municipalities in western and southern Libya. Eighteen
of these councils have already sworn in their mayors.
It is unfortunate that some elections have had to be
postponed for security reasons. In that regard, I note
that efforts of the parallel Government in the east to
appoint mayors or block municipal elections from being
held are a denial of the rights of all Libyans to elect their
local representatives. It is vital to keep the pilot light of
democracy alive in Libya, and I appeal to the Council
to lend its unqualified support to the continuation of the
municipal election process.
There is no military solution to Libya. This is
not a cliché, it is a fact, and it is high time for those
who have harboured that illusion to open their eyes
and adjust themselves to the reality. Libya’s mosaic of
4/21

21/05/2019

communities cannot be governed without alliances and
relationships stretching across the country. It was to be
through the national conference bringing those myriad
communities together that hope for an inclusive,
peaceful and prosperous future existed.
I hear many Libyans telling us that the political
process cannot ignore the present war as if it were not
taking place. They are right; there is a before and after
4 April, and we, as impartial mediators, need to adjust
that process in order to bridge the deep gap of mistrust
that has prevailed since that date. Our consultations
with the parties, as well as with men and women of
influence, have not ceased and we struggle to maintain
a minimum of political fluidity among the various
groups, which, sooner rather than later, will need to
come back and devise together a better future for their
children and a more peaceful formula for sharing power
and resources.
To that end, Libyans need the international
community to work in unison to mitigate and alleviate
their divisions, instead of amplifying them. A better
future is still possible, but we all must be seized with
the fierce urgency of now while the front lines remain
on the outskirts of Tripoli and before the battle moves,
God forbid, to the capital’s more densely populated
neighbourhoods. That will require the concerted and
immediate action of the international community.
Without the international and regional stakeholders
recognizing that Libya is not a prize for the strongest,
but a country of 6.5 million people who deserve peace
and the right to collectively determine their own path
forward, the future of Libya will be bleak. I fear that
without immediate action to stop the flow of arms and
pressure on the Libyan parties to the conflict to enable
a return to serious dialogue, Libya will descend into
civil war, which could potentially lead to a Hobbesian
all-against-all state of chaos or partition of the country.
Full civil war in Libya is not inevitable, but it may
occur by the will of some parties and the inaction of
others. I hear Libyans resigning themselves to a conflict
of many months or even many years. My duty, and that
of this family of nations, is to tell them: “No. You need
to stop the fighting and stop it now, for the sake of your
loved ones, for the sake of your country and for the sake
of international peace and security.”
I therefore request this organ to take up its
responsibility, urge the silencing of the guns and call
on the warring parties to engage with the Mission to
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

S/PV. 8530

ensure a full and comprehensive cessation of hostilities
and a return to an inclusive, United Nations-led
political process.

reconciliation through the Libyan National Peace and
Reconciliation Forum, scheduled to take place in Addis
Ababa at the headquarters of the African Union.

The President: I thank Mr. Salamé for his briefing.

More recently, in early March Under-SecretaryGeneral for Political and Peacebuilding Affairs
Rosemary DiCarlo and I visited Libya, where, among
other things, we agreed on the need to closely coordinate
the activities of the United Nations and the African
Union in managing the political and security situation
in Libya. In addition to such contentious issues as the
composition of the Presidency Council, the formation
of the Government, the issue of Commander-in-Chief
of the Army and the equitable distribution of oil
revenues, we continue to be highly concerned about the
fate of African migrants in Libya and the dangerous
impact of the crisis not only on Libya’s neighbours but
on the entire Sahel space. The latest terrorist attack in
the Niger proved once again that new skills and greater
capabilities have been exported from Libya.

I now give the floor to Mr. Chergui.
Mr. Chergui: I would first like to express my
gratitude for the opportunity to address the Council on
the situation in Libya.
The current security situation in Libya is of great
concern, as it has gravely deteriorated in the past
few weeks. On 4 April, the Libyan National Army
launched a military campaign to take over Tripoli and
the Government of National Accord mobilized forces
to defend the capital. The ensuing fighting led to the
death of over 400 civilians, more than 2,000 injured and
65,000 displaced persons. The ongoing fighting in and
around Tripoli has led to the emergence of a range of
alliances between the Government of National Accord
and several armed groups, and the Libyan National
Army with other militias. The situation is further
complicated by the fact that Libya has essentially
become a proxy battleground for a number of external
actors that are pursuing their national interests through
local proxies.
Since the beginning of the crisis in Libya in 2011,
the African Union (AU) has consistently called on
all the parties and their external backers to pursue a
political solution to the crisis in the country. The AU
remains convinced that there is no military solution to
the crisis and therefore reiterates its call for dialogue
and consensus among Libyans as the only lasting
solution for a stable and united Libya.
The African Union’s engagement at all levels
has consistently focused on helping the Libyan
stakeholders to address the loopholes and shortcomings
of the Libyan Political Agreement in order to promote
a durable solution. However, persistent disagreements
between the Presidency Council and the House of
Representatives on the scope and modalities of the
implementation has stalled any meaningful progress.
It is tragic to see the war resume on the same day
that the Secretary-General arrives in Tripoli and two
days after the Chairperson of the African Commission
visited the airport in Benghazi to consolidate a muchexpected political agreement. In relation to the foregoing,
the African Union and the United Nations are leading
efforts to organize an all-inclusive dialogue to promote

I would like to highlight the following four
messages on the way forward.
First, there is an imperative to recognize that the
situation in Libya is deteriorating at an alarming rate.
This underscores the need for an immediate ceasefire
agreement and secure safe corridors for the provision of
humanitarian assistance.
Secondly, the current situation has had devastating
effects on the African migrants, especially those in
detention centres in Tripoli, where it has been reported
that some of them have been used as human shields
or otherwise forced to join the fighting. Beyond our
coordination with the International Organization
for Migration and the European Union on the issue,
additional efforts are urgently needed.
Thirdly, there is a need to acknowledge that there
has been unprecedented, toxic external interference in
Libya. Such interference has flooded the country with
weapons, which has created an environment conducive
to terrorist groups thriving. This interference is
exacerbating the already volatile situation on the
ground. In this regard, we call on all actors to work in
the genuine interest of the Libyan people and respect
the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Libya.
Fourthly, all stakeholders need to concentrate their
efforts on the continuation of the peace process and
prepare for the convening of the national conference
and the African Union-led all-inclusive conference for

19-147635/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

reconciliation. We look forward to working closely with
local, regional and international stakeholders to ensure
the success of these two meetings and pave the way for
a final and permanent settlement of the Libyan conflict.
In the face of the prolonged suffering and despair of
the Libyan people, the full-scale war imposed on them
and the bitter lessons of the past seven years, I count on
my colleagues around this table to go above and beyond
a review of the political and security situation to focus
on a common approach, based on a single African
Union-United Nations road map in the spirit of sincere
cooperation for a comprehensive solution to the crisis
in Libya.
The President: I thank Mr. Chergui for his briefing.
I now give the floor to Ambassador Schulz.
Mr. Schulz (Germany): In accordance with
paragraph 24 (e) of resolution 1970 (2011), of 26 February
2011, I have the honour to report to the Security
Council on the work of the Committee established by
the same resolution. The report covers the period from
21 March to 21 May 2019. At the outset, I would like
to highlight three developments relating to the work of
the Committee.
First, the Committee received the interim report
of the Panel of Experts, pursuant to paragraph 15 of
resolution 2441 (2018), on 2 May.
Secondly, the Committee received an ad hoc report
from the Panel on 3 May. A Committee meeting with
the Coordinator of the Panel is scheduled for 31 May.
Thirdly, a member of the Panel of Experts,
Mr. Moncef Kartas, was arrested and detained in
Tunisia on 26 March. Since that time, the members of
the Committee have received five written notes and
one oral briefing from the Secretariat with respect to
this matter. On 18 April, in my capacity as Chair, and
accompanied by the Secretariat, I met with the Chargé
d’affaires ad interim of the Permanent Mission of Tunisia
to the United Nations, as agreed during the informal
consultations of the Committee on 15 April. In its most
recent written note of 13 May, the Secretariat informed
the Committee that following a careful review of the
information submitted by the Tunisian authorities to the
Secretariat relating to the legal proceedings in relation
to Mr. Kartas, it reaffirmed the immunities enjoyed
by Mr. Kartas and requested his immediate release
and that the charges against him to be dropped. The
6/21

21/05/2019

Committee is closely following the situation and calls
upon the Secretariat to keep the Committee informed.
During the reporting period, the Committee
concluded its consideration of two of the four
communications previously submitted by Libya with
reference to paragraph 8 of resolution 2174 (2014). In
those two cases, the Committee determined that the items
and services in question fell under the exception to the
arms embargo contained in paragraph 10 of resolution
2095 (2013), provided that all of the conditions of the
exception were met. The Committee also responded to
a guidance request from the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya related to the arms embargo.
Furthermore, the Committee received three
inspection reports, conveyed by the European Union,
on vessel inspections conducted by the European
Union military operation in the Southern Central
Mediterranean under the authorization provided by
resolution 2292 (2016) and extended in resolution
2420 (2018). The Committee recalls the arms embargo
established pursuant to Security Council resolutions
1970 (2011), 2009 (2011), 2095 (2013) and 2174 (2014)
which obliges all Member States to take immediate
steps to ensure full and effective implementation of the
arms embargo.
With regard to the assets freeze, no negative decision
was taken by the Committee on a basic-expenses
notification submitted by the United Kingdom in
connection with medical and related travel expenses for
Ms. Aisha Al-Qadhafi. A travel-ban exemption request
had previously been approved for Ms. Al-Qadhafi. Also
with respect to the travel ban, the Committee approved
a second exemption request pursuant to paragraph 16
(a) of resolution 1970 (2011) for Ms. Al-Qadhafi.
Furthermore, after receiving additional information
from the Panel of Experts, as well as from Libya, the
Committee determined that the travel of Mr. Abu Zayd
Umar Dorda, from Libya to Egypt through Tunisia, on
17 February 2019, constituted non-compliance with the
travel-ban measure. While appreciating Mr. Dorda’s
reported medical condition at the time of travel, the
Committee would like to highlight that its travel-ban
exemption procedures allow for the consideration of
cases of emergency medical evacuation. For individuals
who are also subject to an assets freeze, the Committee
would like to highlight that the Council has provided for
exemptions in paragraph 19 of resolution 1970 (2011),
and that the Committee has elaborated corresponding
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

exemption procedures in its Guidelines. The Committee
has written to the three countries in connection with
Mr. Dorda’s travel and has received a response from
one of them.
The President: I thank Mr. Schulz for his briefing.
I shall now give the floor to those members of the
Council who wish to make statements.
Ms. Pierce (United Kingdom): I thank Mr. Salamé
and Mr. Chergui for their briefings, as well as the
German Ambassador for his report on the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya. We are very grateful that the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General could be
here in New York. That was a very sobering and quite
alarming briefing he delivered. We take very seriously
the warnings that you, Mr. President, have given.
I want to set out three clear things right at the start,
so that there can be no ambiguity.
First, in response to Mr. Salamé’s appeal to the
parties on the ground and his request for a very firm
message from the Council, I want to express the
United Kingdom’s very firm support for Mr. Salamé.
The United Nations-led process is the only way to
ultimately achieve the security and stability that all
Libyans deserve.
Secondly, we are extremely clear in our call, which
I repeat today, for all those involved in the conflict
to commit to an immediate ceasefire, unfettered
humanitarian access and a resumption of political talks
facilitated by Mr. Salamé. I would like to really stress
those points, and I invite all Council members to do
likewise, so that there is no doubt about the strength
of feeling of the Council on those issues and the
importance of unity within the Council.
We are very concerned as the briefings, including
from the African Union Commissioner, implied that
the security and humanitarian situation continues to
deteriorate. As I said, that is alarming. There can be
no military solution and there certainly will not be
anything like a clean victory for any party in Libya.
The protracted and worsening violence, as the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General said, certainly
does not benefit ordinary people in Libya, and we really
need to put them front and centre of what we are doing.
I would like to turn to the arms embargo. All
Member States have an obligation under resolution

S/PV. 8530

1970 (2011). We know, as we heard earlier, that ships
may even now be on their way to Libyan ports with
arms. Flooding Libya with arms is only going to fuel
escalation, prolong the conflict and retard progress
towards the ceasefire. We therefore call on all Member
States to implement the arms embargo in full, and we
hope that the Libya Sanctions Committee will continue
to do its good work looking at transgressions of the
arms embargo.
I believe that we also need to remember that Da’esh
and other extremist groups are capitalizing on the chaos
in Libya to carry out opportunistic attacks, which ought
to worry all of us, particularly those of us that are at
direct risk from Da’esh-inspired terrorism. Continued
fighting will continue to have a negative impact on
the counter-terrorism agenda in Libya, and we need to
keep in mind that the people who benefit most from that
conflict are actually those extremist groups, which is
another sobering point on which we all ought to reflect.
I would like to say a few words about the
humanitarian situation and oil. There have been reports
of the targeting of civilians. I want to urgently call on all
parties to respect their obligations under international
humanitarian law and ensure that civilians, civilian
infrastructure, medical personnel, facilities and
transport vehicles are protected. I want to underscore
the obligations in resolution 2286 (2016) about not
targeting health workers and detention centres. I want
to stress the need for the greatest possible humanitarian
access on the ground.
The Special Representative mentioned the oil
situation. We believe that it is essential that all Libya’s
oil exports remain under the supervision of the
National Oil Corporation of Tripoli, in accordance with
the Council’s resolutions. Any attempt by the parties
to the conflict to divert Libya’s oil resources for their
own ends again needs to be addressed by the Libya
Sanctions Committee.
We heard a little bit about Mr. Kartas from the
German representative. We have supported the United
Nations in that, and we continue to support the United
Nations. We have heard reports of his safe release, but I
would like to underscore that United Nations personnel
carry immunity. They work for the United Nations, and
the United Nations works for the benefit of all citizens
in those countries where it is situated. We call on
Member States to respect that.

19-147637/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

In conclusion, the safety of United Nations personnel
in general is of great concern to us. A ceasefire and a
return to the United Nations-led political process are
the only way to end the bloodshed in Libya and chart
a way forward before the situation collapses into an
even more deadly and chaotic conflict. As penholder,
we will continue to engage Council members on a way
forward and the appropriate steps that the Council can
take in support of the Special Representative of the
Secretary-General.
Mr. Alotaibi (Kuwait) (spoke in Arabic): At the
outset, I would like to thank the Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya, Mr. Ghassan Salamé, as
well as the African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, Mr. Smaïl Chergui, for their briefings, which
come at a time of difficult circumstances in sisterly
Libya. I would also thank Ambassador Juergen Schulz,
Chair of the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya,
for his briefing on the latest activities of the Committee.
It is no secret that there has been a great deal of
regional and international support for the United
Nations, represented by the statement that Mr. Salamé
made on 20 March at a recent open meeting of the
Security Council (see S/PV.8488), in which the date and
place for convening the inclusive national conference
that has been so long awaited were determined. That
came after many rounds of negotiations with a number
of Libyan actors and great effort on the part of the
United Nations Mission in Libya for more than a year.
The purpose was to ensure the conditions necessary for
finding an effective and lasting solution to the conflict,
which has now entered its ninth year, and as a way to
reach a political settlement that will respect the Libyan
national constants.
The international community is ready to hold the
national conference and the Security Council also
urged its convening in press statement SC/13749, which
welcomed the resolve of the Libyan parties to actively
and seriously participate in the conference. It further
welcomed the visit of Secretary-General António
Guterres to Tripoli and Benghazi to pave the way for
the conference and encourage all parties to participate
in it and accept the envisaged outcome.
However, we were surprised by the military
confrontations in and around Tripoli during the first
week of April, in which more than 400 people were
8/21

21/05/2019

killed, more than 2,000 injured and nearly 70,000
displaced. The military clashes spilled over beyond
the zones of confrontation, thereby exposing citizens
and their property to great danger and hampering the
political process. Such repercussions could undermine
all the efforts of recent years to end the crisis.
I reiterate what Mr. Salamé said in his briefing to
the effect that there will never be a military solution
to the crisis. With that in mind, we appeal to all the
warring Libyan parties to exercise restraint and respect
their commitments under international humanitarian
law and international human rights law. We call on
them to not target civilians and civilian facilities and
to prioritize peaceful solutions based on dialogue and
rejecting violence. We ask the Libyan parties to also
respond in a constructive and concrete manner to the
calls and efforts of the United Nations Support Mission
in Libya to implement an immediate ceasefire and
de-escalate the military situation.
Furthermore, they must cooperate with the Mission’s
efforts to establish the necessary guarantees for
convening the national conference, which represents a
genuine historic opportunity to move on from a past that
depleted the resources and capabilities of the Libyan
people. The conference also constitutes a promising
path towards a better future that can seriously address
the differences and the institutional divisions in Libya
without excluding or marginalizing any component of
Libyan society.
We would also like to mention the increase in
terrorism and the growing number of subversive
operations by the Da’esh terrorist group, which
took advantage of the current security situation and
launched a number of terrorist attacks on certain
regions in Libya, such as Al-Fuqaha, Sabha and the
oil field in Zillah. Those terrorist operations must be
condemned by the Security Council and require that
all necessary assistance be provided to the relevant
Libyan authorities in order to overcome that challenge,
which threatens regional and international security and
stability. In conclusion, we reiterate our support to the
efforts being made by Mr. Ghassan Salamé in order to
facilitate the comprehensive political process in Libya
according to the United Nations plan. We recognize
what he mentioned about the necessity to ensure the
security circumstances as a main condition to hold the
national conference. We appreciate his tireless efforts
in that regard and urge all Libyan parties to demonstrate
their goodwill towards a peaceful political solution
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

and to participate seriously and constructively in the
political and security processes in accordance with the
arrangements agreed in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi
to hold transparent, inclusive and peaceful elections so
as to build a united and stable Libya.
Mr. Delattre (France) (spoke in French): I thank
Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of the
Secretary-General, and Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African
Union Commissioner for Peace and Security, for their
briefings, which provided a detailed and informative
assessment of the situation and the challenges that
we currently face in Libya. I would also like to thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his briefing as the
German Chair of the Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya.
I would like to begin by expressing, on behalf of
France, our particular gratitude to Special Representative
Ghassan Salamé for his presence here among us today
and for his commitment and to reiterate to him France’s
full support in the execution of his mandate as he
bravely works with his team in a particularly difficult
context and a very fragile political environment.
At the outset, I would particularly like to echo
Ghassan Salamé’s call for a ceasefire. Given the
deadlock in the situation and the risk of escalation, it is
imperative to establish a ceasefire without preconditions
based on an international monitoring mechanism.
The new developments in the Libyan crisis are
particular concerning, as has been said. The fighting
has already had worrying humanitarian consequences
since the beginning of April, with more than 500
dead and 75,000 displaced, clashes moving to densely
populated areas and 3,200 migrants and refugees
detained in centres near the fighting. All parties must
comply with their obligations towards civilians and
civilian infrastructure, as well as humanitarian and
health personnel.
The ongoing fighting also jeopardizes the political
and diplomatic efforts to implement the United Nations
road map. Let us not be mistaken — it is criminal,
radical and terrorist groups that are benefiting from
the situation, as evidenced by the infiltration, under the
guise of defending the Government of National Accord,
of radical elements in Tripoli, including individuals
under Security Council sanctions, and the recent
attacks claimed by Da’esh in the south and centre of
the country.

S/PV. 8530

That critical situation threatens to further
deteriorate if nothing is done to overcome the current
impasse in a context where it is clear that neither side
can prevail by force. The continuation of hostilities,
or even their spreading to other fronts in Libya, the
rearmament of both sides and the increase in terrorist
activities pose a major risk to the civilian population
and the sustainability of the political process.
Under such conditions, I reiterate that our priority
must be the rapid implementation of a lasting ceasefire,
without preconditions, which in order to be credible
must be supported by an international monitoring
mechanism. We must also ensure that humanitarian
channels are effectively established so as to facilitate
the delivery of aid to all populations in need, including
migrants and refugees.
It is also vital that the Libyan stakeholders
disassociate themselves fully and unambiguously from
terrorist groups both in their public statements and
on the ground. Finally, as the Special Representative
emphasized, the arms embargo established by the
Council must be fully respected and implemented by
all the parties.
Without an immediate ceasefire, the conflict
could only further threaten international and regional
peace and security. The resolution of the conflict
and the stabilization of Libya are imperative for the
Libyan people, who yearn for peace and stability,
and for all of us because Libya is a priority security
issue in the fight against terrorism, trafficking and
migration management.
In that context, the other imperative is the resumption
of political discussions as part of the United Nationsled process. The unconditional ceasefire is only a first
step that must be supported by a revival of the political
process on the basis of the principles established at the
Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi meetings. That is the
only way to create a new momentum for the holding of
general elections as soon as possible to allow Libyans
to decide their own destiny in a sovereign manner.
The Abu Dhabi agreement remains a valid basis
because it establishes the principles for the reunification
of the country and its institutions, paves the way for
the formation of a unified Government to prepare
for elections, and provides for political control of the
military until the elections.

19-147639/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

That is why France calls on the Libyan parties
to resume talks on that basis, with the assistance of
the Special Representative. The United Nations must
continue to play a key role in resolving the conflict in
Libya through the mediation of Special Representative
Ghassan Salamé and with the Council’s full support.
Within the Council we share significant points of
convergence, in particular the observation that the
priority is to relaunch the political process, that there is
no military solution in Libya and that it is imperative to
silence the weapons. Let us build on that convergence
in support of the Special Representative.
It is also absolutely essential that the United Nations
and its Panel of Experts on Libya be able to carry out
their work independently and in appropriate conditions.
With regard to the situation of Mr. Moncef Kartas,
which the German Chairmanship of the sanctions
committee mentioned just now, we are encouraged
by the recent developments in Tunis. We thank the
United Nations Legal Counsel, Mr. Miguel Ferreira
de Serpa Soares, and his teams for their efforts and
Tunisia’s commitment.
France will resolutely continue its efforts in support
of Special Representative Ghassan Salamé to bring
the Libyan stakeholders together around an inclusive
political solution, leading as soon as possible to the
elections demanded by the Libyan people, and to help
build a lasting peace in Libya. That is the aim of the
efforts being made by President Macron and Minister
Le Drian, together with the Libyan parties.
Mr. Ma Zhaoxu (China) (spoke in Chinese): I
would like at the outset to thank Special Representative
Salamé, African Union Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Schulz for their respective briefings.
I commend Mr. Salamé for coming to New York to
brief us.
Since early April, the military conflicts that have
broken out around Tripoli have resulted in heavy
casualties, including civilians. The increasing number
of refugees, migrants and displaced persons and the
rise in terrorist activities are undermining the stability
and development of Libya in the political, security,
economic and social areas. They are also spilling over
into other areas, such as the Sahel and the Mediterranean
coastal region. China is extremely concerned about
developments in Libya. The international community
should pay increased attention to Libya and work
together to reach a solution to the Libyan issue as soon
10/21

21/05/2019

as possible. In that regard, I shall make the following
four points.
First, we must continue to seek a political solution.
China has always believed that the Libyan issue must
be settled through political means. We hope that
the parties to the conflict in Libya will focus on the
interests of the country and its people, respond to
the calls of the international community, achieve a
ceasefire as soon as possible, de-escalate tensions
and return to the path leading to settlement through
peaceful dialogue and consultation. We must safeguard
the safety and security of civilians and try to improve
the humanitarian situation.
Secondly, synergy must be created. The
international community should respect the sovereignty,
independence and territorial integrity of Libya.
Countries with influence should play an active role and
exert their influence by encouraging the Libyan parties
to resolve their differences and build mutual trust and
by providing constructive assistance to the parties in
achieving a ceasefire and resuming political dialogue.
Thirdly, we must strengthen coordination. China
supports the active promotion of the political settlement
process in Libya, under United Nations leadership, and
the good offices of Secretary-General Guterres and
Special Representative Salamé. My country supports
the active role of regional organizations, such as the
African Union, and hopes that the relevant mechanisms
will fully leverage their advantages and enhance
coordination and cooperation.
Fourthly, the issue of sanctions should be properly
handled. We have always believed that sanctions are
not an end in themselves, but rather a means. They
should always serve to reach a political solution to the
problems at hand. While maintaining the enforcement
of sanctions on Libya, it is imperative to ensure
avoiding their negative impact on its civilian population
and third countries. The overall interests of the Libyan
nation and the day-to-day life and humanitarian needs
of its people should not be undermined.
China stands willing to work with the international
community in an active and concerted effort to achieve
lasting peace and stability in Libya.
Mr. Adom (Côte d’Ivoire) (spoke in French):
At the outset, I thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé for his
excellent briefing on the current state of the security
and humanitarian situation and the political process in
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

Libya, as well as the activities carried out under the
mandate of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya.
I offer him our full support and the encouragement
of my country, Côte d’Ivoire. I also thank Mr. Smaïl
Chergui for the quality of his briefing. Lastly, I thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of
the Security Council Committee established pursuant
to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, for his
presentation of the thirty-fourth periodic report on the
Committee’s work.
Côte d’Ivoire is attentively following developments
in the situation in Libya and notes with deep concern
the impasse that has reigned since the beginning of the
armed clashes over control of Tripoli. After more than
six weeks of fighting and the tragic toll of 450 deaths,
more than 2,000 injured and 63,000 displaced persons,
the prospects for a resumption of the intra-Libyan
political dialogue are becoming dangerously remote.
Equally worrisome is the insidious establishment and
entrenchment of religious groups, in particular the
Islamic State, in areas outside State control. If the crisis
persists, those groups, fuelled by radical ideology and
rhetoric, could exacerbate tribal divisions and pose
another major challenge to the return of lasting peace
and stability in Libya that we are seeking.
Côte d’Ivoire therefore condemns the armed clashes
between the forces of the Government of National
Accord and those of General Haftar, the humanitarian
consequences of which have been particularly
devastating. While expressing its solidarity with the
brotherly Libyan people at this particularly difficult
time, my country once again reiterates its call on the
United Nations and the African Union to pursue their
mediation efforts and good offices to the parties to the
conflict in order to reach an immediate ceasefire and
resume dialogue among all Libyan parties. While Côte
d’Ivoire recalls that the way out of the crisis and the
dawn of lasting peace and stability in Libya depend on
robust, constructive and inclusive dialogue among all
stakeholders, my country remains convinced that the
continuing deterioration of the social, political and
humanitarian situation in Libya requires the prompt
implementation of resolution 2420 (2018), especially its
provisions concerning the arms embargo.
It is also beyond question that the fighting around
Tripoli is affecting the country’s oil industry, thereby
further depressing an already devastated economy
and exacerbating the ongoing humanitarian crisis. In
that regard, it is appropriate to recall that the export

S/PV. 8530

of Libyan petroleum is the exclusive responsibility of
the National Oil Corporation. The Council’s message
to the Libyan parties must therefore be imbued with
firmness regarding their obligation to respect human
rights and international humanitarian law, including
the protection of civilians and humanitarian personnel.
Côte d’Ivoire also echoes the call of the African
Union Peace and Security Council on the Libyan parties
to focus on the plight of the thousands of migrants in
detention camps in close proximity to the areas of
fighting. As Commissioner Chergui mentioned earlier,
some Africans are now being used as human shields in
the fighting around Tripoli, which must alarm us and
heighten our attention to the matter. In that regard, Côte
d’Ivoire welcomes the assistance of bilateral partners,
including the Government of Germany, whose recent
donation of €3 million to the Office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Refugees in Libya will
undoubtedly contribute to the increased protection of
refugees and displaced persons.
The joint communiqué issued at the end of the third
African Union-United Nations Annual Conference, held
on 6 May, highlights the complementary roles played
by regional organizations and actors in the resolution
of the Libyan conflict. Above all, it recalls the need
for the international community to act urgently to send
an unequivocal message with regard to the need for an
immediate ceasefire and the imperative of a single road
map for Libya.
The current instability in Libya clearly poses a
threat to peace and regional and international security,
particularly for the sub-Saharan African countries
that are struggling to find adequate responses to
the progressive entrenchment and deadly attacks of
jihadist groups. That is why Côte d’Ivoire unreservedly
supports the call on the international community,
launched at the meeting of the Heads of State of the
Group of Five for the Sahel, to fully acknowledge the
regional and international scale of the Libyan crisis and
to harmonize the efforts of all the countries concerned
to achieve a lasting settlement to the conflict in Libya.
Mr. Cohen (United States of America): I thank
Special Representative Salamé, Commissioner Chergui
and Ambassador Schulz for their briefings today.
The United States condemns in the strongest
terms the two terrorist attacks on the United Nations
Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in
Mali last weekend that killed one Nigerian peacekeeper

19-1476311/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

and wounded several others. We send our condolences
and sympathy to the family of the Nigerian peacekeeper
who was killed and wish a speedy and full recovery to
those who were injured.
Turning back to Libya, foremost on our minds is the
safety of United Nations personnel and civilians on the
ground. We strongly support the personal leadership of
Special Representative Salamé in promoting a political
solution and attempting to reduce the violence in Libya.
We welcome the ongoing efforts of the United Nations
Support Mission in Libya (UNSMIL) to chart a path
forward that will provide security and prosperity to
all Libyans.
The continuing instability in Tripoli is endangering
civilians, damaging civilian infrastructure, creating
opportunities for terrorists to regroup and fuelling a
worsening humanitarian situation. Lasting peace and
stability will come only through a political solution.
All parties should return to United Nations political
mediation, the success of which depends on a ceasefire
in and around Tripoli. The humanitarian situation
is alarming, and we commend the ongoing efforts to
address the humanitarian dimension of this conflict.
We call on all sides to avoid further escalation and
work constructively with the Special Representative and
UNSMIL to achieve a long-overdue political solution to
this conflict. The United States stands ready to provide
all appropriate assistance as UNSMIL works to help
Libyans return to the political process and de-escalate
the conflict in Tripoli.
Mr. Safronkov (Russian Federation) (spoke in
Russian): We thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, the African Union Commissioner for Peace
and Security, for their detailed briefings. We support
Mr. Salamé’s work and will continue to help him. We
want to affirm to Mr. Chergui that the Russian Federation
has always emphasized the crucial role of the African
Union in settling crises on the continent, including the
one in Libya. We thank the German delegation for its
leadership of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya, which has
come at a difficult stage in the Libyan settlement.
We are sorry to have to conclude that the escalation
in greater Tripoli, and in Libya as a whole, is not
improving. Like other members of the international
community, Russia is deeply concerned. The bitter
truth is that this country, which was until quite recently
12/21

21/05/2019

a stable and prosperous North African State, has
descended into chaos. It has no Government for all
practical purposes and has been fractured for a number
of years. It is being used as a transit and migration area. It
is a source of destabilizing influences on neighbouring
regions on both sides of the Mediterranean. Anyone
who believes that Libya’s problems began only this
spring is deeply mistaken. Libya’s situation today is
a result of geopolitical engineering and the policies
of regime change that various countries decided to
implement in 2011. We have only one purpose in
pointing this out. The situation that has arisen in Libya
should be a constant reminder of the bankruptcy of
the concept of outside armed incursions, which lead
to the dismantling of Government institutions and the
emergence of failed States.
We have to learn from mistakes, which means that
now, in the active phase of the conflict, we have to
work with all the parties involved without preferring
any one of them over the others. That is the only way to
end the military confrontation. Attempts to hold only
one of the players responsible will only deepen the
confrontation and worsen the prospects for resuming
the political process. We are confident that Mr. Salamé
will be guided by that approach. We must continue
humanitarian assistance to all Libyans who need it and
ensure unimpeded and non-discriminatory access for
humanitarian personnel.
Russia will continue to appeal to all of Libya’s
military and political forces and to its influential figures
to cease military actions, refrain from aggressive
statements and sit down at the negotiating table in order
to re-establish the trust that has been so undermined,
step by step. To do that, narrow interests must be set
aside and we must work based on the principle that
Libya and its people come first. For that, we must
refrain from plans that involve constant intervention
in internal affairs and remember that Libya’s natural
wealth belongs exclusively to the Libyan people. In our
view, there is no alternative to a political settlement.
We must refrain from the use of force and work to
unite the efforts of all Libyan forces in the interests
of the rapid restoration of national institutions that
are capable of dealing effectively with the immediate
priorities, including the fight against terrorism.
Unfortunately, that threat is still a powerful one and
requires the unification of all political forces. One of
the most urgent tasks on the agenda is the establishment
of united, viable State institutions, including the army
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

and security forces. It is Libyans themselves who must
take those decisions. Succumbing to any temptations or
attempts to impose the parameters for that process from
the outside will inevitably be counterproductive, and
we will repudiate them.
We are coordinating our efforts with international
and regional partners on a bilateral and multilateral
basis. The situation in Libya was a subject of discussion
during the Russian-Arab Cooperation Forum in
Moscow. We are constantly analysing it in our daily
contacts with representatives of the African Union,
and we have reached an agreement on working together
on a Libyan settlement. Our shared goal is helping
Libyans to overcome their differences and emerge with
a sustainable agreement on the main issue, which is
national reconciliation. There have been previous steps
taken in that direction in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi,
but the commitments made then have unfortunately
remained on paper.
The regional actors have an important role to
play in encouraging Libyans to end the bloodshed and
resume negotiations. We note the leading role that the
African Union has taken in giving the Libyan settlement
new momentum, including through the conference in
Addis Ababa planned for July. We firmly believe that
all the international efforts to restore peace and unity
to Libya must ideally be harmonized, and we emphasize
once again that a political settlement should not be an
issue for competition.
Much has been said today about the role played
by Special Representative Salamé in arranging a
harmonized system for finding a long-term solution to
the Libyan conflict, as I just mentioned. But we should
all remember from our own experience that for the
task of the United Nations Support Mission in Libya to
be feasible, it must be able to rely on the consolidated
support of international and regional players and all
of Libya’s political actors. It requires a comprehensive
approach. Attempts to approach the situation selectively
will not work, and neither will attempts to act based
on the principle that what is permissible for some is
not permissible for others. All stakeholders, without
exception, must comply with the arms embargo.
Russia and Libya are linked by deep historic ties. The
relations between our States have always been defined
by mutual respect. That is why we have been able to
maintain contact with all political forces throughout the
crisis in Libya. Russia will continue to restore stability

S/PV. 8530

in Libya, including by supporting Mr. Salamé’s efforts.
However, we will be strictly guided in that by the
principles of the Charter of the United Nations, such as
the duty to ensure the independence, sovereignty and
territorial integrity of Libya. We encourage everyone
to work on that basis.
Ms. Bekwa (South Africa): South Africa thanks
Special Representative Ghassan Salamé, Ambassador
Smaïl Chergui, the African Union Commissioner for
Peace and Security, and Ambassador Juergen Schulz
for their briefings.
My delegation commends Secretary-General
António Guterres and Mr. Salamé for their tireless
efforts in bringing together all parties and stakeholders
to reach an agreement on the peace process in Libya,
and extends its full support for their efforts. We
particularly commend the work of the African Union
Ad Hoc High-level Committee on Libya, under the
leadership of President Sassou Nguesso, and call for
greater cooperation and collaboration between the
African Union (AU) and the United Nations in finding
a lasting solution to the crisis and in support of a single
road map in pursuit of peace and stability in Libya.
South Africa remains concerned about the worsening
security and humanitarian situation in Tripoli. South
Africa calls on each of the parties to reduce tensions
and exercise restraint so as to prevent destruction and
loss of life in the capital and the continued suffering of
civilians and migrants. We reiterate that all parties and
stakeholders must commit to building durable peace
in Libya on the basis of inclusive political dialogue.
We particularly urge the parties to commit fully to the
ceasefire agreement reached in September 2018 and to
avoid any further escalation of violence. In that regard,
South Africa will continue to support the convening
of a Libyan national peace and reconciliation forum,
preceded by a national dialogue conference, in order
to unify the people of Libya. We are therefore deeply
concerned about the postponement of the process due
to the increased fighting in and around Tripoli. Where
could we be if things were normal according to the time
frames set?
We support the ongoing efforts of the AU through
its Peace and Security Council, the AU Ad Hoc Highlevel Committee on Libya and the commitment of the
AU High Representative for Libya as they continue
to engage with the main stakeholders in the country.
The Security Council must support all efforts to bring

19-1476313/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

about a peaceful settlement of the dispute and promote
political dialogue.
In terms of the progress report of the Committee
established pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011)
concerning Libya, South Africa views sanctions not
as an end in and of themselves but rather as a tool to
accompany a political process towards peace and postconflict. While some elements of the sanctions may
assist in providing the necessary momentum towards
the desired outcome, the focus should be on creating
an enabling environment that promotes conditions for
a peace process and addresses the root causes of the
conflict. However, given the recent escalation in military
confrontation, South Africa views the implementation
of the arms embargo, renewed under resolution 2420
(2018), as an important part in preventing illicit flows
of arms into Libya, which increases the risk of arms
proliferation and further fuels instability in the Sahel.
We call on all parties supplying arms to the
protagonists in Libya to keep an inventory of such
supplies so as to fully account for them post-conflict.
We need to avoid the situation of the past whereby tons
and tons of weapons, ammunitions and explosives were
dropped to groups fighting the regime of that time.
Those arms have subsequently found their way into
the greater Sahel, resulting in what we are witnessing
today in Mali, Burkina Faso, Chad, Nigeria, Cameroon
and Côte d’Ivoire.
Ms. Wronecka (Poland): At the outset, let me
thank Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral Ghassan Salamé and African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security Smaïl Chergui
for their comprehensive if very alarming briefings on
recent developments in Libya. I especially welcome
Mr. Salamé’s presence in the Council today and thank
him for his tireless efforts. Allow me also to thank
Ambassador Juergen Schulz for his helpful briefing
on the ongoing work of the Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya
and to congratulate him on his leadership.
Poland remains gravely concerned about prolonged
clashes in and around Tripoli, especially by the use of
airplanes, drones and rocket artillery. We condemn the
growing number of attacks on the civilian population
and civilian infrastructure and confirm our position
that all parties to the conflict must comply with their
obligations under international law, in particular
international humanitarian law and international
14/21

21/05/2019

human rights law. Therefore, we call on all parties to
immediately implement a ceasefire and to engage with
the United Nations to ensure a full and comprehensive
cessation of hostilities.
We also call on all parties to fully respect the
arms embargo and refrain from taking any action that
could further undermine the United Nations-facilitated
political dialogue. In that context, we must underscore
the meaningful role of the Panel of Experts in the work
of the Sanctions Committee. Its independence and
autonomy are essential for its undisturbed work and
that of the Sanctions Committee and the Council.
The recent terrorist attack in Sebha serves as a
strong reminder that terrorist groups will exploit every
opportunity to expand their presence in Libya. In that
regard, all parties should dissociate themselves from
terrorist and criminal elements involved in the fighting.
In conclusion, we believe that the conflict in Libya
should be resolved only by peaceful means, since power
gained by force will not achieve long-lasting stability
and prosperity for Libyans. In that regard, Poland fully
supports all efforts by Special Representative Salamé
and the United Nations Support Mission in Libya,
under challenging circumstances, aimed at finding a
comprehensive political solution to the current crisis
and bringing security, political and economic stability
and national unity to Libya.
Mr. Ugarelli (Peru) (spoke in Spanish): We thank
you, Mr. President, for convening today’s meeting. We
also thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative
of the Secretary-General and Head of the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya; Ambassador Juergen
Schulz, Chair of the Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011) concerning Libya; and Mr. Smaïl
Chergui, African Union Commissioner for Peace and
Security, for their excellent briefings.
Peru reiterates its deep concern about the armed
conflict ravaging Libya, which claims lives every day
and is causing tragic humanitarian consequences and
having a devastating effect on the country’s economy.
Given the situation, there is no better alternative than
immediately devising a political solution, in line with
the progress made at the Abu Dhabi conference. As
such, we believe that the institution of an immediate and
unconditional ceasefire and the return to the dialogue
table are priorities. It is clear that the aggressive
rhetoric and individual interests must be transformed
into concrete measures for the welfare and protection
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

of the civilian population. To that end, the support of
the international community is necessary, especially
that of the countries with the ability to influence the
parties, while transcending strategic and economic
considerations and avoiding the power vacuum that
terrorist and extremist groups have taken advantage
of, as mentioned by the Special Representative and
other delegations.
We are particularly troubled by the manifest
violations of the arms embargo in ungoverned territory.
One need only observe — with alarm — the recent
offloading of armoured vehicles at a Tripoli port. These
are situations that serve only to prolong the conflict,
to the detriment of the direct interests of the civilian
population. Most of Libya’s current revenues are mostly
directed towards weapons purchases.
In that context, and faced with the forced
displacement of tens of thousands of people and
hundreds of deaths, we emphasize the responsibility
of the Council to protect the civilian population from
the occurrence of atrocious crimes. That implies,
among other things, ensuring mandatory compliance
with the provisions of international humanitarian law
in all conflicts, including the Libyan conflict, without
distinction or double standards. It also implies the
necessary attribution of accountability for those crimes,
starting with the deliberate and reprehensible attacks
against the civilian population and vital infrastructure.
Those crimes should be tried within the Libyan justice
system and, in a complementary manner, by the
International Criminal Court.
In conclusion, Peru reiterates its firm support for
the efforts aimed at preventing further fragmentation
of the country and, through a political solution, at
returning to the path on which progress had been made
following the tireless efforts of Special Representative
Salamé, to whom we reiterate our strongest support.
Mr. Singer Weisinger (Dominican Republic)
(spoke in Spanish): We thank the speakers for their
valuable briefings this morning. We also commend the
mediation efforts undertaken by Mr. Salamé and his
team at the United Nations Support Mission in Libya
(UNSMIL) to reduce tensions and resolve conflicts in
that nation. The Dominican Republic fully supports
Mr. Salamé.
Just two months ago we felt optimistic about Libya.
We harboured the hope that a political solution would
be reached, and trusted that the national conference

S/PV. 8530

would be held in the second week of April, bringing the
day of reconciliation closer. Those hopes are currently
dissolving because Libya is once again at the door of
widespread conflagration. The manifestation of these
military offensives erodes the progress made, which
has been facilitated mainly by the United Nations
Support Mission. In addition, the outbreak of violence
constitutes a danger for regional and international
peace and security.
For that reason, we call for the cessation of all
violence, not just military offensives but also the
aggressive rhetoric that fuels tensions. We also urge
the parties to the conflict, in particular the Libyan
National Army, led by General Haftar, to resume
dialogue, with a view to finding a solution to this
situation and resuming the political process. We also
call on the parties to commit to protecting civilians
and civilian infrastructure, as well as to allow,
without discrimination, access to humanitarian aid
to the areas affected by the conflict, in accordance
with the provisions of international humanitarian
law. Furthermore, we call on the parties to establish
safe and unimpeded mechanisms to assist the civilian
population, including access by medical personnel.
An example of how this conflict worsens the living
conditions of the population can be found in the actions
carried out by armed men last Sunday. They occupied
a station of the pipeline network project that transports
groundwater from the Sahara to the western region of
the country. Their objective was to deprive hundreds
of thousands of Libyans of the supply of that resource,
and they threatened not to restore the service until their
demands were met. That atrocious act constitutes a
violation of international humanitarian law, which we
categorically condemn. We demand that the parties
refrain from attacking infrastructure that is essential to
the survival of the population.
Likewise, given the reported allegations of
violations involving advanced technology artillery and
vehicles, including unmanned vehicles, being used by
the parties to the conflict, we encourage the international
community to respect the obligations established in the
arms embargo. Member States have the responsibility
to comply with the provisions outlined in the Libya
sanctions regime and refrain from supplying, selling or
transferring any type of weaponry and munitions and
their related materials, without exception. Likewise,
we encourage States that produce and import weapons,
munitions and related materials to strengthen the rules

19-1476315/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

of transfer and control mechanisms in order to prevent
zones of conflict from being the final destination of
weapons, thereby avoiding irresponsible transfers and
helping to save lives and to de-escalate the situation.
In barely a month and a half the conflict has
intensified, leaving 510 people dead and 2,467 injured,
with the number of the displaced rising to 75,000. The
continuation of this conflict could mean that the mass
exodus will soon be the next great humanitarian crisis
in the region. We also express our serious concern that
this situation may allow extremist groups to recapture
an area from which they had been expelled with very
great effort. The Council should therefore not remain
impassive. The voice of the Council must be united
in order to stop what is currently unfolding in Tripoli
and its environs. We cannot underestimate the fragility
of the country’s social cohesion, which could not
survive this conflict or the potential severity of the
humanitarian impact.

21/05/2019

Libya. We hope that light will be shed on this case as
swiftly as possible.
Mrs. Van Vlierberge (Belgium) (spoke in
French): At the outset, may I warmly thank the Special
Representative of the Secretary-General, Mr. Salamé,
for his statement and for joining us this morning. I wish
to thank him in particular for his work and his tireless
commitment as well as that of his Mission’s personnel,
all of whom are working in a particularly difficult
environment. I also thank Commissioner Chergui and
Ambassador Schulz for their informative briefings.
The fighting began around two months ago and
has continued despite several calls for a humanitarian
ceasefire. Belgium supports those calls and deplores
the fact that they have been rejected. It is becoming
ever more clear to all of us that the military situation
is at an impasse. This is, unfortunately, exactly what
many of us had feared.

On another note, we condemn the attacks,
intimidation and violence against human rights
defenders, including journalists, and we hope that the
crimes committed against human rights defenders
will be investigated. We believe that civil society
organizations are autonomous and play a fundamental
role in the functioning of a democracy. They must
therefore not be restricted, with or without the consent
of internal forces in Libya, when they want to reach
out to the international community and carry out their
work with communities and citizens.

Today’s briefing quite rightly reminds us that it is
Libyan civilians as well as the most vulnerable migrants
who are paying the heaviest price for the rejection of a
political solution. Belgium calls on all parties to respect
their commitments under international humanitarian
law, including the protection of civilians. In particular,
we call on the parties to refrain from any serious
violations with regard to children, including recruiting
them and using them in combat. Belgium commends
the courage of humanitarian and medical personnel,
who are paying a high price for their determination.

We ask the parties to prioritize the protection of
children at all times, while adhering to international
humanitarian law, and to cease immediately the
recruitment of children to be used as soldiers in the
conflict. We also ask for the immediate release of any
child who has been detained owing to their association,
or presumed association, with armed groups.

At this stage, the major beneficiaries of the current
situation are terrorists. The military option will lead
only to chaos and to the destabilization of the country
by allowing Da’esh to resort to guerrilla strategies; this
is a fundamental threat to the progress made.

The Dominican Republic is convinced that the
solution to the Libyan conflict should be political and
not military, and that such a solution should be reached
through consensus among the parties. We recognize and
appreciate the courage, determination and commitment
that the UNSMIL team, led by Mr. Salamé, demonstrate
on the ground at this crucial time.
Finally, like other colleagues, we welcome the
release of Mr. Moncef Kartas, who had been detained
in Tunis in the exercise of his functions as a member
of the Panel of Experts of the Sanctions Committee on
16/21

Beyond assigning responsibility for the fighting,
Belgium would recall that those who are guilty of grave
violations of international humanitarian law and, more
broadly, those who threaten the peace in Libya should
be held accountable for their actions. All leaders,
military and civilian, who have control, authority or
effective command over their subordinates could be
held criminally responsible for the crimes committed
by the latter and could be prosecuted in national courts
or the International Criminal Court.
Belgium supports the work of the Special
Representative and of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya and calls on the parties to return to
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

the negotiating table without preconditions. The need
for a ceasefire remains urgent.
Finally, Belgium calls for strict respect by all parties
of the arms embargo imposed by the Council. Violations
of the embargo have, as Mr. Salamé underlined,
prolonged the conflict and the suffering of the Libyan
people. In this regard, we should underscore the vital
work being done by the Libya Panel of Experts, created
by resolution 1973 (2011), with which the Council has
exhorted all States to Cooperate fully. In that regard,
we are encouraged by the recent report from Tunisia of
the freeing of one of the experts, who had been detained
for a number of weeks despite his immunity.
In conclusion, I should to underscore, as did my
French colleague, the fact that there is a convergence
of ideas in the Council on the situation in Libya, and I
hope that the Council will be able to pronounce itself
very soon through the adoption of a resolution.
Mr. Sipaco Ribala (Equatorial Guinea) (spoke in
Spanish): I wish at the outset to thank Mr. Ghassan
Salamé, Special Representative of the SecretaryGeneral and Head of the United Nations Support
Mission in Libya, for his comprehensive briefing. We
take this opportunity to wish him the blessings of peace
and calm in Libya during this holy month of Ramadan,
to the extent possible, and reiterate our strong support
for him and for the entire Mission team in their difficult
task of achieving a peaceful, negotiated political solution
in Libya, despite the difficult situation in the country,
especially in Tripoli, the result of the escalation of the
military offensive that began on 4 April.
We align ourselves with the statement delivered
by Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union Commissioner
for Peace and Security, to whom we express our
deepest gratitude for voicing in this Chamber an
African perspective on today’s topic of discussion.
We welcome his contribution and hope that in future
such input will continue, given the need for partnership
and coordination between the United Nations and the
African Union in addressing issues of this nature in the
context of all the crises facing the African continent.
We further convey our gratitude to Ambassador
Schulz, in his capacity as Chair of the Security Council
Committee established pursuant to resolution 1970
(2011) concerning Libya, for his briefing.
Eight years after the crisis began, the situation
in Libya, far from having improved, is deteriorating

S/PV. 8530

by the hour, which is causing us a heightened sense
of alarm. The exacerbation of the crisis lays bare the
Council’s difficulty in finding a solution to the conflict,
which could have been averted in the first place, as we
have stated previously, which is why there is a need
to redouble our efforts to get the process back on the
track of dialogue and find a political solution as quickly
as possible.
In the light of the aforementioned, and echoing the
communiqué issued by the African Union on 24 April,
we reiterate the call for an immediate cessation of
hostilities and for respect for the sovereignty and
unity of Libya and for the protection of civilians and
migrants. We would also remind the parties of their
obligation to respect international humanitarian law
and international human rights law in order to guarantee
the security of civilians.
We take this opportunity to reiterate our rejection
of any external interference, encouraging third parties
to bring their influence to bear so as to achieve an
immediate cessation of hostilities, rather than stoking
tensions. Such interference only makes the situation
worse, and the Council must take this fact into account
and undertake the appropriate measures in response.
Actions of this kind must be condemned and totally
eradicated. In that respect, we believe that the Security
Council must undertake a process of in-depth reflection
on the continuing violations of the arms embargo, as
this is yet another element that adds complexity to
the conflict.
To conclude, I would like to underscore my
delegation’s concern about the humanitarian situation,
which is reaching alarming proportions. The death toll
stands at almost 500 people in Tripoli alone, and more
than 75,000 persons have been displaced, according to
official figures. These numbers will only increase if
we fail to find an immediate solution. We reiterate that
there can be no military solution to this conflict.
The ongoing human rights violations remain on the
agenda, in particular the plight of the more than 6,800
migrants and internally displaced persons being held
in detention centres by armed groups and traffickers.
The Libyan people require unflagging international
support in order to address the crisis through dialogue,
reverting to the framework of the United Nations action
plan, as had been envisaged.

19-1476317/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

Mr. Schulz (Germany): First of all, let me thank
our briefers for their informative, albeit sobering and,
indeed, alarming briefings.
We are gravely concerned about the continuation
of the conflict and its potential for local and regional
escalation of violence. It is the responsibility of all sides
to do whatever is possible to avoid further escalation
and seek a peaceful solution to the conflict. As we have
learned once again from today’s briefing, this conflict
encourages and strengthens terrorists and extremists,
primarily at the expense of the civilian population.
The conflict in Libya has caused a humanitarian
disaster. More than 75,000 people have fled their homes
and more than 400 people have been killed since the
beginning of the conflict. In addition, the plight of
many refugees and migrants in Libya is of particular
concern, especially those held in so-called detention
centres. Some of them are located in direct proximity
to the fighting.
We strongly condemn and are appalled by the
attacks civilians, civilian infrastructure and health
workers. We call upon all parties to the conflict to
abide by international humanitarian law and secure and
ensure safe and sustainable humanitarian access.
Let me also say that many local civil society
organizations are doing incredibly important work
on the ground in the current difficult environment.
In particular, I would like to highlight the work of
human rights defenders, who often speak out in spite
of considerable risks to their personal safety. Germany
condemns attacks, intimidation and violence against
human rights defenders, including women human rights
defenders and journalists.
We urge all parties to return to the negotiating table
and commit to an immediate ceasefire, as proposed by
the Special Representative of the Secretary-General.
The Council must send a clear signal to the Libyan
stakeholders — stop military offensives and work
towards a political solution. We would like to reiterate
our strong support to the Special Representative and the
United Nations-led peace process, which we see as the
only way forward to tangible results. We support the
Special Representative’s call for a Council resolution,
which should include three main elements — first, an
immediate ceasefire; secondly, the resumption of the
political process; and, thirdly, strict implementation of
the arms embargo.
18/21

21/05/2019

On the resumption of the political process, we still
believe that an including format, such as the national
conference, offers the best chance for a peaceful and
inclusive solution. We must return to the inclusive
political process, which the Special Representative
has been continuously working towards, as quickly
as possible.
On the issue of the arms embargo, the alarming
and seemingly endless amount of arms used in Libya
is truly shocking and contributes to further escalation
of the conflict. Increasing numbers of heavy weapons
are being brought into Libya, despite the arms embargo
imposed by the Council. The enormous influx of arms
made available to parties to the conflict is one of the
core causes of the humanitarian disaster in Libya, and
we are gravely concerned about the ongoing violations.
We urge all State and non-State actors to immediately
take the necessary measures to ensure the strict
implementation of the arms embargo.
Before I conclude, I would like to refer to the
case of Mr. Moncef Kartas, a member of the Panel Of
Experts on the Security Council Committee established
pursuant to resolution 1970 (2011). The arrest and
detention of Mr. Kartas is a very serious concern for
us, since he enjoys immunity from arrest and detention
in his capacity as a United Nations expert on mission.
The immunity of United Nations staff and experts is an
important element of our multilateral system. It must
be protected and upheld. We are encouraged by the
most recent news from Tunis in that regard. We look
forward to receiving more detailed information on the
way forward.
The President: I shall now make a statement in my
capacity as the representative of Indonesia.
At the outset, we would like to thank Special
Representative of the Secretary-General Ghassan
Salamé, Commissioner Chergui and Ambassador
Schulz for their briefings. We had hoped that
Mr. Salamé would have come in person last month to
bring us good news, but apparently he has come to the
Security Council today to bring us grim news.
Indonesia would like to join others in expressing
its deep concern about the situation in Libya. I would
like to bring four points to the attention of the Council.
First, Indonesia calls for the cessation of hostilities
in Libya. We reiterate the call of the Security Council
on 10 May for all parties to commit to a ceasefire and
19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

de-escalation and to return to the United Nations-led
political mediation. We also reiterate that lasting peace
and stability in Libya will come about only through a
political solution. No military solution will help. We
welcome the efforts made by Special Representative
of the Secretary-General Salamé to restore a unified
international position on Libya to end its current crisis.
The Council has repeatedly shown its support for the
work of the Special Representative and the United
Nations Support Mission in Libya, and today Indonesia
would like to affirm its continued support. We call
on all partners — the United Nations and regional
organizations, including the African Union — to
continue their support and their work in pursuing peace
in Libya.
Secondly, Indonesia supports the convening of the
Libyan national conference. Although the scheduled
time for the national conference in April has come and
gone, we should not forget that we were once there. We
can come back to that point and pick up where we left
off. Indonesia supports the convening of the national
conference as soon as possible so that the Libyans can
peacefully discuss the future of Libya, but we need a
ceasefire in order for that to happen.
Thirdly, Indonesia would also like to reiterate
its call for a humanitarian pause during the month of
Ramadan. We are closely following the reports from
Libya. Sad to say, the numbers are disheartening. On
17 May, the Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian
Affairs reported that 126 civilians had been killed,
including 29 confirmed civilian deaths; more than
75,000 people had been internally displaced due to
ongoing hostilities, 48 per cent of whom were children.
It is estimated that 100,000 men, women and children
remain trapped in immediate front-line areas, with over
400,000 more in areas directly impacted by clashes, as
mentioned by the Special Representative. Water and
electricity cuts are being reported from front-line areas,
while market access and the availability of food is very
limited. Every day of violence means more people
killed, injured or displaced. Every day of inaction in
the Council will lead to more deaths. The situation is
indeed deteriorating, and it must stop. We must heed
Mr. Salamé’s warning on the danger of civil war, which
would ultimately affect women, children and other
civilians. Nothing is more tragic than brothers and
sisters fighting one another.
Finally, Indonesia calls for the protection of civilians
in Tripoli and throughout the rest of Libya. We are

S/PV. 8530

saddened by the increasing number of civilian casualties
in this crisis. Nevertheless, we are also concerned for
the safety of United Nations personnel, as well as the
medical and humanitarian workers on the ground. We
hear from Special Representative Salamé that there are
attacks on health facilities and ambulances, which is in
violation of resolution 2286 (2016). It is important for
all parties to respect international humanitarian law and
human rights, and not target civilians or humanitarian
workers. Efforts should be made to help those in need,
and such efforts should be facilitated in order to reach
them and save innocent lives.
In conclusion, I call on all parties in Libya and all
countries that care for the people and children of Libya
to silence the guns and give peace a chance so that the
men, women and children of Libya can enjoy the end
of Ramadan and celebrate the festive day of Eid al-Fitr
this year and many years to come.
I now resume my functions as President of
the Council.
I give the floor to the representative of Libya.
Mr. Elmajerbi (Libya) (spoke in Arabic): I
would like to begin by thanking you, Mr. President,
for organizing today’s meeting. I would also like to
thank Mr. Ghassan Salamé, Special Representative of
the Secretary-General, for his briefing on the serious
developments in Tripoli for more than 50 days now.
I also thank Mr. Smaïl Chergui, African Union
Commissioner for Peace and Security, for his
briefing, as well as Ambassador Juergen Schulz for
the summary he presented on the activities of the
Security Council Committee established pursuant to
resolution 1970 (2011).
Eight years have passed since the Security Council
took up an agenda item entitled “The situation in
Libya”. Serious events have taken place during that
time. The Council has adopted a number of resolutions
and presidential statements calling for establishing
peace and security in my country. The Council has sent
a full political Mission, led by Special Representative
Salamé, to provide support to the Libyan people and
end their ordeal. The Mission has made tremendous
efforts, which culminated in the signing of Skhirat
Political Agreement in 2015.
Following the signing of this Agreement, the
Presidency Council was formed in Tripoli and
recognized by the international community. Since then,

19-1476319/21

S/PV.8530

The situation in Libya

the Government of my country has spared no effort to
establish stability throughout Libya by addressing with
four main topics, namely, security, the economy, the
situation in the south of the country and the preparations
for the elections.
There has been notable progress in the country with
the establishment of security arrangements, in close
cooperation with the international community, in terms
of eliminating weapons, re-establishing public order
and ensuring the gradual return of State institutions.
Among the first goals set by the institutions was the
fight against terrorism, in line with their prerogatives
and consistent with the United Nations Global Counterterrorism Strategy. National security forces — unified
and enhanced forces exclusively under the under the
authority of the Government of National Accord — were
set up. The terrorist group Da’esh was eradicated
in Sirte and other areas of the country, thanks to the
sacrifice of our young people who paid the ultimate
price in removing that cancer from Libya.
There has also been strategic cooperation with the
United States, and we joined the international counterterrorism coalition. My country has also honoured its
international commitments under the Government of
National Accord, in particular with respect to chemical
weapons, as was certified by the Organization for the
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons in January 2018. We
saw the elimination of tons of chemical weapons, thanks
to international support. We also made achievements
in terms of human rights and migration, including
efforts made by the Libyan Coast Guard, with its
meagre resources, to save thousands of migrants off
the Libyan coast — again, working with international
organizations on a daily basis.

21/05/2019

the political process, in cooperation with the United
Nations. As Libyans began to see the first signs of a
better future, following Mr. Salamé’s announcement of
the upcoming national conference and the SecretaryGeneral’s visit to Libya, Haftar launched his traitorous
aggression against Tripoli, where one third of the
Libyan population lives. His forces continue to commit
violations that constitute war crimes and crimes against
humanity. They have arbitrarily bombed civilian areas,
including schools, warehouses and civil airports. That
has led to more than 500 persons killed to date and nearly
3,000 injured, as well as more than 100,000 persons
displaced. Those violations also include the recruitment
of children, the torture and murder of detainees in cold
blood and the kidnapping of journalists covering the
war. For example, two journalists, Mohamed Al-Qurj
and Mohamed Al-Shibani, were kidnapped two weeks
ago. We hope to ascertain their fate as soon as possible.
The list of violations is very long, to which must
be added an unprecedented crime, namely, that water
supplies to the capital from the south of Tripoli, where
Haftar’s forces are based, have been cut off. The toll
of the violations has been heavy and well-documented.
We sent a letter to the Security Council calling for a
fact-finding commission to verify those abuses and
violations. We have also asked that the countries
backing the aggression be identified. According
to confessions by aggressors, it appears that those
countries are providing military support.

I would also like to mention the economy, which in
turn has also seen noteworthy progress thanks to a reform
programme that aimed to decrease spending, increase
State revenue and support the national oil company.
My country’s Government was able to increase oil
production, reduce our deficit and lower inflation rates,
while also responding to the basic needs of citizens,
in particular their need for food and medicines, while
working towards future economic reform. Those are
some of the efforts that have been made.

The military arsenal being used in the aggression
is evident. It is clear to everybody that some countries
have been providing the aggressors with weapons
of all kinds for years — planes, missiles and modern
equipment — in flagrant violation of the Security
Council resolutions. That has also been documented in
the reports of the Panel of Experts established pursuant
to resolution 1973 (2011). How long are the violations
going to continue without any response, although
everybody knows who is involved? They are preventing
Libyans from finding a solution. Their actions fly in the
face of international laws and resolutions. The support
given to the aggressors is prolonging the war, killing
more civilians and destroying infrastructure, while also
undermining the social fabric and worsening the future
of our country and our relations with other countries.

The Presidency Council of the Government of
National Accord showed great flexibility in the meetings
held in Paris, Palermo and Abu Dhabi. We continued
dialogue with those we thought are our partners in

The Government of National Accord has a sovereign
right to defend its citizens, and we emphasize that we
are going to continue to fight terrorism wherever it
exists on Libyan soil. Unfortunately, aggression and the

20/21

19-14763

21/05/2019

The situation in Libya

security situation have allowed for the return of Da’esh,
which we had fought and expelled from Sirte and other
Libyan cities. There have been nearly 800 martyrs and
thousands of people injured.
Some say that this aggression on Tripoli is aimed
at fighting terrorism, even though the forces that are
defending the city are the ones that liberated Sirte from
Da’esh. Recently, there was a series of terrorist attacks
by Da’esh in the south on the cities of Sabha, Ghodwa
and Zalla, among others, which were a consequence
of the aggression against Tripoli. Where are Haftar’s
forces — those forces that claim they liberated those
cities? We believe that Haftar’s forces aroused tribal
conflicts and tensions that we have tried for years to
calm through various measures and a national campaign
that included security, services and social assistance.
Unfortunately, this war is a flagrant failure of the
United Nations to meet its commitments to Libya,
a country that occupies an important place on the
Organization’s agenda. The Security Council’s mandate
is to maintain international peace and security, but the
Council has not been able to do that. It has not been able
to end this aggression or to ensure that its resolutions
are respected. They have been violated by many
countries in the form of negative intervention in Libya
and not safeguarding civilians from violations and acts
of aggression.
The Government of National Accord believes
that it is incumbent upon the Security Council today
to shoulder its historic responsibility to correct the
situation. The Council should, more than ever, do more
than just express its concern. It should implement its
resolutions and name and condemn the aggressor, while

S/PV. 8530

also forcing his forces to stand down. There is no sense
in treating the aggressor and the person who is attacked
equally. There is no sense in telling people who are
being attacked to put down their weapons, when the
aggressor force does not retreat to where it came from.
Haftar responded to the call made by Mr. Salamé for a
truce during the holy month of Ramadan by rejecting
that call. He declared jihad and continued fighting.
He reaffirmed that attitude during his meetings with a
number of international mediators.
In conclusion, we have always called for peace and
reconciliation, but have been obliged to wage war to
defend our people, our capital and the hope of Libyans
for a civil and democratic State. The aggression against
Tripoli is nothing but a coup against legitimacy, which
undermines the political process and aims to bring back
a totalitarian regime and the rule of one individual.
We ask the Council to support the efforts of
Special Representative Salamé to begin a political
process that can be successful and take into account
the new realities so that the United Nations Mission
can find new mechanism to achieve dialogue with all
Libyans without any exclusions and without associating
that process with any particular person. The rules
of negotiation have changed after such treason and
aggression. Libya is greater than everybody.
The President: There are no more names inscribed
on the list of speakers.
I now invite Council members to informal
consultations to continue our discussion on the subject.
The meeting rose at 12.10 p.m.

19-1476321/21
