S/2010/473

United Nations

Security Council

Distr.: General
14 September 2010
Original: English

Letter dated 9 September 2010 from the Secretary-General
addressed to the President of the Security Council
I have the honour to refer to the letter dated 9 September 2010 from the
Chairman of the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), Mr. Pushpa Kamal
Dahal “Prachanda” (see annex), in which he requested, on behalf of his party, the
extension of the current mandate of the United Nations Mission in Nepal by another
six months from 15 September 2010.
I should be grateful if you would bring the present letter to the attention of the
members of the Security Council.
(Signed) BAN Ki-moon

10-53306 (E) 140910

*1053306*

S/2010/473

Annex
Letter dated 9 September 2010 from the Chairman of the
Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) addressed to
the Secretary-General
1.
First of all, it is apparent that the UNMIN has been accomplishing its role
from the beginning of the peace process to now within the mandate assigned to it.
Our party, the Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist), appreciates UNMIN’s
role and thinks that it is necessary until the successful conclusion of the peace
process.
2.
The letter that Madhav Kumar Nepal, the Prime Minister of the caretaker
Government of Nepal, had written on 6 September 2010 to the Secretary-General of
the United Nations has seriously drawn our attention. The part of the said letter: “It
is for these reasons that we would like to see that the mandate of UNMIN focuses
itself on the monitoring of management of the Maoist combatants and their arms
until the Special Committee takes responsibility of this task. We wish, therefore, to
seek the extension of the term of UNMIN to do the above-mentioned task for the
next four months from 15 September 2010” means that the role of UNMIN has been
limited to monitor the Maoist Army only by bringing to an end its role of
monitoring both Nepali Army and Maoist Army. It is a direct violation of the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement, Interim Constitution and the entire agreements
reached in the past regarding the peace process. There has not been any kind of
agreement of the aforesaid type with the present caretaker Prime Minister. Our party
seriously disagrees with that letter.
3.
In the peace process of Nepal, there is a section of elements which are always
against peace, constitution and agreement. This section has been making ill-efforts
to defame UNMIN and bring its role in an unnecessary debate. We strongly urge
that Government should not fall under the influence of those elements.
4.
Our party thinks that the previous mandate of UNMIN must be continued until
the peace process reaches its conclusion. We are cautious that there should not be
any dispute between Nepali Army and the Maoist Army combatant. We are ready to
resolve the disputes through mutual understanding.
5.
Our party demands that the tenure of UNMIN should be extended for six
months from 15 September 2010.
(Signed) Pushpa Kamal Dahal “Prachanda”
Chairman
Unified Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist)

2

10-53306
